
 Analyzing the Impact of Events in an Online Music Community Juan M. Tirado Daniel Higuero Florin Isaila 
Jes´us Carretero Carlos III University {jtirado,dhiguero,.saila,jcarrete}@inf.uc3m.es Abstract The huge 
popularity of on-line social networking sites has in­creased the likelihood that locally-relevant events 
propagate glob­ally throughout the Web. Conversely, real world events captured as digital content on 
the Web may in.uence the behavior of these dig­ital social communities. In this work we collected and 
analyzed event-related data from LastFM, and global volume of searches from GoogleTrends, with the following 
objectives: (1) to study the event mechanism provided by LastFM, (2) to evaluate the impact of global 
and local events on system utilization, and (3) to understand the event-related propagation of information 
over social links. We analyze the impact of LastFM events on the user activity and interests. Our study 
indicates that half of LastFM events cause an increase of the interest for an artist. However, several 
peaks of popularity are not associated with LastFM events, while being highly correlated with global 
volume of Internet searches provided by Google Trends. Finally, our analysis shows that the interest 
for an artist appears to be disseminated over social links. We .nd out that there are two factors likely 
to make a user in.uential over his friends: the degree of interest and the number of social links. Categories 
and Subject Descriptors H.3.5 [Online Information Services]: Web-based services; J4 [Social and behavioral 
sci­ences]: Sociology General Terms Measurement Keywords Social Networks, Data Analysis, Last.FM, Google 
trends  1. Introduction Recent years have shown a spectacular surge in popularity of Web 2.0 based applications 
such as blogging, wikis, mashups, .le shar­ing or social networking. One of the main reasons for this 
phe­nomenon is that these applications appear to re.ect the behavior and interests of users in the real 
world and allow participants to intercommunicate in an ef.cient way. The ever increasing inter­connectedness 
among the users makes Internet a global village in which trends, content, marketing and rumors propagate 
at high speed. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or 
a fee. SNS 11 April 10, 2011, Salzburg, Austria. Copyright c &#38;#169; 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0634-8/11/04. 
. . $10.00 On-line social networking sites such as Facebook [21], Twit­ter [6] or YouTube [7] are currently 
among the most visited in the Internet. These sites integrate many Web 2.0 applications, which can be 
used in cooperation by communities build based on ex­plicitly declared relationships such as friendships, 
follower, col­league, fan etc. Given the huge popularity of these sites, the be­havior of these communities 
is re.ected throughout the Web. Re­versely, events from the real world re.ected in the Web may in.u­ence 
the behavior of these digital communities. One of the mechanisms that most of the social networking sites 
offer is the declaration, sharing and advertising of an event. The events that can be declared in advance 
are expected such as a concert, a political meeting, a music release, a party, etc. A category of events 
are unexpected (the sudden death of an artist, an earthquake etc.) and are not re.ected in the system 
before their occurrence, unless there is some expectancy that they might happen. Understanding the effect 
of events on the community and on the system can bring several bene.ts. The intuition is that events 
have the potential of triggering activity (such as message exchange, ru­mor diffusion, content propagation) 
in an on-line social network and even beyond it depending on the general interest and magni­tude. Events 
may be used as conveyors of advertising in viral mar­keting strategies [12, 14, 15]. On the other hand 
in an active social network, events may quickly in.uence users and cause increases in both traf.c and 
server load. The knowledge of patterns of traf­.c produced by events can help service providers to forecast 
high workloads and adequately distribute content or provision resources in order to improve user experience. 
In this paper we collected and analyzed data from LastFM [17], a popular music Web site and Google Trends 
[11] for a period of 142 days. LastFM allows users to listen to selected artists, to build bidirectional 
friendship relationships, to declare and share events such as concerts or music releases, and to post 
comments on events. Google Trends is an indicator of the evolution of world interests in certain topics 
given in number of searches. Our analysis targets to answer the following questions. What impact do events 
declared in LastFM have on the behavior of the users and on the system? How does the local impact of 
events correlate with the global impact? How can events be characterized? Have events any impact on in.uencing 
behavior over social links? What are the shortcomings of the event mechanism in LastFM? How can the event 
mechanism in LastFM be improved? The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents 
the related work. Section 3 presents a summary of the data set and the results of our analysis. Finally, 
Section 4 concludes and presents future work. 2. Relatedwork On-line social networking research has 
approached various aspects such as structural social network characteristics [1, 21], statistical properties 
of content popularity [7, 19], growth and evolution of social graphs [5, 16, 20], network-level activity 
[22, 23]. While our study shares certain analyses and data collection methodology with the cited works, 
it differs in its focus on characterization of events and their impact on workload and social interactions. 
Understanding the behavior of social networks has derived in different studies that propose algorithms 
to detect communities of similar users. Community detection is achieved by different means such as analyzing 
the modularity [10, 29] between partitions of a graph, or the overlapping cliques [9] in a graph. While 
these studies are interested in discovering communities in a social network, our approach differs in 
that we are not interested in .nding commu­nities based only on social links, but taking also into account 
the pro.le of the users. There are few works that examine events in social networks. Yin et al. [28] 
present an analysis of a particular event (Beijing 2008 Olympic games) for Video on Demand (VoD) workloads. 
They study user behavior patterns such as the emergence of .ash crowds and the impact of advertising 
on video access patterns. Becker et al. [13] present a method for clustering Flickr pictures by correlating 
Flickr upcoming events with LastFM events. In turn, we want to extend the understanding of event impact 
(1) by studying the correlation between local social network events and global interest (e.g. Google 
Trends) and (2) by analyzing the effect of events on content utilization and propagation through social 
links. Several works have investigated patterns of dynamics of user interaction and behavior in on-line 
social networks [4, 25, 27]. Some studies focus on the role of social links on the propagation of information 
and in.uence [8, 26]. Bakshy et al. [3] analyze contagion in Second Life on-line game by tracking the 
transfers of online artifacts over 130 days. They observe that 48% of all transfers occur along social 
links.  3. DatasetandEventcharacterization In this section we provide a characterization of the events 
based on the collected data. First, we describe the methodology and provide general information of the 
data set. Second, we investigate the im­pact of LastFM events based on the effect on the play count. 
Third, we evaluate the ef.ciency of LastFM events, by comparing explicit events from LastFM and events 
inferred from Google Trends for different patterns of popularity evolution. Finally, we study how events 
may cause users to in.uence each other through social links. 3.1 Data set We crawled LastFM data1 analyzed 
in this paper through LastFM API by using a distributed crawler deployed in cluster over 20 machines. 
We traversed the friendship graph in a breadth .rst search manner and extracted the pro.les of a set 
of 250,000 users including the listened artists, daily for the period between January 1st to May 22nd, 
2009 (142 days). The extracted social graph has an average degree of 14.9, a diameter of 8, an average 
path length of 4.37, and an average clustering coef.cient of 0.17. The total number of artists users 
listened to was 2,390,970, amounting to a total play count of 780,579,318. For a set of 68 most popular 
artists, representing 13% of the total observed play count, we extracted the following attributes of 
all associated 1241 events registered in LastFM: date, number of announced partici­pants, number of comments 
(shouts), and number of reviews. 1 Traces from Last.FM are available upon request to the authors For 
selected artists, we used Google Trends to extract the search volume index for the name of the artist, 
daily for the period of our trace. Google Trends [11] reports the share of a search term relative to 
the total number of searches done on Google over time. 3.2 Event impact In this section we evaluate 
the relevance of LastFM events based on the user participation in the system. The traces show that LastFM­registered 
events caused user activity. The average number of users announcing to attend an event of the 68 most 
popular artists was 143. The play counts of songs of the involved artist on event s day was 11,919. There 
was an average of 7.8 shouts per event and 1.3 reviews per event. Our results show weak correlation between 
play counts and reviews, shouts and reviews, play counts and atten­dance, and shouts and attendance. 
However, the number of reviews and attendance are highly correlated (0.9), while play counts and shouts 
are moderately correlated (0.49). Figure 1(a) shows the CDF of the ratio between the play counts on event 
day and the day before (pre-event impact) and Figure 1(b) the ratio between the day after and the day 
of the event (post-event impact) for the most popular 68 artists amounting to 13% of the play counts. 
On the event day 52% of the events appear not to have any impact on the system. The remaining 48% increase 
the play count 8.9% on average. In the day after, 50% of the events generate a similar average increase 
of 8.3%. This lack of impact for the events is particularly interesting. Events in LastFM can be included 
in the system without any re­liability or relevance control. Although it is possible to notify prob­lems 
related with duplicated or canceled events, there is no way to determine the reliability or relevance 
of an event.  3.3 Impactofeventsondifferentpopularityevolution patterns Last section has shown that 
LastFM events are qualitatively differ­ent in terms of impact. In this section, we complement the LastFM 
data with information extracted from Google Trends, re.ecting the global interest in an artist based 
on the volume of Internet searches. For this analysis, we .ltered relevant LastFM events producing an 
increase of 10% in the play count in two consecutive days including the day of the event. Furthermore, 
from the 68 most popular artists, we selected four artists with relevant popularity evolution patterns. 
Figure 2 shows the evolution of LastFM play counts, Google Trends volume search and related LastFM events. 
Figure 2(a) shows a fast increase fast decrease pattern of play count evolution for Blink 182 . The LastFM 
play count is strongly correlated with Google Trends volume search index (0.91). How­ever, the surge 
in popularity on February 9th, one day after the group reunited for the Grammy Awards ceremony, is not 
repre­sented by any LastFM event. This event can be inferred from Google Trends spike, which accurately 
corresponds to the surge in the LastFM play counts. This event does not produce a consoli­dated interest 
and both indicators show a fast decay. Events on May 15th and 18th, posted in LastFM, can be inferred 
from play counts and Google Trends, but they produce a relative small increase com­pared to the earlier 
spike. Lily Allen s popularity evolution plotted in Figure 2(b) shows a sluggish increase in the .rst 
days of observations when a new album was promoted in different performances followed by a four times 
surge coinciding with the launch of the album on February, 9th. In this case, the play count increases 
due to performances and an album release matched by LastFM events. Additionally, we can also observe 
a strong correlation (0.86) between the play count in LastFM and the search volume index of Google Trends. 
After the peak, the play count volume decreases slowly, with the particularity Playcount Playcount  
01/01 01/22 02/12 03/05 03/26 04/16 05/07 01/01 01/22 02/12 03/05 03/26 04/16 05/07 (a) Fast increase 
-fast decrease (Artist: Blink 182). (b) Fast increase -slow decrease (Artist: Lily Allen).  Trend Trend 
50 100 150 200 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5  Playcount Playcount   246810 10 20 30 40 0.8 1.0 
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 Ratio of increase in the playcount Ratio of increase in the playcount 
(a) Pre-event impact. (b) Post-event impact. Figure1. Impact of LastFM events on the play counts. 01/01 
01/22 02/12 03/05 03/26 04/16 05/07 01/01 01/22 02/12 03/05 03/26 04/16 05/07 (c) Slow increase (Artist: 
Lady GaGa). (d) Slow decrease (Artist: Fall Out Boy). Figure2. Examples of four popularity evolution 
patterns. The continuous line indicates the LastFM play count and the dashed line indicates the Google 
Trends search volume index. Events from LastFM are plotted using vertical lines. that the mean play count 
is double after the launch of the new album posted in the system. As in previous cases, play count is 
strongly compared with the play count volume before. correlated with Google Trends search volume (0.74). 
Play count evolution also re.ects how artists gain or lose popu-Figure 2(d) shows the play count evolution 
of Fall Out Boy . In larity as they become famous. Figure 2(c) shows the slow increase this case, we 
can clearly observe a slowly decreasing trend, which of play count for Lady GaGa as she becomes popular. 
The posi-shows how the artist becomes unpopular over time. The negative tive trend has a local maximum 
after events related with her Euro-trend starts with a play count volume of more than 10,000 per pean 
Tour (February 2nd - 13th). The local peak is not matched day, and ends at roughly 6,000. The last album 
of the artist was by any LastFM event, while the events on the European tour are presented on December, 
12th, 2008. After the release of the new album, no major events were registered in the system until May, 
3rd, when a United States tour starts. The list of LastFM events shown in the .gure corresponds to the 
different major cities toured by the band, but unlike other cases, while the system registers minor peaks 
in play count volume, the negative trend continues. How the artist loses popularity is also re.ected 
in Google Trends (2.8 times less search volume), matching the trend observed in LastFM (correlation 0.69). 
 3.4 In.uencepropagationoversociallinks In this section, we want to understand how events may affect 
in­.uence propagation over social links. For this analysis, we have selected for each of the four artists 
from Figure 2 the events as­sociated with the highest increase in play counts. The selected events correspond 
either to LastFM-declared events or events in­ferred from correlated peaks of LastFM play count and Google 
 CDF 1 2 5 10 20 50 100200 500 User playcount Trends global volume search index (e.g. the peaks for Blink-182 
from Figure 2(a) without an associated LastFM event). For the an­alyzed events, we select the users listening 
to the associated artist and the play count for three days: pre-event day, day of the event and post-event 
day. For the users from this set, we de.ne a user to be active if: (1) the user listens to an artist 
two consecutive days D1 and D2 (2) D1 is the day of the event (post-event active) or D2 is the day of 
the event (pre-event active). (a) Play count of potential in.uential and non-in.uential users on day 
D1, where D1 is either the pre-event day (pre-event in­.uence) or event day (post-event in.uence). Potential 
in.uen­tial users show a higher activity than non-in.uential users on D1 day. We classify the active 
users in potential in.uential over other users with respect to an event if the number of friends listening 
to the artist on day D2 is greater than on day D1, and non-in.uential otherwise. A potential in.uential 
user has pre-event in.uence if D2 is the day of the event and post-event in.uence if D1 is the day of 
the event. A user that may have been in.uenced by others is called infected. We use the attribute potential 
in order to point out that there can be other factors, which can affect the behavior of a friend listening 
to the same artist in the next day. One of these factors is homophily, which is de.ned as the tendency 
of people with similar tastes to behave similarly. In.uence and homophily have been shown to be hard 
to distinguish when present [2, 24]. CDF 1 2 5 10 20 50 100200 Average playcount of user friends However, 
the absence of homophily between two users listening to the same artist in consecutive days, might indicate 
a higher probability of in.uence propagation over the social links. Table 1 shows that from 2759 pre-event 
active users 32% may be in.uential over 5970 of their friends. The number of post­event active users 
increases to 3475, out of which 24% may be in.uential over 5116 friends. A number of 1516 are both pre-event 
and post-event active users. A number of 108 pre-event infected users become post-event active, out of 
which 16 become post-event in.uential, a result suggesting the propagation of in.uence over the social 
cascade. Pre-event Post-event Active users 2759 3475 Potential In.uential 894 822 Non-in.uential 1865 
2653 Infected 5970 5116 (b) Average play count of friends of potential in.uential and non-in.uential 
users on day D2, where D2 is either event day (pre-event in.uence) or post-event day (post-event in.uence). 
Friends of potential in.uential users show a higher activity compared to friends of non-in.uential users. 
 Table 1. Active and potential in.uential users. Active users are users listening to an artist two consecutive 
days, including the day of the event. Potential in.uential users are active users, whose number of friends 
listening to an artist increments the second day. First, we want to understand if there is any factor 
that makes an active user become or not in.uential over other users on day D2. Figure 3(a) shows the 
CDF of the play count of potential in.uential and non-in.uential users during D1 day for two cases: D1 
is the pre-event day (pre-event in.uence), and D1 is the event day (post 1 2 5 10 20 50 100200 500 Total 
number of friends (c) Social degree distribution of potential in.uential and non­in.uential users for 
both pre-event and post-event in.uence. Potential in.uential users have a signi.cant higher degree than 
non-in.uential users. Figure3. Analysis of pre-event and post-event user in.uence. event in.uence). Potential 
in.uential users show a higher play count both days. The play count for non in.uential users slightly 
increases the day of the event, but it shows a signi.cant difference with potential in.uential users. 
On the day before the event, 50% of the potential in.uential users listen to less than 3 songs (with 
an average of 13.05 songs), while one half of the non in.uential users listens to less than 2 songs (average 
8.883). For the event day the play count increases in both cases. Potential in.uential users listen to 
less than 5 songs in 50% of the cases (average 18.97), while 50% of non in.uential users listen to less 
than 3 songs (average 10.43). On average, potential in.uential users listen to 68% and 54% more songs 
than non in.uential users the day before the event and the event day, respectively. Second, we study 
the effect that active users have on their friends on day D2. Figure 3(b) illustrates the average play 
count for the friends of potential in.uential and non-in.uential users. Friends of potential in.uential 
users listen on average to more songs than friends of non-in.uential users on event day: 14.65 songs 
(median: 7.889) versus 11.439 songs (median: 4.536) for friends of non­in.uential users. On post-event 
day the average play count value for friends of both potential in.uential and non-in.uential users is 
similar (the median differs: 9.102 for potential in.uential and 6 for non-in.uential users). This is 
due to the fact that, even though the aggregate play count increases, the number of friends of potential 
in.uential users listening to the same artist also increases; for the non-in.uential users this number 
remains constant. Third, we investigate how the social degree of active users might indicate the proclivity 
of a user to become potential in.uential or non-in.uential. Figure 3(c) shows that potential in.uential 
users have a signi.cant higher number of friends (median 58, mean 75.6) than non-in.uential users (median 
24, mean 39.55). The results suggest that users with a high social degree are more likely to in.uence 
their friends than users with a lower social degree. Finally, we analyze the pairs of friends classi.ed 
by the pre­vious analysis as potential in.uential and infected users, in order to estimate if the observed 
behavior might be a result of in.uence propagation or homophily [18]. We base this analysis on a met­ric 
computing the distance between user consumption pro.les. The consumption pro.le P(ui,dk)is the set of 
tags associated to artists listened by user ui on day dk. We calculate s(ui,uj ), a content sharing coef.cient 
between users ui and uj over a period of Ddays before the potential in.uence was observed, as the average 
over D of Jaccard similarity coef.cient for user day pro.les P(ui,dk)and P(uj ,dk). If two users are 
listening daily to the very same set of artists the value of the sharing coef.cient will be 1, while 
if they are listening to completely different artists it will be 0. The formula of sis given by Equation 
1. 1 X |P(ui,dk)n P(uj ,dk)| s(ui,uj )= (1) |D||P(ui,dk). P(uj ,dk)| dk .D Figure 4 shows a CDF with 
the values of s(ui,uj ),where ui are potential in.uential users, uj the potentially infected user, and 
D one week before an event occurs. We observe that the pairs of potential in.uential-infected users listening 
to Blink-182 appear to share less similar content than the users listening to all the other artists, 
whereas the pairs listening to Lady Gaga share more content than the others. This indicates that the 
probability that a friend was infected over a social link is larger for Blink-182 and smaller for Lady 
Gaga. For example, for Blink-182 around 20% of pairs do not share any tag 7 days before the event. This 
observation suggests that listening to the artist by a potentially infected user might be the result 
of a in.uence propagating over a social link. In the case of Lady Gaga, around 20% of the pairs have 
a sharing coef.cient larger than 0.4. For these pairs of users it is complicated  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
1.0 s ui uj Figure4. s(ui,uj )for potential in.uential users to differentiate between two cases: do we 
identify an in.uence propagated over the social link? or was the social link created because the two 
users share common interests (homophily)? We propose a probabilistic interpretation, which associates 
a higher certainty of in.uence propagations to the pairs sharing less content, and a higher certainty 
of homophily to the pairs sharing more content.  4. Conclusionsandfuturework The analysis performed 
in this work suggests that events are corre­lated with activity in LastFM, irrespective if they are or 
not posted in the local scope of the system. First, we have observed that only around 50% of the events 
posted in the system are associated with an increase in the play count of the involved artist larger 
than 10%, while the other 50% did not appear to have any impact. On the other hand, several peaks of 
popularity were not associated with any LastFM event, reducing the possibility of load prediction. Second, 
our study shows that there is a high correlation between the LastFM play count per artist and the volume 
of searches in Google Trends. This fact indicates that local LastFM activity re­.ects the global interest 
on artists. This result suggests that the lack of user-declared LastFM events may be compensated by events 
in­ferred from the global interest for an artist. This approach can be used both for advertising inside 
the system or predicting system load. Third, we investigate the in.uence of events on the propagation 
of information through social links. Our analysis shows that inter­est for an artist appears to be disseminated 
over social links. We identify a set of active users, which listen to an artist both the day before the 
event and the day of the event. Our analysis suggests that there are two factors likely to make an active 
user potentially in.uential or non-in.uential. In.uential users listen on average to more songs than 
non-in.uential users in the day before event: 13 versus 9. In.uential users have on average more friends 
than non­in.uential users: 76 versus 40. Our results also show that 16 in­fected users become in.uential 
for their friends in the day after the event, suggesting the existence of a social cascade. In order 
to con­.rm this hypothesis, we measure the level of homophily as the ratio of shared tags between potential 
in.uential and potentially infected users for the period of our trace. Our study shows that the sharing 
coef.cient remains low (under 0.4) in most cases. This suggests that with a larger certainty the potential 
users can be classi.ed as in.uential. However, in some cases the sharing coef.cient can be as high as 
1. We propose a probabilistic interpretation, associating high certainty of in.uence propagation with 
low sharing coef.cient values and high certainty of homophily with high sharing coef.­cient values. Finally, 
we make some observations and suggestions related to the LastFM event mechanism. In LastFM, users can 
post events with a limited number of attributes (for instance an event can be only a concert or a festival), 
making the automatic classi.cation of events dif.cult. Additionally there is no validation and reputation 
mechanism, which should allow users to evaluate the relevance of an event. We suggest three improvements 
in the LastFM event man­agement system. First, a broader range of attributes should allow the classi.cation 
of events into live performances, disc releases, TV appearances, etc. Second, we suggest a collaborative 
event val­idation mechanism including a reliability system to help users to decide by vote if an event 
is relevant or reliable or whether a user is to be trusted. Third, we recommend a mechanism for semiauto­matic 
addition of events, by monitoring the global interest based on services such as Google Trends. This is 
likely to increase both user satisfaction and system popularity. We would like to extend this work in 
various directions. First, we would like to propose mechanisms for inferring events from the activity 
and interests re.ected either in related sites or globally in the Internet. Second, we are interested 
in studying the relation­ship between events and interaction patterns in LastFM. Third, we would like 
to investigate how events can be leveraged for predicting activity in the system, in order to adequately 
provision resources during peak loads. Fourth, we wish to make a comparative study among different systems 
to extend our conclusions to a larger sam­ple of users and systems. Acknowledgements This research has 
been partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education under FPU program AP2007-03530 (Juan M. Tirado) 
and by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under the project TIN2010-16497. References <RefA>[1] 
Y.-Y. Ahn, S. Han, H. Kwak, S. Moon, and H. Jeong. Analysis of topological characteristics of huge online 
social networking services. In WWW 07: Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide 
Web, pages 835 844, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM. [2] S. Aral, L. Muchnik, and A. Sundararajan. Distinguishing 
in.uence-based contagion from homophily-driven diffusion in dy­namic networks. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 106(51):21544, 2009. [3] E. Bakshy, B. Karrer, and L. Adamic. Social in.uence and 
the diffu­sion of user-created content. Proceedings of the tenth ACM conference on Electronic commerce, 
pages 325 334, 2009. [4] F. Benevenuto, T. Rodrigues, M. Cha, and V. Almeida. Characterizing user behavior 
in online social networks. In IMC 09: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement 
confer­ence, pages 49 62, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. [5] C. Canali, M. Colajanni, and R. Lancellotti. 
Characteristics and evolution of content popularity and user relations in social networks. In Computers 
and Communications (ISCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on, pages 1 7, jun. 2010. [6] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, 
and K. P. Gummadi. Measuring User In.uence in Twitter: The Million Follower Fallacy. In In Pro­ceedings 
of the 4th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM). [7] M. Cha, H. Kwak, P. 
Rodriguez, Y. Ahn, and S. Moon. I tube, you tube, everybody tubes: analyzing the world s largest user 
generated content video system. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, 
page 14. ACM, 2007. [8] M. Cha, A. Mislove, B. Adams, and K. Gummadi. Characterizing social cascades 
in Flickr. Proceedings of the .rst workshop on Online social networks, pages 13 18, 2008. [9] N. Du, 
B. Wang, and B. Wu. Community detection in complex networks. Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 
23(4):672 683, 2008. [10] J. Duch and A. Arenas. Community detection in complex networks using extremal 
optimization. Phys.Rev.E, 72(2):027104, Aug 2005. [11] Google Trends. http://www.google.com/trends , 
2009. [12] J. Hartline, V. Mirrokni, and M. Sundararajan. Optimal marketing strategies over social networks. 
In Proceeding of the 17th interna­tional conference on World Wide Web. ACM New York, NY, USA, 2008. [13] 
L. G. Hila Becker, Mor Naaman. Event identi.cation in social media. In ACM SIGMOD Workshop on the Web 
and Databases (WebDB 09), 2009. ´in.uence through a social network. pages 137 146. ACM New York, NY, 
USA, 2003. [14] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos. Maximizing the spread of [15] J. Kleinberg. Cascading 
behavior in networks: Algorithmic and eco­nomic issues. 2007. [16] R. Kumar, J. Novak, and A. Tomkins. 
Structure and evolution of online social networks. In KDD 06: Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international 
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 611 617, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM. [17] 
Last.FM. http://www.last.fm , 2009. [18] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. Cook. Birds of a feather: 
Homophily in social networks. Annual review of sociology, 27:415 444, 2001. [19] Y. G. Michael Zink, 
Kyoungwon Suh and J. Kurose. Watch global, cache local: Youtube network traces at a campus network -measure­ments 
and implications. In IEEE MMCN, 2008. [20] A. Mislove, H. S. Koppula, K. P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and 
B. Bhat­tacharjee. Growth of the .ickr social network. In WOSP 08: Proceed­ings of the .rst workshop 
on Online social networks, pages 25 30, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. [21] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. 
Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. Bhattachar­jee. Measurement and analysis of online social networks. In Proceed­ings 
of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, pages 42 53. ACM, 2007. [22] A. Nazir, S. 
Raza, D. Gupta, C.-N. Chuah, and B. Krishnamurthy. Net­work level footprints of facebook applications. 
In IMC 09: Proceed­ings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement conference, pages 63 
75, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. [23] F. Schneider, A. Feldmann, B. Krishnamurthy, and W. Willinger. 
Un­derstanding online social network usage from a network perspective. In IMC 09: Proceedings of the 
9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement conference, pages 35 48, New York, NY, USA, 2009. 
ACM. [24] C. R. Shalizi and A. C. Thomas. Homophily and contagion are generically confounded in observational 
social network studies. arXiv, 2010. [25] B. Viswanath, A. Mislove, M. Cha, and K. P. Gummadi. On the 
evolution of user interaction in facebook. In WOSN 09: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM workshop on Online 
social networks, pages 37 42, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. [26] J. Weng, E. Lim, J. Jiang, and Q. He. 
TwitterRank: Finding Topic­sensitive In.uential Twitterers. International Conference on Web Search and 
Data Mining, 2010. [27] C. Wilson, B. Boe, A. Sala, K. Puttaswamy, and B. Zhao. User interactions in 
social networks and their implications. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM European conference on Computer 
systems, pages 205 218. ACM, 2009. [28] H. Yin, X. Liu, F. Qiu, N. Xia, C. Lin, H. Zhang, V. Sekar, and 
G. Min. Inside the bird s nest: Measurements of large-scale live vod from the 2008 olympics. In IMC 09, 
2009. [29] X. S. Zhang, R. S. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Qiu, L. Wang, and L. Chen. Modularity optimization 
in community detection of complex networks. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 87(3):38002, 2009.  </RefA>
			
