
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G. W. Evans, eds. ANCILLARY EFFECTS OF SIMULATION Matt Hickie John W. Fowler MOS 12 Die Manufacturing 
Motorola Industrial Engineering 1300 North Alma School Road, Mail Drop CH 305 Arizona State University 
Chandler, AZ, 85224, U.S.A. Tempe, AZ, 85287-5906, U.S.A. ABSTRACT Simulation can often be one of the 
first modeling tools implemented at a manufacturing site. When this occurs, much effort must be used 
to get current manufacturing data into the simulation model. The amount of time and data needed to get 
the simulation running to an acceptable validation level and to maintain that validation level over time, 
should lead to an effort to automate the loading of factory data into simulation. If this automation 
effort is efficient and comprehensive, it can become the cornerstone of a system that benefits manufacturing 
from more than just simulation analysis. The other benefits range from the development of a simple times 
theoretical analysis of the line to the complex development of an infinite capacity planning system. 
This paper will discuss a real world example of the extra benefits received from implementing simulation 
at a semiconductor manufacturing plant. INTRODUCTION MOS 12 is one of Motorola s semiconductor wafer 
fabrication plants that produces microcontroller devices. As an integrated circuit semiconductor wafer 
fab, MOS 12 has hundreds of products that each consist of a couple of hundred steps that require about 
one hundred or so different equipment types to produce. The total cost of such equipment is over 1 billion 
dollars. In addition to the number of steps required to build each product and the number of products, 
more complexity is added because the product flows are recursive with some equipment types being visited 
multiple times. The worst case scenario is that some equipment type will be required fifteen to twenty-five 
times during the process flow. These complexities make modeling a semiconductor wafer fabrication plant 
extremely challenging. Due to the above complexities, MOS 12 chose to implement a discrete event simulation 
model to help evaluate manufacturing performance issues. Discrete event simulation was recognized as 
a tool that could model such a complex system because it could evaluate the interaction between product 
mixes, taking into account time dependencies from recursive flow, and the stochastic nature of events 
in manufacturing. A. Alan B. Pritsker, in Introduction to Simulation and SLAM II (1995), establishes 
4 main performance measures for manufacturing systems. These are throughput, on time delivery, resource 
utilization, and in-process inventory. Since the building of the first model in 1994, discrete event 
simulation has been used successfully to evaluate these performance measures for different manufacturing 
scenarios. An example of typical scenarios evaluated include mix analysis, start rate increases, equipment 
install prioritization, optimal wait time at an equipment type for batching scenarios, and automated 
material handling system issues. 2 INITIAL MODEL BUILD AND VALIDATION The building of the first model 
consisted of defining the system based upon the above outputs required for evaluation. A system is essentially 
a grouping of elements that interact together through some logic to complete a task or goal (Law and 
Kelton 1991). The elements for the defined system were chosen to be equipment, product, guided vehicles 
for product movement, and product stockers. Equipment was defined by what was currently in each bay of 
the fab. Product was defined with part names and each product has a series of steps it must go through 
to be completed. Each step has a defined recipe that runs on a defined equipment type with a setup and 
processing time. Guided vehicles were defined as the method of moving product from one bay location in 
the fab to another bay location. Product stockers were defined as the place in the bay where the guided 
vehicles delivered product. After defining the system, some analysis was done to understand what types 
of data needed to be collected for each entity in the system. The basic data needed for input to the 
model were: 1. Equipment performance data -List of active equipment types -Number of equipment for each 
equip­ ment type - Equipment state fail and repair char­ acterization - Equipment processing type (singular/ 
batch/batch sequential) - Recipe throughput data for equipment 2. Part/Product data -Path/route product 
will follow for processing (including alternates) -Recipe to be run at each step (including alternates) 
-equipment for each step of route (including alternates) -yield data at each step of process -start 
rate data 3. Guided vehicle -Defined available paths -Travel time from stocker to stocker -Number of 
guided vehicle -Capacity of guided vehicle  4. Material stocker -Capacity of stocker  The data for 
the above system was collected from the MOS 12 CIM (Computer Integrated Manufacturing) System. Scripts 
were written to help extract the information needed to build the model. Product information was extracted 
from the WIP tracking system called PROMIS (a product from PROMIS Systems Corporation). Equipment information 
was extracted from a Motorola internally developed equipment tracking system called SEPT. The material 
transportation information was collected from another internally developed Motorola system called the 
Material Control System (MCS). It is important to note that for the initial model build the extraction 
of the data might have been a piece of code or script, but the data still had to be manually entered 
into the model. Also not all data was available in the systems and portions of the above data had to 
be manually calculated and entered. The attempt was made to extract as much input data as possible from 
the existing factory systems. After the building of the first model, the initial validation was done 
through collecting historical factory data from the same MOS 12 CIM systems. More specifically this meant 
getting product performance data from the PROMIS WIP tracking system. It also meant getting equipment 
performance data from the SEPT equipment tracking system, and it meant getting inter bay delivery data 
from the material control system. Programming scripts were written to help collect the data from the 
systems. Much of the data was in raw format and had to be manipulated to give summary data that was comparable 
to the simulation output. Also, the actual validation task still had to be accomplished through manually 
comparing factory data to simulation data. The basic types of validation data collected from the factory 
systems were: 1. Equipment data -WIP -Throughput -Utilization -Cycle time  2. Product data -WIP -Yield 
-On time delivery -Cycle time  3. Material movement data -Bay to bay delivery times -Stocker inventory 
  The method of developing and validating the first MOS 12 discrete event simulation model was an arduous 
task, but the results left us with an accurate representation of manufacturing line to measure performance. 
Unfortunately, as the factory ramped up with new products and new equipment, it became harder to keep 
up with the new changes using the manually established model building process. The model started losing 
its validity and therefore, its credibility. At a certain point during the ramp up of the wafer fab, 
it became evident that the previous model building process could not keep the inputs to the model accurate. 
Failure to maintain good inputs to the model makes it impossible to generate a model that can mimic the 
real system and impossible to generate a model that can be validated.  3 INTEGRATION AND AUTOMATION 
The loss of a model s credibility to the customer makes the model useless. New methods for getting data 
into the simulation model needed to be developed. The goal was to automate and integrate the model building 
process. Integration refers to directly updating the required simulation input files with accurate factory 
information. Automation refers to the extraction of the factory data for input to the simulation and 
for validation of the simulation output. This extraction must occur on a timely basis (mostly determined 
by the model customer) so that it can be integrated into a simulation model. The task of integrating 
and automating was broken down into the two parts. Part one dealt specifically with the collection of 
input data for the simulation. Part two dealt with the collection of validation data to compare with 
the simulation output data. The method of integrating and automating relied mainly upon the writing of 
programs to interface with the WIP tracking system, the equipment tracking system and the material control 
system. Due to the platforms on which the factory systems operate, the programs were of different types. 
Table 1 shows the different programming languages used to integrate the data from the extracts and automate 
the running of the extracts. The use of so many languages often make the extraction complicated, but 
this is unfortunately sometimes a reality in wafer fabrication plants. Table 1: Program Languages Used 
VAX UNIX DCL KORN SHELL FORTRAN AWK PROMIS SCRIPTS C The first type of input data to be automated and 
integrated was the product flows. All active factory parts are extracted from the factory WIP tracking 
system. These flows are then matched up with a maintained recipe information database. This recipe information 
basically contains theoretical processing time information for each recipe along with additional delays 
for setup and special processing (batch sequential) if required. Unfortunately, this information was 
not available from the existing systems and because of this, a separate database was required. The matching 
up of the flows with this database results in a table of all active parts and an accurate representation 
of every part s flow through the line with the addition of theoretical processing time at each step of 
the flow. The next set of input data to be automated and integrated was the active equipment information. 
This involved extracting the equipment type, equipment id name, and the number of equipment that are 
currently active for manufacturing. This data is maintained in the equipment tracking system. This information 
is then combined with a manually maintained set of data that contains detail facts on the equipment. 
This detail pertains to the type of processing the equipment performs. The main types of processing were 
per wafer, per lot, multiple lot batching, lot sequential, or batch sequential processing equipment. 
It also pertains to the location of the equipment in the wafer fab and a brief description of the equipment. 
Minimum and maximum batch sizes were detailed. In addition to these, the dispatching algorithm used in 
day to day lot selection was identified. This results in an accurate picture of all equipment on the 
manufacturing floor and a basic description of how each piece of equipment is operated. After getting 
the equipment information data, the next set of input data needed dealt with equipment state changes. 
This involved using the previously obtained active equipment list and extracting performance details 
from the equipment tracking system. The extracted data is then converted into different outputs. The 
first output contains information on mean time to fail and mean time to recovery for all equipment states 
and an estimate of the what distribution for each is. This information is then read into another program 
that converts the data into a formatted input for simulation. The second output simply contains the percent 
time in state for all equipment states. Both sets of output data are maintained for any time period requested, 
but standard period reports have been established for reporting purposes. With much of the input data 
automated and integrated, the next step was to start looking at factory data to automate the validation 
of the output data from simulation against actual factory data. The first set of output data to validate 
is the part performance data. This involved extracting part inventories, cycle time, and yield for the 
whole line. This data is maintained in the WIP tracking system. Also maintained in this system is the 
equipment performance data with respect to product. This data is the average cycle time to process at 
an equipment type and also the average WIP at the equipment type. The cycle time data is important to 
have broken down to the recipe level for validation of theoretical values and possible in­line problems. 
The WIP data can be broken down into part types at the equipment type. Another set of data to validate 
against is the equipment state performance data. This was already collected as input to the simulation. 
 4 BENEFITS Automating the collection of factory floor data and integrating the data into simulation 
models has undoubtedly made model building and model validation of current factory scenarios much easier 
and faster. The development of this system has also provided valuable information that can be used to 
evaluate the performance of the current manufacturing plant and make improvements. Both the input data 
used for simulation and the output data used for validation are critical pieces of this evaluation. Figure 
1 shows a high level orientation of an integrated and automated system with components that use the input 
and output data. Following the figure are discussions of the data each component utilizes along with 
a brief description of what it does.  FACTORY FLOOR SYSTEMS WIP Tracking Material Movement Equipment 
Fab Wide Planning Finance Systems System System Tracking System Input Data Simulation Model Validation 
Output Data Infinite Capacity Cost Modeling Planning (Activity Based) OR Optimization Static Capacity 
Techniques Spreadsheet Queueing Cycle Time Eval In Line/Thru Line Network Models Overall Equipment Effectiveness/ 
Bottleneck Figure 1: Factory Floor Systems The first ancillary effect evolved from having process flows 
with theoretical processing at the recipe level for all active parts built on a daily basis. This enabled 
us to do some cycle time and WIP evaluation of all product that is currently in the line. One advantage 
to this is average semiconductor product cycle time can be typically 3-6 weeks. Having to wait for a 
lot to ship means that some of the steps making up the lot s performance occurred weeks ago. In line 
measurements, if trended or monitored frequently, can indicate problems more expeditiously and efficiently. 
The advantage from this is that cumulative in line times theoretical cycle time can be evaluated. This 
is done on a lot by lot basis to lots with poor cycle time performance. This is also done by product 
names to get an idea of current in-line cycle time performance by part. It is also used to trend the 
overall line performance with regard to cycle time and WIP. Another benefit from the data is that we 
were able to establish an infinite capacity planning system. This system requires accurate process flows 
with theoretical processing time, historical recipe and equipment cycle time data, and the current status 
of all parts in the line along with required demands from the fab. The current status of the parts in 
the line comes from the WIP tracking system and the required demands comes from a fab wide planning database. 
The planning system essentially takes the current status of each part and forecasts it forward using 
historically weighted cycle time performance. This historically weighted formula can be adjusted however 
the user feels necessary. This forecast for every step of every lot is run multiple times in the day, 
and the output from it is used for two things. The forecasted out of the line date for each lot is used 
along with the required demand data to establish a report that is used for factory planning. This report 
matches lots to the customer demands. The matching is a soft match that can change as line conditions 
and yields change. The tagging of lots to demands provides a report that helps identify lots that are 
or could potentially be late to customer demands. In addition to this, it also provides the lot ship 
information to the shipping department when a lot is complete. This identifying of late lots even with 
this report can become complicated due to the number of lots in line. Because of this, the system will 
identify these lots automatically through a routine based on the forecasted out date and the customer 
due date. This information is fed back into the WIP tracking system and this is what drives the lot selection 
for dispatching at the tool. Another purpose for the output is that all lot arrivals at each equipment 
type for the next twenty-four hours is reported. This gives the factory personnel the visibility to the 
quantity of product and the type of product that will be arriving at the equipment they are operating. 
This is used to make local decisions as to whether or not to pull inventory from upstream locations so 
as to keep bottleneck tools from running out of inventory to process. It can also be used with some capacity 
constraints to predict future bottlenecks. It also helps provide information to answer tool setup related 
issues. The input and output data for the simulation can also be used to help develop an activity based 
cost model. The data needed for this is the historical equipment state performance, equipment cycle time 
data, current product flows with theoretical cycle time, and historical financial data. The financial 
data is compared to past equipment performance data for the same period. This comparison yields a cost 
per minute of utilized time on the equipment. This cost per utilized minute of time is then integrated 
with a capacity spreadsheet to help predict the wafer costs for any identified product mix. To make this 
activity based, the financial data must be broken down by its cost drivers at each step of processing 
completed by the equipment. In some cases the costs can be allocated to the equipment on a generally 
agreed upon percentage. The cost model above utilizes another important benefit from the input and output 
data for simulation. This resultant benefit is a capacity spreadsheet. A simulation model from a semiconductor 
fab typically has an extremely large amount of data used as inputs. Often, one of the biggest problems 
with simulation is that if the simulation shows something different than what the customer thinks might 
happen, the customer becomes doubtful of the data used as input. Since the collection of the data is 
automated, manually checking to make sure there is not a problem with the automated programs requires 
reams of data. Neither the customer nor modeler wants to review all the data. To solve this problem, 
a program was written that took inputs from the simulation like the active flows with theoretical processing 
time, equipment state changes, and equipment information. This information was summarized in a large 
static capacity spreadsheet. The spreadsheet was organized to the customer s specifications with common 
data being grouped together and summaries provided where applicable. The spreadsheet can be quickly opened 
and reviewed to help answer and resolve nagging data validation issues or unexpected results. Through 
the adding of equations to the spreadsheet, it evolved into a static capacity spreadsheet model. This 
tool becomes very useful for establishing starting points for future capacity analysis problems. It is 
also useful when the capacity question being asked does not require a discrete event simulation model. 
The extracted factory data for simulation model validation can also be used to monitor factory performance 
trends. Equipment availability and utilization performance can be graphed with WIP and throughput to 
show performance problems. Adding to this the theoretical processing time, the Overall Equipment Effectiveness 
can be measured. Average equipment cycle time and the weighted theoretical processing can also help identify 
cycle time bottlenecks. The equipment performance can also be broken down by shifts to show other possible 
problems. Other uses for the input and output data used to build and validate simulation include inputs 
and validation data for queuing models. Making sure that all modeling tools use the same data makes it 
much easier to assess the usefulness of the tool and also to validate the tool. Also, the data can be 
used for other Operations Research techniques such as linear programming. This has yet to be attempted 
in a global sense at MOS 12, but the data is there for later use. 5 SUMMARY Simulation has provided MOS 
12 with a method of modeling the manufacturing line for the purpose of measuring the line performance 
under different scenarios. The contribution simulation has made to this purpose is unquestioned. An important 
ancillary effect from the establishment of the infrastructure to automatically collect and integrate 
factory data into the simulation is that now there is a wealth of factory data that can be evaluated 
and combined with other types of data to add to the characterization of the manufacturing process. This 
extra benefit makes simulation even more worth the effort to maintain and execute. However, the importance 
of having such data for a factory highlights the need for a factory data warehouse for factory performance 
and modeling data. The current method of data collection, while automated does not populate all data 
into a true database where key fields can be easily linked through SQL queries. A data warehouse project 
is currently under way at MOS 12. The extraction of data from the systems that was done in the past is 
very useful for creating the entity relationship diagrams that form the database. The direction for the 
future will be to complete this robust data warehouse so that better integration with the existing factory 
floor computer systems can be accomplished. With this, the true functionality of a data-mining tool can 
be integrated with reporting tools and modeling tools. REFERENCES <RefA>Law, A. M. and W. D. Kelton. 1991. 
Simulation Modeling and Analysis. 2nd Edition: McGraw-Hill. Pritsker, A. A. B. 1995. Introduction to 
Simulation and SLAM II. 4th Edition: John Wiley and Sons.</RefA>  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MATT HICKIE is a graduate 
student in the course of master program of Industrial Engineering at Arizona State University. He is 
working for Motorola at Chandler, Arizona. His research interests include optimization and scheduling 
on semiconductor manufacturing system. JOHN W. FOWLER is an Assistant Professor of Industrial Engineering 
at Arizona State University. He holds a Ph.D. from Texas A&#38;M University. His research interests include 
manufacturing systems analysis, discrete event simulation, and applied operations research.  
			
