
 AN OVERVIEW OF CIM ENTERPRISE MODELING METHODOLOGIES Ganesh Kateel Manjunath Kamath David Pratt Center 
for Computer Integrated Manufacturing School of Industrial Engineering and Management Oklahoma State 
University Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078, U.S.A. ABSTRACT Computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems 
are increasingly being used as weapons by manufacturing enterprises in competitive business environments. 
The complicated mtnre of these systems and the high initial investment requirements have necessitated 
their accurate modeling. A number of models, modeling methodologies, and modeling tools have been developed 
and used for this purpose. We first present a brief overview of several CIM models as well as modeling 
tools and methods. Many of the models are said to emphasize only a part of the system. A concern in the 
research eommnnity is that these models must be integrated. We conclude the paper by examining the rationale 
and feasibility of integrating the different models and/or creating integrated models. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Many manufacturing firms, zealous to maintain their competitiveness in the world class manufacturing 
environment, attempt to use state of the art technology in their operations. Advancements in computer 
and information technology have led to the development of computerized applications in many fictional 
areas of manufacturing enterprises. As a result, we have a plethora of three letter acronyms starting 
with C (for Computerized) such as CAD, CAM, and CAE along with others such as MRP, MRP-11, and SFC which 
deal with different aspeets of mantiacturing. The design of such systems is generally developed in a 
fashion that emphasizes heal solutions mostly overlooking the overall organizational effectiveness, This 
together with the use of heterogeneous databases and incompatible computer operating systems, has led 
to islands of automation which stier from data inconsistencies and lack of control of the fictional interactions 
between manufacturing application systems. Traditionally, ditTerent functions of enterprises have been 
modeled with a focus on the performance evaluation of the individual departments (referred to in this 
paper as local optimization) rather than the effectiveness of the entire organization. But, a modem enterprise 
requires the departmental goals to be in tune with the organizational goals for its betterment and survival. 
Designers need tools that will allow them to evaluate the impact of Ioeal decisions on the performance 
of the total enterprise. However, many CIM models and modeling approaches tend to focus only on particukr 
fictional parts of the enterprise. Hence, one of the issues that we examine in this paper is the rationale 
and feasibility of integrating the @erent models and/or creating integrated models. The rest of the paper 
is organized as follows. Several difFerent definitions of CIM are provided in Section 2 as a basis for 
krther discussion. Section 3 provides a general perspective on modeling with an emphasis on CIM modeling. 
CIM enterprise architeetnres, modeling tools and methods are briefly discussed in sections 4, 5, and 
6 respectively. Section 7 discusses the issues pertaining to integration of models. 2 CIM ENTERPRISES-DIVERSE 
PERSPECTIVES Jorysz and Vernadat (1990) state the objective of CIM as the appropriate integration of 
enterprise operations by means of eflicient information exchanges within the enterprise with the help 
of information technology. This indicates that CIM includes all of the design and manufacturing functions 
of CAD/CAM, as well as all the business functions such as marketing and accounting. A comprehensive definition 
of CIM has been given by Donmeingts et al. (1995): CIM refers to a global approach in an industrial environment 
which aims at improving industrial petiormances. This approach is applied in an integrated way to all 
activities, from designing to delive~ and after sale, and uses 1000 various methods, means and techniques 
(computer and automatic) in order to simultaneously improve productivity, decrease costs, meet due dates, 
increase product quality, secure flexibility at local or global level in a manufacturing system, and 
involve every actor. In such an approack economic, social and human aspects are at least as important 
as technical aspects. Nagata et al. (1993) describe CIM as an integrated system which combines the areas 
of production marketing and R&#38;D, to manage and operate them under a single management strategy with 
the support of computers so that the production operation can be efficient and flexible. A few of the 
other definitions of CIM are: The automation and integration of information, processes, and functions 
in a manufacturing enviromuen~ including customers and vendors, with the result being a closed-loop, 
fhnctionatly integrated manufacturing planning and control system (Weston 1994). CIM is the integration 
of computer based manufacturing process, drawing on a common database and communicating via some form 
of computer networks (F3essant1991). The foregoing discussion indicates that most authors encompass a 
broad range of enterprise activities in the definition of CIM. So it is ditlicult and may be inappropriate 
to view CIM in isolation. It is not surprising to see that many enterprise modeling tools, methods and 
architectures are being used to model or are being structured to model CIM. Further evidence for this 
can be found in Ngwenyama and Grant (1994). Generally the implementation of CIM involves high investment 
and complex system design issues. Although much research is being carried out regarding the development 
and implementation of CIM, many problems are yet to be addressed satisfactorily. Ngwenyama and Grant 
(1994) provide a list of these problems which includes lack of integration, islands of automatio% sub-optimization 
of resources, ad-hoc developmen~ lack of welldefined architecture, con@ing definition of CIM and so on. 
Many researchers have tried to address these problems by developing good models of CIM because models 
form a rational basis not only for designing new systems but also for learning about existing systems. 
Evaluation using models instead of the actual systems allows fast acquisition of knowledge and avoids 
the risk of costly disruptions to the real system. Models can be used for system optimization, performance 
analysis and prediction, gathering insight into the system or facilitating learning processes.  3 CIM 
MODELING Modeling is the process of creating an abstraction of a real world system which reflects the 
system properties to the desired degree of detail (Kochikar and Narendran 1994). Models filter out irrelevant 
details and represent only information essential to the task. The traditional approach to modeling begins 
with the ident.ifkation of the purpose of the model. Then the modeler identifies all system features 
germane to the purpose, constructs and validates an abstract structure with sufficient scope and complexity 
so that it can aid in integration of system components and their interaction under suitable assumptions. 
The purpose driven, tool dependent modeling described above has the inherent disadvantage that one has 
to construct different models for different purposes even though the system being represented is the 
same. Hence, Duse et al. (1992) suggest building robu% tool independent models to represent manufacturing 
enterprises from which one can extract the information relevant for a particular purpose. They refer 
to this model as a Base Model. This base modell is a rich, robust, representation of the system consisting 
of physical, informational and control elements as well as their relationships. The above base model 
concept is a new paradigm in the field of manufacturing systems modeling, and additional research is 
necessary before researchers fully implement this concept. Meanwhile, constraints such as cost, quality, 
flexibility, time, size, nature, and complexity make the designing and modeling of CIM a very complicated 
task and as such requires good modeling methodology and tools. The comprehensive definition of CIM provided 
by Doumeingts et al. (1995) indicates that CIM systems are remarkably complicated with a multitude of 
activities carried out by human beings and machines using information flows and control signals. Generalized 
models and well defined architectures are required to understand the system complexity at a manageable 
level. Since humans have bounded rationality they like to break (such) complicated systems into better 
manageable pieces for analysis, design and management (Little 1991). Humans prefer to abstract only that 
part of reality which may be relevant to them. Due to this tendency, most of the modeling approaches 
have separate models for different aspects of CIM. The above argument follows from systems theory. It 
is well known that any system, with a very few exceptions, consists of subsystems. These subsystems can 
be considered to be systems in their own right, Hence, they can lbe modeled independently, This may not 
allow us to have a big­ picture of the system and it is diflicult to move from one model to the other 
(Savolainen et al. 1995). The means that we use to model systems are referred to as modeling tools. An 
Entity Relationship (ER) diagram is an example of a tool used for representing the relationship between 
entities. The procedure to cmstruct models may be termed as methodology. The result of using the modeling 
tools in a manner prescribd by the methodology is a representation or a model. In the case of CIM modeling 
this may be an architecture. As a preparation for the finther discussion about CIM enterprise modeling 
issues, a brief overview of existing architectures, modeling tools, and modeling methods is presented 
in the following sections.  4 CIM ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURES Architectures of CIM systems contain conceptual 
models as well as rules that help to translate the models into a working reality (O Sullivan 1994). O 
Sullivan defines architecture as a body of rules that define those system features which directly ti 
the manufacturing environment into which the system is placed. These features include system configuration, 
component locations, interfaces between the system and its enviromnen~ and modes of operation. Most authors 
refer to two types of architecture. The first is a detailed collection of generic information management 
and automatic control tasks and their necessary functional requirements referred to as reference architecture. 
A particular architecture is the instantiation of a reference architecture. A CIM reference model committee 
of Purdue University (1989) describes a reference model or architecture as a previously agreed upon or 
standard definitive document or conceptual representation of a system. The reference model defines requirements 
common to all implementations but is independent of the specitic requirements of any particular implementation. 
Several reference architectures have been put forth by collaborative research projects, computer manufacturers 
and individuals. Some of the important architectures frequently referred in the literature are briefly 
discussed below. CIM-OSA: CIM-OSA is an Open-System Architecture and has three levels of model derivation 
viz., requirements definition, design specification and implementation description% fbur views viz., 
fictional, informational, resource, and organizational views, and three levels of instantiation viz., 
generic, partial and particular models (Jorysz and Vernadat 1990). This aad Pratt architecture guides 
the system designer in deciding what is to be implemented to achieve what is required. ICAM Architecture: 
ICAM (Integrated Computer Aided Manufacturing) architecture uses tools such as IDEFO (ICAM Definition 
-Zero) and IDEF1 (ICAM Definition -One). A Heirarchial decomposition method is used to define this architecture. 
The architectures generated in ICAM are not genemlly available publicly (O Sullivan 1994). CAM-I Architecture: 
The Computer Aided Manufacturing -International (CAM-I) architecture is a general representation of manufacturing 
enterprises. The fictional decomposition method used to create this architecture is prescribed to indicate 
the details such as company policies and procedures, organizational structure and standards (Doumeingts 
et al. 1995). NBS Architecture: The NBS (National Bureau of Standards -now, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology) architecture uses a hierarchical control approach with five levels of hierarchy viz., 
factoV, shop, cell, workstation and machine. Each level can be broken into more activities. The decomposition 
is based on procedures, fimctions, or rules. NBs (NITS) developed this architecture so that manufacturing 
system vendors could develop products compatible for CIM (O Sullivan 1994). IMPACS Architecture: The 
IMPACS architecture uses IDEFO, Data Flow Diagrams (DFD), Graphe a Resultatis er Activities Intercies 
(GRAI) Grids and nets, IDEFIx and group technology. IMPACS outlines a cellular architecture. The production 
cells are controlled by software modules such as dispatcher, scheduler, mover, producer and monitor. 
These software modules are designed to be compatible with each other even when they are developed by 
ditlerent vendors. O Sullivan (1994) states that the IMPACS architecture has been widely accepted among 
manufacturing software vendors as a usefid and practical interpretation of the production management 
system. 5 MODELING TOOLS Models are built using the modeling tools in the manner prescribed by modeling 
methodologies. System modeling tools refer to techniques used for diagrammatically representing fimctions 
or activities (O Sullivan 1994). lDEF Modeling Tools: IDEFO, IDEF1, IDEFIx and IDEF2 are modeling tools 
developed by the ICAM (Integrated Computer Aided Manufacturing) project of the US Air Force at Soft Tech, 
Inc. These four main modeling tools, which are complementary to each other, provide functional, informational 
and dynamic models of the system. IDEF models are used primarily for requirements definition. IDEFO Models: 
IDEFO is a comprehensive and expressive fictional modeling language capable of graphically representing 
a wide variety of business, manuhctnring and other types of enterprise operations to any level of detail. 
Three important features of IDEFO technique are activity modeling graphics, gradual exposition of details 
and disciplined team work. The basic construction used in an IDEFO model is a function block linked to 
other function blocks by inputs, outputs, mechanisms and controls. Links between the blocks may be either 
physical objects, such as material flow, or information flow. IDEFO models have three important features 
viz., context which indicates the position that the subject model takes up in the systems hierarchy, 
viewpoint which refers to the perspective which the model adopts, and the purpose which indicates the 
reason for existence for the model (I%ndya 1995). IDEFO has been widely used in industry because of its 
user­friendliness, computer Suppofi rigor and conciseness, and well documented rules and procedures. 
The static nature of the models produced using IDEFO has been cited as the major drawback of this tool. 
A comprehensive treatise on the state of the art of IDEFO can be found in COlquhoun et al. (1993). IDEF1 
and IDEFIx Models: IDEF1 is a technique for modeling information requirements of a function, in terms 
of the structure of information. (An overly simplified example: What information should an invoice have?). 
It is based on the entity­relationship approach developed by Chen (1976). IDEFIx is an e~ension of IDEF1 
and deals with the flow of information. IDEFIx is not widely used due to its drawbacks such as its inability 
to support composite entity types and the strict procedural requirements such as complete enumeration 
of attributes of entities before instantiation (Pandya 1995). IDEF2 Models: IDEF2 models have the capability 
to describe as well as analyze a system (Banerjee and A1-Maliki 1988). However, IDEF2 is an Modeling 
Methodologies unsupported simulation language (Young and Vesterager 1991). Hence, other simulation languages 
such as ARENA (Drevna and Kasales 1994) and PROMODEL (Baird and Leavy 1994) are more commonly used. 
Structured System Analvsis (SSA~ (Gane and Sarson 1979). SSA is considered as a data flow approach to 
systems design. It is also quite effective in representing the flow of physical entities. This technique 
prompts the user to think in terms of what to accomplish than how. SSA uses hierarchical decomposition 
similar to IDEFO. However, it is more detailed and software oriented than IDEFO and is the most preferred 
modeling tool for data flows (O Sullivan 1994). This is also referred to in the literature as Data Flow 
Diagrams (DFD). GRAI Grids and GRAI Nets: GRAI grids and GRAI nets are the tools developed by the GRAI 
Laboratories of France to model decision-flow processes in manufacturing environments. In the GRAI grid, 
various activities are modeled with respect to the decisions and information flows between them while 
the GRAI net delineates the decision making process itself. 6 MODELING METHODS Modeling methods are 
guidelines to combine the modeling tools described above to model a particular system. Some of the methods 
used for modeling CIM enterprise systems include IDEF, SSADM, SADT, GIM, and CIM-OSA cube. IDEF Method 
This methodology prescribes the integration of IDEFO, IDEF1 and IDEF2 models which describe functional, 
informational and dynamic model of an enterprise, respectively. Structured Systems Analwis and Desire 
Methodology (SSADM: SSADM is a procedural framework which was developed specflcally for use in system 
development projects. It uses three modeling tools: data flow diagrams (DFDs), logical data structures 
(LDSS), and entity life histories (ELHs) to provide function, data, and event views of the systems, respectively 
(l%ndya 1995). Structured Analysis and Desi gn Technique (SADT): SADT (Ross 1977) is a system analysis 
and design methodology to represent the stmcture of the system diagramma tically. The representation 
begins with a diagram depicting the general description of a system. Modelling then progresses in a top 
down fashion. This method makes use of a number of graphical and textual tools such as activity diagrams, 
data diagrams, node lists, and data dictionaries to represent the structure of the system being addressed. 
The analysts are required to consider activity or function and data views of the system being modeld 
thereby encouraging the creation of integrated enterprises. The methodology requires a functional model 
before considering the physical design. This methodology has computer support in the form of softsvare 
packages viz., AUTOIDEFO and SPECIFX. GRAI Integrated Method (GINQ: The ESPIRIT IMPACS project uses 
an approach which employs tools such as GRAI, IDEFO, IDEFIL and Group Technology. This combination is 
called the GRAI Integrated Method (GIM). CIM-OSA Method: CIM-OSA defines an integrated methodology to 
design, implement, operate, and maintain an enterprise. The CIM-OSA method deploys many well-accepted 
ideas and principles to design a CIM enterprise. These include fictional decomposition in SADT; fimction/activity 
and information modeling used in IDEF, the entity­relationship model and the three schema approach from 
ANSI/SPARC development for data communications (Jorysz and Vernadat 1991). Obiect-Oriented Ammach: Object 
oriented concepts provide a new promising ontology for enterprise and CIM modeling. Ngwenyama and Grant 
(1994) and Kim et al. (1993) suggest ways to model CIM information systems using an object-oriented approach. 
The methodology proposed by Kim et al. (1993) consists of an analysis phase and a design phase. In the 
analysis phase, functional decomposition is employed to define the information flow among the manufacturing 
functions and their infrastmchwes. Decomposed fimctions are represented by fictional diagrams. The functional 
diagrams are then -ormed into an object­oriented information model consisting of a class dictionmy and 
class relationship diagrams. Using these, a class dictionary consisting of fimction classes and entity 
classes is formed. These class dictionaries can then be translated to a specific data dictionary of an 
object oriented database management system,  7 MODELS, ARCHITECTURES, AND INTEGRATION Consideration 
of the architectures and modeling methods described above reveals that almost all architectures do rely 
upon multiple views of manufacturing entepises. The functional and and Pratt informational views appear 
in most of the architectures. But most of these architectures have dif%ering additional views. IDEF has 
a dynamic view. The CIM-OSA architecture has a resource view and an organization view. CAM-I depicts 
three more perspectives viz., management perspective, computer systems perspective, and physical structure 
perspective in addition to functional and informational perspectives. Savokiinen et al. (1995) note that 
a single model will not be able to capture all aspects of a CIM enterprise. Therefore, a complete model 
is composed of different views, aspects, or perspectives. Weston (1994) suggests that CIM may be viewed 
from three diftierent perspectives, viz., from an engineering perspective, from the viewpoint of information 
system and networking and from the operations view point. He encourages mantiacturing organizations 
to examine CIM in the context of a total organizational perspective. He argues that a single dimensional 
CIM perspective most likely will produce results that are less than desired, particularly in a global 
competitive environment. Brandimarte and Cantamessa (1995), however, note that while the aim of the CIM 
community is to develop an integrated manufacturing enterprise, the integration between the Werent domains 
and cultures which cooperate in this field is dMcult to achieve. But it would be advantageous to the 
CIM community to integrate the different disciplines of CIM modeling, mainly the physical, communication 
(information) and operational dimensions. Little (1991) obsemes that we indulge in modeling myopia if 
we believe as system analysts that we can (or should) be building complete models of our system and setting 
all the control variables. Doing so misses the major opportunities for system improvement that are possible 
by finding new ways to improve the people on the front lines of the organization by giving them information, 
training and tools with which to improve our Pefiormance. He further comments the building of more and 
more complicated models of systems using the same methodologies is likely to yield diminishing returns. 
Managers face dozens of ditTerent problems each dafi not just late schedules and excess inventories but 
also issues such as key people being hired away, roofs that leak, customer dimaticfaction with products, 
and employee absenteeism. Thus a hundred different models are often needed, not one big model. This seems 
to be a very strong argument/opinion against building of a single integrated model. At this point it 
may be worthwhile to discuss the ditlierences, if any, between development of an integmted model and 
model integration. The first is the development of one big-picture (global view) from which the detailed 
local models can be built by zooming-in . Conventionally this may be akin to the topdown hierarchical 
approach. Most of the models discussed above fall in this category. The second is the pooling of the 
different models and tying them with some common thread. The argument in favor of the first approach 
(integrated model) is that the local models built with the big-picture in mind will not be striving towards 
local optimization, rather they would contribute towards the system effectiveness. But the biggest drawback 
here is that it would be a Herculean task to use this concept in existing systems which are already in 
operation. It may be easier to adopt this while establishing new systems. A serious challenge for the 
designers of such models is that those models should be flexible and must be robust to adapt to changing 
environments without losing focus. The argument in favor of the second approach (model integration) 
is that this is a plausible integration methodology in the case of existing organizations. But the problem 
here is that each of the local models developed separately will be myopic and naturally strive towards 
local optimization. Another practical problem is to make these models communicate with each other, as 
these might have been developed on different platforms and may operate in different languages. An attempt 
at integrating distributed models called the ENVISION architecture was presented by Heim (1994). He describes 
model integration as an alternative to aggregate refinement and decomposition. He provides a conceptual 
framework to integrate individually and independently fimctioning models to communicate with each other 
by acting as message passing objects in client-server relationships. This allows data sharing and coordination 
of the activities. This also reduces the programming effort and simplifies model validation. The author 
presents a prototype implementation of the model integration architecture. Wang et al. (1993) challenge 
the approach of integrating distributed models built using difTerent tools to represent the various viewpoints. 
They cite some of the latest developments in this area reported by Gay, et al. (1991). Gay et al. (1991) 
are said to have described the fictional, informational, and dynamic perspectives of a flexible manufacturing 
system by applying IDEFO, IDEF1 and SLAM II, respectively. Wang et al. (1993) challenge these approaches 
using the following arguments firs4 since the dynamic view point is being modeled using a language different 
from that used to represent functional and informational view, some actions have to be re-represented 
in building the dynamic version of the model. Second, the dtierent modeling tools use different syntax. 
This may result in loss of information especially if different people have Modeling Methodologies modeled 
the various views. Third, any change in the system will require a signiilcant remodeling effort since 
the change in one is not automatically reflected in the other. This makes the modeling and remodeling 
process highly inefficient. Wang et al. (1993) present a comprehensive methodology called IDEM (lrztegrated 
system Description Mode/) to overcome this difficulty. IDEM uses an extended IDEFO methodology to build 
a fi.mctional view of the system. An information view of the model is described by adding an object oriented 
information model on to the previously defined fictional model. A dynamic view of the model is created 
by associating time attributes to the functional model. The dynamic behavior of the model is governed 
by defining rule sets. IDEM is developed using a LISP based language called LOOPS. The first International 
Conference on Enterprise Modeling Technology (ICIEMT) identiled three types of approaches to the problem 
of syntactic and semantic model integration (Petrie 1992). They are described below. Master Models are 
a single reference model from which all other models and instantiation are derived. This is similar to 
what has been referred to in this paper as an integrated model. Unified models are metamodels which translate 
between models. Generally these models may have similar structures. For example, all the models may be 
databases which can communicate with each other. Federated models are loosely coupled models. Here the 
individual models may not have same structure. In such a case the interface between the models has to 
be manually constructed. Hence these models are also referred to as interfaced models. 8 CONCLUSION The 
literature reviewed suggests that there are various tools and methods to model CIM enterprises. There 
appears to be some consensus that there is a need to develop a generic approach to build CIM models which 
can represent the entire manufacturing organization while simultaneously allowing each function of the 
enterprise to maintain its uniqueness. Though the present day models do not appear to have completely 
achieved this character, some of the approaches appear to be quite promising. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We wish 
to acknowledge the support provided by the National Science Foundation for this research through Grant 
No. EEC-9527493. REFERENCES <RefA>Bair4 S. P., and J. J. Leavy. 1994. Simulation modeling using PROMODEL for 
Windows. In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, cd J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. 
Sadowski, A. F. Seila. 527-532. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. 
Banerjee, S. K., and I. A1-Maliki 1988. A structured approach to FMS modelling. International Journal 
of Computer IntegratedManufacturing. 1(2): 77-88. BessanL J. 1991. Managing Advanced Manufacturing Technology. 
Manchester NCC Blackwell, Brandimarte, P., and M. Cantamessa. 1995. Methodologies for designing CIM systems: 
A critique. Computers in Industry 25:281-293. Chen, P.P. 1976. The entity-relationship model: Toward 
a unified view of data. ACM Transactions on Data Base Systems, l(l), 1976. CIM reference model committee. 
1989. A reference model for computer integrated manufacturing from the viewpoint of industrial automation. 
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing. 2(2): 114-127. Colquhom G. J., R. W, Baines, 
and R. Crossley. 1993. A state of the art of IDEFO. International Journal of Computer IntegratedManufacturing. 
6(4); 252-264. Doumeingts, G., B. Vallespir, and D. Chen. 1995. Methodologies for designing CIM systems: 
A survey. Computers in Industry. 25:263-280. Drevna, M. J. and C. J. Kasales 1994. Introduction to ARENA. 
In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, 
A. F. Seila. 77-80. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. Duse, 
M., J. Gharpure, H. Bhuskute, M. Kamath, D. B. Pram and J. H. Mize. 1992. Tool independent model representation. 
In Proceedings of the 2nd Industrial Engineering Research Conference, 700-704. HE, Norcross, GA. Gane, 
C., and T. Sarson. 1979. Structured Systems Analysis-Tools and Techniques. Englewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice 
Hall International. Gay, R. K. L., R. Lim , and L. W. Shing. 1991. Using IDEF methodology for fictional, 
information and dynamic modelling of a FMS. In Proceedings of International conference on Computer integrated 
Manufacturing. ed. B.S. Lim. 97-100. World Scientific, Singapore. Heiq J. A. 1994. Integrating distributed 
models: the architecture of ENVISION. International Journal of Computer IntegratedManufacturing. 7(1):47-64. 
and Pratt Jorysz, R H. and F. B. Vernadat. 1990. CIM-OSA part 1: total enterprise modeling and function 
view. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3(3) &#38; (4):144-156. Kim C., K. 
Kim, and I. Choi. 1993. An object oriented itiormation modeling methodology for numtiacturing information 
systems. Computers and Industrial Engineering. 24(3):337-353. Kochikar, V. P., and T. T. Narendran. 
1994. On using abstmct models for analysis of flexible manufacturing systems. International Journal of 
Production Research 32(10):2303-2322. Little, J. D. C. 1991. </RefA>Are there laws of manufacturing? Manufacturing 
Systems. Washington D, C.: National Academy Press. Naga@ T., Y Naga@ and H. Koshimitsu. 1993. Building 
a CIM system for compound plant: Utilization of distributed processing system. Computers &#38;Industrial 
Engineering. 24(4): 561-569. Ngwenyama, O. K., and D. A. Grant. 1994. Enterprise modeling for CIM information 
systems architectures: An object oriented approach. Computers &#38; Industrial Engineering. 26(2): 279-293. 
O Sullivan, D. 1994. Manufacturing System Redesign: Creating the Integrated Manufacturing Environment, 
New Jersey: Prentice Hall. Pandya, K. V. 1995. Review of modeling techniques and tools for decision making 
in manufacturing management. In IEE Proceedings on Science, Measurement, and Technology 142(5): 371-377. 
Petrie, C. J. 1992. Introduction In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Enterprise Modeling 
Ed. Petrie, C. J., 1-17. Massachusetts: MIT Press. Ross, D. 1985. Applications and extensions of SADT. 
Computer April: 25-34. Savolainen, T., D. Beeckmann, P. Groumpos, and H. Jagdev. 1995. Positioning of 
modeling approaches, methods and tools. Computers in Indus@. 25:255­ 262. Wang W., K. Popplewell, and 
R. Bell. 1993. An integrated multi-view system description approach to approximate factory modeling. 
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing. 6(3): 165­ 174. Weston, Jr. TED . 1994. Three 
dimensions of CIM, Production and Inventory Management Journal. First Quarter 59-61. Young, R.E. and 
J. Vesterager. 1991. An approach to CIM system development whereby mantiactnring people can design and 
build their own Cl&#38;f system. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing. 4(5): 288-299. 
 AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES GANESH PAI KATEEL is a Research associate in the Center for Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
in the School of Industrial Engineering and Management at Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK. 
He received the B.Tech degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Karnataka Regional Engineering College, 
India and Post Graduate Diploma in Industrial Engineering form the National Institute for Training in 
Industrial Engineering, Bombay, India. He has two years experience in the CNC machine building industry. 
He has taught both at undergraduate and graduate levels at Karnataka Regional Engineering College, India 
for four years. He was the Project OfKcer for the State of Karnatr@ National Technical Manpower Information 
System, Govt. of India from 1990 to 1994. Currently he is completing his M.S. degree in Industrial Engineering 
and Management at Oklahoma State University. During 1995-96, he taught Production Management at the College 
of Business, Oklahoma State University. MANJUNATH KAMATH is an Associate Professor in the School of Industrial 
Engineering and Management and Director of Center for Computer Integrated Manufacturing at Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, OK. He received the B.Tech. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 1982, the M.E. degree in Automation from the Indian Institute 
of Science, Bangalore, India, in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree in Industrial Engineering from the University 
of Wisconsin-Madiso~ in 1989. His primary areas of interest are stochastic modeling and queueing theory, 
analytical performance modeling of manufacturing systems, object-oriented modeling and simulation of 
discrete-event systems and Petri nets. He is a member IEEE, IIE, and INFORMS. DAVID B. PRATT is an Assistant 
Professor in the School of Industrial Engineering and Management at Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK. He holds B. S., M. S., and Ph.D. degrees in Industrial Engineering from Oklahoma State University. 
He has twelve years experience in the petroleum, aerospace and pulp and paper industries. His research 
and teaching interests include manufacturing systems modeling, enterprise integration, and the strategic 
implications of CIM. He is a registered Professional Engineer in Oklahoma, a certified Fellow in Production 
and Inventory Management and an ASQC Cetiled Quality Engineer. He is a member of IIE, NSPE, AFICS, INFORMS, 
and ASQC. 
			
