
 AN UNLEVEL PLAYING FIELD: WOMEN IN THE 1NTR0DUCT0R% COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSES Marian Gunsher Sackrowitz 
Department of Computer Science Middlesex County College Edison, New Jersey 08818 msack@pilot.njin. net 
ABSTRACT This study looks at students in introductory computer science courses at two major universities 
in order to under­stand some of the reasons behind the recent sharp decline in the number of female computer 
science majors. The study focuses on gender differences in preparation and skills and the implications 
of these differences on success in the intro­ductory course. The study showed that despite the proliferation 
of comput­ers in many areas of daily life, female students still enter in­troductory computer science 
classes with weaker program­ ming skills and less involvement with computers than their male counterparts. 
Prior familiarity with programming concepts emerged as the most useful predictor of success in the course 
and a high level of success was difficult to achieve without this prior knowledge. The mean grades were 
comparable for men and women but the women were underrepresented among the highest achievers. This study 
suggests that the above factors combine to place women at a disadvantage in introductory computer science 
classes and that some adjustments to the pace and/or struc­ture of this course might be necessary to 
attract and retain more women in the major. INTRODUCTION Data from the Department of Education [12] indicates 
that the number of women earning undergraduate degrees in computer science has declined sharply in recent 
years, even as the number of women in other traditionally male fields Permission to copy without fee 
all or part of this material is gtanted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, 
and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing MacfdneW. To copy 
otherwise or to republish, requires a fee andlor specific permission. SIGCSE 96 2/96 Philadelphia, PA 
USA @l996 ACM 0-69791 -757-X196K)002 ....SO.SO Ann Parker Parelius Department of Sociology Rutgers University 
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903 apareliu@zOdiac.rutgers.edu has increased. This is particularly surprising 
given the pro­liferation of computers in homes, schools, and places of work. As computers become more 
commonplace, gender differences inexperience and interest in computing might be expected to decline. 
Yet, women are still entering college with less computer experience than men and the gender gap in undergraduate 
computer science education is widening. There have been a number of previous studies describing problems 
faced by women in undergraduate computer science courses [1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11]. These studies have 
shown that women are generally less involved than men with computers at the high school level. Therefore, 
women enter the introductory computer science courses with a weaker background and less confidence with 
computers. They report feelings of isolation and frustration in the course and have a lower persistence 
rate in the major. Although the introductory course seems to present prob­lems for female students, a 
study in Australia [7] suggests that the situation improves for those women who remain beyond the first 
course. The Australian study showed that the advantage conferred by greater prior experience disap­peared 
for those still enrolled at the end of the first year and that women were actually overrepresented among 
the high­est achievers in the graduating class (13.2% women to 10.8% men). Therefore, efforts to understand 
and remedy the problems that women face in the introductory computer science course might help narrow 
the gender gap in com­puter science. This study looked at men and women enrolled in introduc­tory computer 
science courses in order to assess what types of gender differences in preparation and skills were still 
sig­nificant and the implications of these differences on success in the introductory course. METHOD 
A questionnaire assessing general academic background, mathematics background, computer experiences, 
perceived computer skills, and attitudes towards computers was administered to students in introductory 
computer science classes at Rutgers and Princeton Universities. The population at Rutgers consisted on 
186 students, 127 men and 59 women (68% men, 32% women). The population at Princeton consisted of 94 
students, 67 men and 27 women (71 ~0 men, 29~0 women). Completed questionnaires were obtained from from 
50% of the Rutgers students and 35% of the Princeton students. The sample group at Rutgers was 30% female 
and the one at Princeton was 45% female. The survey was conducted during the fifth week of the 1995 spring 
semester. At the end of the semester, grades were obtained for the students in the study and for the 
class as a whole. FINDINGS The students in the study were generally a mathematically able group of students 
who reported an interest in pursuing a technical major. The students at both schools reported high math 
SATS. The average score on the math SAT was in the mid 600s at Rutgers and in the mid 700s at Princeton. 
These math SAT scores place the Rutgers students in approximately the top 10% of college bound seniors 
and the Princeton students in approximately the top 1% [3]. The math SATS of the men and women were comparable 
at both schools, with men having a slight (under 20 point) advantage. Computer and programming skills 
To determine the level of preparedness of the students, we asked them to rate their prezourse degree 
of familiarity with various programming concepts and their prccourse degree of competency with several 
widely used computer languages, operating systems and machines. Table 1 indicates the ex­tent to which 
the students in our sample reported familiarity with five fundamental programming concepts. Table 2 indicates 
the extent to which they reported competence with a variety of commonly used programming languages, applications 
and systems. These tables indicate a gender difference in the favor of the men in almost all categories 
and a significant difference in many of them. Princeton Rutgers h looping 1.6 2.1 Z:u Table 1 Princeton 
Rutgers BASIC PASCAL c word processor 1.0 1.5 * 1.2 1.4 * spread sheet 1.6 2.7 * 1.8 2.0 data base 2.3 
3.4 * 2.1 2.4 MS-DOS 1.6 2.7 * 1.7 2.9 * 2.7 3.3 *2.9 3.5 * IBM PC MAC mini (SUN/VAX) Lx.uiLx Table 
2 Competencies with Languages, Applications and Systems (Means of Responses) scale -1 (very competent) 
to 4 (not at all competent) * indicates a significant difference on the t-test Skill Acquisition To better 
understand the reasons behind some of the reported gender differences in computer skills, we asked questions 
about formal (in-school) learning experiences and informal (out-of school) learning experiences. Formal 
Learning Experiences Table 3 indicates the highest level high school program­ming course completed by 
the students in our sample. At both schools, the men were more likely than the women to have taken an 
Advanced Placement computer class. At Rutgers, the men were more likely to have taken an introductory 
course; but at Princeton, the situation was reversed. Despite the fact that more Princeton women than 
men had taken a programming course, the men indicated greater familiarity with programming concepts (Table 
1). Surprisingly, in both classes, over 50% of the students had not taken a high school programming course. 
Princeton Rutgers ~~ Dixzi7 Table 3 Highest High School Computer Programming Course Informal Learning 
Experiences Familiarity with Programming Concepts (Means of Responses) Although formal coursework is 
a major determinant of scale -1 (very familia) to 3 (not at all familiar) programming preparation, there 
are many other ways stu­ * indicates a significant difference on the t-test dents can acquire computer 
skills. Alternative learning sources include employment, family, friends, publications, Princeton Rutgers 
~ self-teaching, and hacking . To evaluate the importance of informal learning experiences, we asked 
questions about involvement with computers and computer related activities and about the importance of 
various alternative learning sources. At Rutgers, the men were significantly more likely to own a personal 
computer (9170 men, 70% women); however, at Princeton computer ownership was nearly universal (94% men, 
87% women). At Princeton, gender differences might have emerged if we had asked about the length of time 
of computer ownership, since some students had a computer available at home all through high school while 
others acquired a computer only at the start of college. The men in our sample were more likely than 
the women to have held a skilled computer job such as programming, working with software packages or 
working in operations. At Rutgers, 36% of the men versus 21% of the women held skilled jobs. At Princeton, 
the ratio was 5670 to 33~o. As Table 4 indicates, the men also indicated that they spent more time than 
the women engaged in computer related activities such as playing computer games, exploring the intemet, 
reading computer books and magazines, attending computer shows, and participating in computer activities 
with-friends. Differences were si~~ficant in-most cases. Princeton Rutgers men women men women playing 
computer 1.5 0.8 * 1.9 1.0 * games exploring the 2.1 1.4 * 2.1 1.4 * intemet * reading computer 1.1 
0.6 1.7 0.7 magazines * attending 0.6 0.1 * 0.9 0.4 computer shows engaging in 1.2 1.0 1.5 1.1 computer 
related activities with friends Table 4 Involvement with Computer Related Activities (Means of Responses) 
 scale -3 (greatest involvement) to O (no involvement) * indicates a significant difference on the t-test 
Table 5 indicates the importance the students attached to various out-of-school learning sources. Men 
were signifi­cantly more likely to assign greater importance to indepen­dent activities such as self-teaching, 
reading books and magazines and hacking. No particular pattern emerged with respect to the importance 
of family, friends and jobs. self-teaching Y?Y=It%-i hacking publications job family friends Table 5 
Importance of Out-of-School Learning Sources (Means of Responses) scale -1 (very important) to 3 (not 
at all important) * indicates a significant difference on the t-test Course Outcomes and Grades At the 
end of the semester, the final grades were collected. Even though the grading systems and grade distributions 
were different at the two schools, similar patterns emerged. For the class as a whole, the mean grades 
were comparable for men and women. However, the distribution of the grades for the men was skewed toward 
the high end, resulting in an underrepresentation of women among the highest scorers. The final grades 
of those students in the study who completed the course and released their grades to us (85 of the 94 
Rutgers students and 25 of the 33 Princeton students) were used to evaluate the impact of the study variables 
on the grade. Familiarity with five ba~sic programming concepts, selection, looping, procedures, arrays 
and pointers (Table 1), emerged as most useful. To summarize familiarity with the above five programming 
concepts, we created a composite variable prep by adding 2 points for each concept rated very familiar 
, 1 point for each rated somewhat familiar and no points for each rated not at all familiar . The range 
of the variable prep was from O to 10 with 10 indicating greatest familiarity. Table 6 gives the means 
of prep for men and women. Princeton Rutgers - Table 6 Mean of Prep scale -10 (most familiar) to O (least 
familiar) * indicates a significant difference on the t-test A stepwise regression analysis, using the 
major variables of the study, yielded prep as the strongest prexlictor of success, explaining 10% of 
the variance at Rutgers and 26% of the variance at Princeton. A high prep score indicated strong prior 
familiarity with material covered in tlhis course. A bivariate frequency distribution of grade and prep 
as shown in Table 7 gives a more revealing picture of the relationship. At both schools there was a very 
noticeable difference between the grade distribution of the students in the lowest third of the prep 
range (O-3) and that of students in the highest range (8-10). Also, the high grades came overwhelmingly 
from the students in the highest prep category. The bivariate frequency distributions at both schools 
had an upper triangular pattern and the relevant chi-square statistics were significant at at least the 
.05 level. These findings suggest that potential for success in these courses was limited by level of 
prep. This was particularly true at the high success level. A high level of prep was no guarantee of 
success, but a high level of success was unlikely without a reasonable level of prep. Princeton grade 
C to B­ - B to A­ 58 50 14 44% A andA+ 0 17 71 24% Rutgers level of prep o-3 4-7 8-10 totals grade 
25% 39% 36% 100% C and 82 54 53 61% below B 9 3826 26% A 9 821 13% Table 7 Distribution of Grade by Prep 
(in percent) Chi-Square significant at .05 level CONCLUSIONS The pattern of the responses at the two 
schools was very similar and the principle results of the survey combine to explain some of the problems 
that women experience in in­troductory computer science courses. The principle results of the study showed 
that Female students entered the introductory course with weaker computer skills and less involvement 
with comput­ers than their male peers.  Final grades in these courses were strongly dependent on incoming 
programming skill level and high achievement in the course was very difficult without prior programming 
knowledge.  The difficulty many of the women face seems to stem from the fact that although introductory 
computer science courses generally do not have prerequisites, these courses often move rapidly through 
the fundamental programming con­cepts. This fast pace may be adequate for the student who is reviewing 
what is already familiar but too fast for the student encountering these concepts for the first time. 
While the students in the former group move easily through the material and succeed on their early tests 
and assign­ments, the students in the latter group struggle and become aware of their deficiencies relative 
to others around them. In the end, those who enter less prepared are likely to re­ceive more mediocre 
grades and become more discouraged about their ability to compete in computer science courses. Women 
are more likely to find themselves in this less pre­pared group. Studies have shown that women tend to 
have less confidence in their technical skills and to become more discouraged when grades do not meet 
their expectations [2, 4,6, 8,9, 13, 14]; therefore, the above sequence of events might have an even 
more negative effect on them than on their male counterparts. The dramatic increase in the availability 
of computers alone does not seem to be affecting this gender gap in preparation. The results of our study 
are very similar to results obtained in a study conducted in 1985 at Berkeley [8]. Although computer 
ownership was much more pervasive among the current students, the gender gap in preparation observed 
at Berkeley was similar to the gender gap observed in this study. In fact, the students in the current 
group were less likely than the Berkeley group to have taken a high school programming course. The results 
of this paper imply that some adjustments need to be made at the high school and/or at the college level 
in order to attract and retain more women in computer science. Substantial change at the high school 
level will be difficult to achieve. Data from the College Board [3] indicates that the percentage of 
high school students taking a programming course has been dropping rather than rising (from 40% in 1990 
to 29% in 1994), although the proportion of women among these students has remained stable at about 47?Z0 
percent. There are no formal educational requirements for high school computer science instructors; therefore, 
the quality of computer science teaching at the high school level can be very inconsistent. Also, high 
school students already face a large number of competing pressures and many never find time for a programming 
course. These facts strongly imply that the gender gap in prepara­tion and the problems that is creates 
will not disappear soon. Therefore, the colleges must make efforts to adjust the pace and/or structure 
of the introductmy course to ensure that a student with an aptitude for computer science but lit­tle 
computer science background can have a reasonable chance for success. Appropriate changes would help 
women gain more skill and confidence with computers and thus encourage more women to pursue a computer 
science major. Note Copies of the questionnaire in several formats are available via anonymous ftp at 
ftp.cs.rutgers.edu in the directory Ipublmsack Acknowledgments This research was facilitated by the Princeton 
mid-career fellowship program. We would also like to thank Professor Andrea LaPaugh of Princeton and 
Professors Louis Steinberg and Barry Wittman of Rutgers for allowing us to use their classes for this 
study. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] P. F. Campbell &#38; G. P. McCabe, Predicting the Success of Freshman in a Computer 
Science Major, Communications of the ACM, 27(1 1), 1108-1113, 1984. [2] V. A. Clarke &#38; S. M. Chambers, 
Gender-based factors in computing enrollments and achieve­ments: Evidence from a study of tertiary students. 
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5(4) 409-429, 1989. [31 The College Board, Profiles, college-bound 
se­niors, 1990 and 1994. College Entrance Examination Board, New York, N. Y. [4] K. A. Frenkel, Women 
and computing. Communications of the ACM., 33(1 1), 34-46, 1990. [51 K. Howell, The experience of women 
in under­graduate computer science: What does the research say? SIGSCE Bulletin, 25(2), 1993, ACM Press, 
New York, N. Y., 1-8. [6] C. M. Jagacinski, W. K, LeBold &#38; G. Salvendy, Gender differences in persistence 
in computer-re­lated fields. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 4(2), 185-202, 1988. [7] J. Kay, 
J. Lubin, G. Pointer &#38; M. Presser, Not even well begun: women in computing courses. Higher Education, 
18 (4),511-527, 1989. [8] Z. A. Kersteen, M. C. Linn, M. Clancy &#38; C. Hardyck, Previous experience 
and learning of computer programming: The compu[er helps those who help themselves. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 4(3), 185-202, 1988, [9] A. Pearl, M. E. Pollack, E. Risken, B. Thomas, E. Weld &#38; 
A. Wu, Becoming a computer sci(en­rist, Communications of the ACM., 33(11), 47­57, 1990. [10] L. Sproull, 
S. Kiesler &#38; D. Zubrc~w, Encountering an alien culture. In S. Kiesler and L. Sproull (Eds.), Computing 
and change on cam­pus (173-194). 1987, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [11] C. Toynbee, On the 
outer: Women in Computer Science Courses . SIGACT News, 24(2), 18-20, 1993, ACM Press, New York, N. Y 
. [12] U. S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Degrees and Other Formal 
Awards Conferred. March, 1993. [13] N. C. Ware, N. A. Seckler &#38; J. Leserman, Undergraduate women: 
Who chooses a science ma­ jor? Journal of Higher Education, 56(l), 73-84, 1985. [14] S. E. Widnall, AAAS 
presidential lecture: Voices from the pipeline. Science. 241, 1740-1745, Sept., 1988.  </RefA>
			
