
 (An Undergraduate Course in ADDlied Data CommunLcationg' Larry J. Brumbaugh Applied Computer Science 
Department Illinois State University Normal, Illinois 61761 Abstraot This paper describes a different 
type of data communications course than that presently offered in most computer science programs. Several 
justifications for such a course are provided. Overview and Rationale Most people will not question the 
importance of including one or more data communications courses as part of a modern computer science/data 
processing curriculum. However, there is an extremely wide range of opinions as to the topics that should 
comprise the contents of such a course. Is there a relationship between the computer science courses 
presently offered in data communications and a very significant shortage of qualified people in the data 
communications area? Three 'typical' data communications courses are described here. (A) In a computer 
science department located in an engineering school, or in a 'traditional' computer science program, 
the data communications course is often hardware and theory oriented. Mathematics, engineering and physics 
topics are included in the course. For many students, much of the course content is irrelevant or incomprehensible 
or both. (B) At the other extreme, a Management Information Systems program located in a School of Business 
may only superficially examine the hardware aspects of data communications. Instead, an MIS course frequently 
emphasizes the design of systems, on-line programs, and screens. Hence, it is a very software oriented 
course. Some on-line applioation projects  Permissionto copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title ofthe publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/ or specific permission. 0 1989ACM 0-89791-298.5/89/0002/0001 $1.50 may be coded and implemented. 
These are usually implemented in a user friendly non-IBM mainframe environment. (C) A third type of 
data communications course covers both hardware and software topics and also networks. In a single semester, 
the three topics cannot be covered in sufficient depth to develop working skills with any one of them. 
For specific audiences, each of the above courses serves a worthwhile purpose. However, for eaoh course, 
either the potential audience is rather limited, the amount of practical data communications covered 
is limited, or both. This paper describes an alternative to the above three oourses, an ADolied Data 
Communications course. Its contents differ significantly from the three courses described above. An ADDliea 
Data Communications course should satisfy two objectives not usually found in the above three courses. 
First, allow students to obtain meaningful hands-on experience with a wide variety of modern data communications 
concepts and equipment, including software and hardware. Second, this experience and the course content 
itself should be related to the type of environment in which the typical entry level application programmer/analyst 
will most likely be working during their first several years as a data processing professional. It is 
important that the course is oriented toward the actual environment where most students will eventually 
be working. None of the three oourses described above are appropriate for satisfying these two conditions. 
Rather, in designing such a course, the following questions must be addressed. In what type of data communications 
environment will the typical application programmer/analyst find themselves? What communication software 
and hardware 1 concepts and equipment will the student be working with over the next three to five years, 
the absolute maximum length of time for which predictions can be safely made in the data communications 
field? The majority of Applied Computer Science students at Illinois State University will eventually 
work on computer systems centered around large IBM mainframes or plug compatible machines. Such systems 
will also include a wide variety of terminal devices, control units, mini and microcomputers. Hardware 
from multiple non-IBM vendors will be included in this collection of devices. Distributed processing 
will be heavily used. The entire computer network will be tied together by IBM's Systems Network Architecture 
(SNA). SNA is clearly the most popular (i.e. widely used) layered architecture in the U.S., and perhaps 
the world today, and has evolved into the de facto industry standard for data communications. Many small 
and medium size computer equipment vendors develop their data communication products to be compatible 
with SNA. Otherwise, the vendors find themselves locked out of the large number of IBM shops, which account 
for approximately 50% of the present computer industry. Under some conditions, non-SNA compatible devices 
and complete non-SNA networks can be tied into an existing SNA network. However, the cost of doing this 
is usually substantial. The large number of todays Computer Science/Data Processing/MIS majors will find 
themselves working in an SNA data communications environment. In a curriculum that claims to be application 
oriented, this, by itself, should be sufficient reason to strongly consider an IBM flavored approach 
in data communications. This paper makes the assumption that emphasizing IBM software and hardware is 
a reasonable path to follow. (For a person with a strong aversion to anything IBM, substitute 'OSI Model' 
for *SNA throughout this paper.) Even accepting this, the problem still remains as to how to offer a 
meaningful application oriented course which includes hands-on experience. The course described later 
in this paper is presently being offered by the Applied Computer Science Department at Illinois State 
University to advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate students. It meets the definition of an Aonlied 
Data Communications course given above. The ACS department has been offering a course called mroduction 
to On-line Svstems for approximately ten years. It is similar to course (B) above. The programming component 
of the course uses Command Level CICS. Recently, two additional courses have been added. The first is 
a course emphasizing hardware, networks, and some software, somewhat similar to course (C) above. The 
second new course developed is the one described in this paper. Prereauisites for ADDlied Data Communications 
apolied Data Communications is an advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate level course in data communication. 
It assumes that the student has acquired a rudimentary background in data communications. This background 
may be gotten from actual work experience or from prior courses. In the later case, the background is 
mostly theoretical. If a student has prior application experience, it has usually been acquired either 
on microcomputer systems or through programming with Command Level CICS or a comparable TP-monitor. Additionally, 
the students must meet two other prerequisites. First, they must have a strong programming background 
in one of the three languages: COBOL, PL/I, or Assembler. Second, they must have some (programming) experience 
on large IBM (MVS) systems. All of the Applied Computer Science undergraduates at ISU meet the three 
prerequisites by the beginning of their senior year. The introduction to data communication knowledge 
is ordinarily acquired in any of one to three types of previous courses. These include microcomputer 
courses, systems analysis and software design courses, and also some aspects of the programming language 
courses. The other added course mentioned above, Data Communications and Networks, will also clearly 
satisfy the prerequisite. As with the other upper division ACS courses, which involve programming, no 
particular language is specified as a requirement for this course. Instead, the individual student selects 
the language with which they prefer to program from among COBOL, PL/I, and Assembler. The prerequisite 
of familiarity with MVS systems is probably satisfied with the 'Advanced Prow Concents UsLrre; COBOL' 
course or the External Data Structures course, which includes an in-depth study of MVS systems, emphasizing 
JCL, Utilities, and VSAM. A substantial number of ISU students take ACS courses on a part-time basis, 
while working in the Bloomington/Normal area. The majority of them are employed by two large insurance 
companies, State Farm and Country Companies. Both companies have large IBM data processing shops. Most 
of these 2 students meet the three prerequisites for the course through their job experience. Additionally, 
most of the medium size programming installations in the immediate geographic area of Illinois State 
University are also IBM shops. Hence, almost all of the students that are interested in taking ADDlied 
Data Communications are able to meet the three prerequisites. Course Content What is the appropriate 
material to include in an ADolied. Data Communications course? The content consists of six major topics, 
which overlap one another. These include the following: (7) A very intense overview is given of the major 
hardware and software components found in the modern data communications environment. This component 
of the course assumes some prerequisite knowledge of data communications. (2) A thorough examination 
is made of the manner in which terminal devices work. This includes studying the data stream SENT from 
and RECEIVED into the terminals. The application software which interfaces with the terminals is examined. 
The control units and front end processors to which the terminals are attached are also described. (3) 
The fundamental structure and major concepts associated with a layered network architecture, as exemplified 
by IBM's Systems Network Architecture (SNA), are studied in detail. This topic is the heart of the course, 
and all other topics are related to it. (4) Telecommunication access methods are studied. This is done 
on both a theoretical and practical level. This component of the course is most responsible for allowing 
students true hands on experience. The VTAM access method is emphasized because of its power, popularity, 
and interrelationship with SNA. (5) The software and hardware for connecting other devices and networks 
into an SNA environment. An emphasis is placed on local area networks, both token ring and CSMA/CD are 
covered, along with X.25 networks. (6) Future directions and new state-of-the-art products in data communications 
are described. It is assumed that this component of the course will probably undergo changes on a yearly 
basis. It is also envisioned that some other parts of the course will also change, although on a less 
frequent basis.  Hands-on Exoerience-Course Pro.iects Specifically, how does the hands-on experience 
enter the course? Students taking ADD~~~Q Data Communications will complete three major projects. Although 
each of these is outlined below, detailed descriptions must be provided by the instructor each time the 
course is offered so that the projects reflect current concerns and practices. First, each student will 
be required to complete a major data oommunications programming project using a teleprocessing access 
method tireotlv rather than indirectlv The Indirect approach most freqlently uses a teleprocessing monitor 
such as CICS or IMS. Programming may be done in the language of the student's choice: COBOL, FL/I, or 
assembler. The ACS Department provides the necessary software support to permit using VTAM from within 
a COBOL of PL/I application program. The project will be completed in several steps, which parallel item 
G in Section IQ in the course content outline. 1. Write a program which establishes synchronous communication 
with a single terminal device. 2. Modify the program to establish asynchronous communication with multiple 
terminals. 3. Further modify the program to establish communication with a second application program, 
concurrent with the existing terminal communications developed in 2 above.  Second, each student will 
be expected to complete another major programming project. Possible programming project topics include: 
1. Write interface software on either the mainframe or an IBM-PC to upload and download files. 2. Write 
an emulation program on a personal computer that will allow a personal computer to act as a device attached 
to the mainframe. In particular, perform some functions available with a 3270 terminal. 3. Use a teleprocessing 
monitor to rewrite selected portions of the teleprocessing access method program developed in the first 
project. Then, compare and contrast the two programs in terms of efficiency and ease of development. 
 4. Conduct a detailed study of how CICS and a 3278 terminal interact during an LU-LU session. Specifically, 
what functions are performed at each SNA layer? Determine which headers are used, and the values they 
may contain? 5. Repeat the above study with IMS replacing CICS. 6. Repeat the above study with TSO 
replacing CICS. 7. Perform a comparable study examining the details of an LU-LU session between two 
large software products selected from among CICS, IMS, TSO, JES, etc.  Third, each student will be expected 
to complete a major non-programming project. Possible projects include: 1. Design a layered architecture 
to successfully run a simplified computer network which supports a limited collection of hardware devices 
and software products. 2. In response to some set of specific user criteria, design (but do not implement) 
a network. Include all relevant hardware, software, and topology, that can correctly and economically 
satisfy the user criteria. 3. Create and analyze terminal data streams, and identify the SNA components 
within them. Specifically the headers, request/response units, and the RPL fields must be identified. 
 4. Design, modify, or expand the scope of the ACS Departments* interface modules that are used to support 
VTAM programming in COBOL and PL/I.  Textbooks and References The first two times the course was offered, 
the book Communications Architecture for Distributed Svstems by R.J. Cypser. Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Co., 1978, ;as used as the text. It is expected that Cypser's book will remain the text for at least 
the next time the course is offered. It is somewhat remarkable that a book written in 1978 remains the 
definitive book on a dynamic subject like SNA/VTAM. However, because of his prior association with IBM, 
Cypser had knowledge of SNA/VTAM developments well ahead of their release by IBM. Hence, in many ways 
the book reads as if it has been written after 1980. At the present time, there is one comparable textbook 
available on SNA/VTAM. It is SNA:IBM*s Networkina Solution by James Martin, Prentice Hall, 1987. It is 
obviously more up-to-date than Cypserfs book, but does not contain nearly the amount of material found 
in Cypser's book. The textbook is supplemented by the material in a large number of IBM manuals. These 
manuals can be grouped into three general categories. First, there are the manuals that describe data 
communications, SNA, and protocols in general. Second, there are four important manuals which discuss 
the role and use of VTAM in an application environment. Finally, there are several manuals which discuss 
both terminals and printers, along with their associated data streams. Several copies of the entire collection 
of manuals are available for student usage. One additional course reference is being developed. It is 
a set of notes that summarize the VTAM manual material that is relevant to the programming projects. 
It is hoped that either the Cypser book will be revised, or a comparable more modern textbook with the 
depth of material found in Cypser's book will become available soon. At present, the same person has 
taught the course every time it has been offered. One part-time instructor in the ACS Department is also 
fully qualified to teach the course and could be used in subsequent semesters if needed. However, from 
a faculty of 20 full-time and 10 part-time teachers, these are the only two people with the necessary 
background to teach the course. There is also a tremendous shortage of people with expertise in this 
area throughout the computer science/data processing field. The comment in the second paragraph of this 
paper is just one acknowledgment of this shortage. Recently, a second full-time faculty member expressed 
an interest in moving into this area. It is presumed that it would be a worthwhile experience for most 
future instructors to unofficially audit one semester of the present course before attempting to teach 
it for the first time. Comoarable Professional Develoomeat A large number of advertisements for three 
to five day professional development seminars get sent to Computer Science faculty members. From reading 
them, one important point becomes evident. Users of large computer systems consider several data commuinications 
topics as the most important for 4 professional development seminars. Three specific types of courses 
seem to be widely offered. The first is an overview of the entire data communications field. Command 
Level CICS topics comprise the second. The third area is SNA/VTAM. Clearly, the reason why so many courses 
are offered in these areas is student demand. Hence, many people feel they need training in these areas. 
It is an interesting question as to why computer science programs are doing such an inadequate job in 
these areas. There are several possible explanations for this. Existing curriculums are outmoded or irrelevant. 
Many computer science faculty members have very limited backgrounds in modern data communications. Courses 
spend too much time on buzzwords and introductory concepts and not enough time teaching important skills. 
As mentioned above, a large number of SNA/VTAM courses are presently offered by a wide variety of vendors. 
Based on the sheer number of courses offered and the cost of attending the, it is apparent that presenting 
SNA/VTAM courses is a very lucrative business. A partial listing of such courses follows. - Course G5ui 
I)ura-tam OS1 VTAM From $900 4 Days Start to Finish SYS-ED VTAM $175 1 Day Operations SYS-ED Implementing 
$515 3 DaysSNA u. Wash-VTAM Inter-$1,075 5 Days ington nal Archi-(St. Louis) tecture The order in which 
the major Applied Data Communications course topics are presented does allow some flexibility. Clearly, 
the overview and review of data communications fundamentals should be covered first. However, following 
this, either of the next two topics can be taught. Likewise, on a programming level, some VTAM material 
could be introduced earlier in the course. This would permit beginning the programming projects earlier 
in the course. If this approach is followed, some VTAM topics must be presented preliminary to explaining 
the SNA theory behind the topic. OGRAPHY <RefA>Cypser, R., QUUuu&#38;zations Architecture for Distributed Svstemg 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978: Martin, J., SNA: IBM's Netuorkillg Solution, Prentice Hall, 1987.
</RefA>			
