
 A METHODOLOGY FOR CONDUCTING ADVANCED UNDERGRADUATE COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSES George J. Pothering Department 
of Computer Science The College of Charleston Charleston, SC 29424 A methodology for conducting upper-level 
computer science courses in areas fn which the "instructor" has no background is presented. The methodology 
is based on having a small class of students assume all of the lecturing responsibilities. The paper 
covers all aspects that go into planning and conducting such a course, from determining the subject matter 
through asssigntng the course grades, and concludes by comparing it with other approaches similar in 
nature. Included are observations from the author's own experience in directing a course in Artificial 
Intelligence which used the methodology. In thls paper I wlsh to highlight the major features of a course 
in Artificial Intelligence which was offered at the College of Charleston as a Special Topics course 
in the Spring, 1984 semester. The emphasis in this paper however Is not on the contents of the course, 
but rather on the manner in whlch the course was conducted. The "instructor" for this course, the author, 
had very little background in the area of Artificlal Intelligence, formal or informal, and in fact used 
the course as a means of gaining an introduction to the discipline. Rather than teach the course In 
a traditional lecture format and leave myself open to the possibillty of preparing lectures one day ahead 
of my students however, I decided to try to recruit a class of outstanding seniors and have them glve 
all of the lectures for the course. Thus they would be teaching both the instructor and themselves some 
of the principles of artificial tnteliigence simultaneously. In recognition of this role reversal I prefer 
to use the terms course director or course supervisor instead of instructor in referring to the faculty 
member in charge of this course. If managed properly such an approach could provide a means by which 
colleges, especially small colleges with a small computer science faculty, can introduce more diversity 
Into Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commercial advamage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
&#38;#169; 1985 ACM0-89791-152-0/85/003/0130 $00.75 senlor-level undergraduate courses without sacrificing 
important foundational courses at the lower levels and without adding substantially to a faculty member's 
course load. In fact as we shall see a course using this "student as teacher -teacher as student" approach 
18 perhaps best offered as an overload to a faculty member's teaching load. Furthermore, while thls course 
was conducted in the area of Artificial Intelligence at the College of Charleston it could just as easily 
been offered Ina number of other areas, e. E. Local Area Networks, Formal Semantics, Analysis of Algorlthms~ 
Computer Securlty, etc. What we have here, in my opinion, is a method by which faculty with relatlvely 
llmlted backgrounds in the more advanced areas of computer science (for example, individuals who may 
be the products of faculty retraining programs in computer science) can extend this background into some 
of these areas and at the same time add breadth to what may be a fairly restricted sequence of upper 
level courses that are available to hls/her institution's computer science majors. In the rest of thls 
paper I wish to present some of the details involved in setting up a course such as this. The nature 
of the description shall be in the form of a general set of guidelines backed up at times by pertinent 
comments based on my experiences with the course. The discussion shall focus on the followlng topics: 
1. determination of course subject matter; 2. student constituency; 3. course syllabus and text; 4. 
class meetings; 5. course requirements and grades.  We follow this with some final comments. I. Determination 
of Course Subject Matter Three criteria which should be prerequisite for offering a student taught course 
with the course director as one of the students are: I. An interest of the course director in the subject 
matter which is so strong that he/she would be willing to offer the course as an overload. 2. A strong 
interest on the part of the of the students both in learning the subject matter and in being active participants 
in the course. Students who regard the course as just another way of satisfying a degree should not be 
allowed to participate. 3. Appropriateness of the course area for a senior level course.  With regard 
to the first point, I shall mention from time to time the advantages to be gained in offering this course 
as an overload to a faculty member's normal teaching load. In fact I would suggest that unless the faculty 
member has a very cooperative chairman and understanding administration that it only be offered as an 
overload so that the director may assume complete control over the constituency of the class. Once it 
has been established that the course will definitely be offered the director may be able to negotiate 
some future release time or some overload pay. As for the second point, the interest of the students 
is critical since in the success of the course will require the consistently careful preparation of each 
lecture. The chance that this will happen is directly proportional to the students' wanting to be in 
the course because of what is being offered. I mention the third point because I am proposing this methodology 
as an aid in introducing diversity into elective offerings of a computer science curriculum. At the same 
time the integrity of the computer science program must be upheld and this could be endangered if it 
seems that the level of difficulty of the course has been lowered for the sake of the students. 2. Student 
Constituency Sometime before the students pre-register for their courses for the next term the course 
director should attempt to recruit students for the class. The size of the class should be kept very 
small -between three and five students -and be limited to outstanding students. Furthermore if word of 
the course gets around and the number of students desiring to get into the course exceeds five the director 
should he allowed to select those who will be in the class to be sure that only the best get into it 
and he/she should be allowed to back away from offering the course if the quality of the prospective 
students is not to his/her liking (backing out should be easy to do if the selection of students is done 
before pre-registration of the next term and if the course is an overload for the director). The rationale 
used here is: 1. Regarding small class sizes: I am assuming that even outstanding students will experience 
most of their learning while preparing their lectures. Consequently a smaller class affords a greater 
number of opportunities for each student to lecture and hence each student is presented with a greater 
number of learning situations. On the other hand I am also assuming that these same students will be 
spending a great deal of time and effort in preparing for each lecture and feel that a short recovery 
period should be included before the student has to lecture again. Thus there should be enough students 
in the course to provide this buffer even if each student lectures for just one class at a stretch. At 
the College of Charleston I offered the AI class to four students (originally five) and the class met 
twice a week for 75 minutes. Since the lecturer changed from class to class this meant that each student 
lectured once in two weeks, a period which seemed to be statisfactory to all involved. 2. Outstanding 
students: While any instructor would love to be able to populate a class with only the department's best 
majors, in a lecture course an unlotivated, undisciplined student with a spotty attendance record who 
never gets anything done on time can be tolerated. I feel that such a student cannot be tolerated in 
a course such as the one being proposed here because the students are so dependent on one another. While 
one may argue that good students will learn in spite of the quality of instruction, in the environment 
created in this kind of course it can easily demoralize the rest of the class to have to contend with 
classmates who are unprepared to lecture and subsequently cause them to lose interest in the course. 
 3. Class determined by the instructor: In the case where the demand for the course exceeds the course 
limit probably the only way that a course director can be assured of getting the quality of students 
he/she needs in the course is to personally select the students. In this way one can circumvent the usual 
quality-oblivious means for getting into courses such as first-come-first-served or credit-hour based 
priorities. This hand-selection should be carried out  before pre-registratlon for the next ;~ L~ ~ 
term's courses so that any students not chosen will still have a chance to get into a regularly scheduled 
classes and not experience a set-back on their progress towards their degree. Should any students object 
or should administrators balk at supporting such a discriminatory selection process the course-director 
has the option of cancelling the course since it was an overload course anyway. 3. Course Syllabus and 
Course Text The problem here of course is how to choose a textbook and to formulate a syllabus for a 
course you know nothing about. Addressing this need should be done carefully and may take up more of 
the director's time than any other aspect of the course (including keeping up with your student lecturers). 
In formulating a syllabus I would offer the following suggestions: i. Look at curriculum recommendations 
which offer course descriptions (such as ACM's Curriculum '78) to see if the subject in question is mentioned 
and a proposed syllabus is offered. 2. Look at catalog descriptions from varlous colleges and universities 
to see how they structure the course.  3. Look at syllabi provided in announcements of professional 
development seminars.  4. Look in the prefaces of introductory books in the subject matter to see if 
the author presents a proposed course of study. 5. Ask colleagues in your own school or contact specialists 
at other colleges or universities for their suggestions. Any, all, or some combination of these sources 
should lead to one or more posslble ways of organizing the course topics. In addition it is not out of 
llne to introduce your own preferences or philosophles into the picture. For example many instructors 
prefer to learn prlnclples and apply them to specific situation rather than to examine case studies and 
extract ideas from them, or vice versa. Selecting a good book is absolutely crltlcal here since everyone 
is going to be at its mercy. A good selection of candidate textbooks can probably be accumulated by combing 
the bookshelves of colleagues and any and all libraries in your area. Furthermore if the plans for the 
course are determined early enough, examination copies from sales representatives can be procured. Assistance 
in making a final selectlon may be obtained from knowledgeable colleagues, reviews such as those in Computing 
Reviews, and even the textbooks themselves ('this book is suitable for an introductory course at the 
level"). On the other hand your own feelings should also play a role. If you find it hard to read or 
to study from the book then almost certainly your students will also. Once the decision has been made 
adopt a certain textbook it may be necessary to go back and revise a syllabus or supplement the book 
if it fails to cover a specific topic you wish to cover or assumes some background knowledge your class 
may not have. In the latter case you might consider inviting in a guest lecturer just to introduce some 
variety into the routine and to give the students a bit of a breather. 4. Conduct of Classes I prefer 
having a different student lecture in each class period and that the subject matter for each lecture 
not be wrapped up into neat little modules. The reason for this preference is that since the preparation 
which each student does for hls/her turn at lecturing will constitute the primary means through which 
the course material will be learned, requiring each student to take over where the previous lecturer 
stopped (no matter where in a topic that may be) wlll probably force that student to reexamine a good 
deal of the material from the previous lecture. In fact the experiences of my own class suggest that 
the students will usually overprepare for their own lectures by a great deal. This overlap between a 
student's lecture and those preceding and following it may not happen when students cover specific topics 
(which the textbook may even arrange to be largely independent of one another). The course director will 
probably find the going somewhat slower than might be desired at the beginning of the term as the students 
grope to find a lecturing style which is suitable for them. My experience was that it took less time 
than I had anticipated for each one to develop a style which they found to be comfortable. Perhaps one 
reason for this is that after the first round of lectures the class began to feel more comfortable around 
one another and each student had a chance to compare hls/her style to those of others in the class, deciding 
what they did or did not llke about the way all of the lectures went, including their own. It is helpful 
to impress on the class from time to time that they are not expected to have all of the answers or understand 
every step of every algorithm, proof, or example covered in their lecture. As much as possible suggestions 
from the rest of the class should be used to clarlfyconfusing points or to assess the significance 
of particular conclusions or results. Certainly here is a place where the director's experience in other 
areas of Computer Science may play a big role, though on occasion it may turn out that no one can figure 
out what is going on. At such times it IS often encouraging to students to see that faculty can get stumped 
on some matters just as easily as they can. It can also be very informative for them to see how that 
same faculty member goes about resolvlng the confusion. 5. Grades One of the first questions students 
will ask in regard to this type of course is "how will my grade be determined?". In my own course I chose 
to use the following criteria: 1. The level of preparation which seemed to ~gq into each lecture and 
the quallty of the lecture as measured b~ the student's overall command of the material: It should not 
necessarily be held against a student if he/she gets stuck a few times if it is apparent that the problems 
seemed to arise at one of those places where someone may have trouble and if the student was able to 
isolate precisely the source of the confusion. At the end of the term the students should also write 
evaluations of the overall quality of each others lectures. These can be consulted in evaluating a student's 
performance here since typlcally the students are more aware of what goes on outside of class and behind 
the scenes than an instructor.  2. Assigned classwork: Each student is asked to be on the lookout for 
worthwhile exercises to assign to the rest of the class )and themselves) at the end of their lectures. 
When the assignment is turned in, enough copies must be made for everyone in the class, who then proceed 
to grade each other's work. These peer grades may then be considered by the director in assigning a final 
grade to each assignment. This approach seems to be quite often informative as it allows the students 
to see first hand what it is llke to read and grade someone else's work. Also, in addition to regularly 
scheduled assignments a long term group project might be assigned in appropriate in order to allow the 
students to pool their knowledge while solving a more complex problem.  3. Evidence of acquired knowledge 
demonstrated by their participation in discussions which arise in class or ability to answer questions 
or clarify points raised by other students in the class or the lecturer.  4. A written summary by each 
student of what they feel they have learned in the course.  I decided to use tests only as a last resort 
in the event that I felt that the class as a whole was not making what I considered to be a serious effort 
to keep up with the course material. Some Final Comments In addition to the diversity courses such 
as the one just described can add to the curriculum and to the increased professional development it 
affords the faculty member directing the course, there are some additional advantages this course methodology 
provides: i. The students gain valuable experience lecturing on advanced topics before peers and grow 
to a point were they are not afraid to risk making errors in front of these peers or a faculty member. 
 2. The students begin to learn how to teach themselves new material.  3. The course director gets to 
know the capabilities of the students much more closely than in a normal lecture class and is in an excellent 
position to write more specific and informative letters of recommendation for these students.  On the 
other hand perhaps the most serious criticism that can be directed towards this methodology is that it 
has the potential for allowing a second-rate course to be offered, since it amounts to a case of the 
blind leading the blind (or being led by the blind). While I can't disagree with argument, I would assert 
that if the director maintains a strong guiding hand throughout the course, the proposed approach is 
not inherently inferior to any of the following generally accepted formats: I. Proseminar courses where 
the instructor assigns topics to each student to be delivered at an appointed point in the course: The 
posslbillty exists here that because of the topical nature of the lectures a student will become a master 
primarily of hls/her own topic. Furthermore due to the generally large class sizes of such courses and 
the tendency to assign topics which require more than one lecture, the student is unlikely to be required 
to lecture on more than one topic. 2. "Moore method" or "Texas Topology" courses where the students 
are in effect asked to "re-lnvent the wheel" insofar as the subject matter of the course is concerned 
and use only their own ingenuity and the guarded direction of the instructor for direction. This method 
is named after R. L. Moore who used it in teaching a graduate course in Topology at the University of 
Texas in the '30 and 40's. Generally these courses do not cover as much material as a traditional lecture 
course might; however this apparent shortcoming is downplayed with the justification that the depth of 
insight which the students acquire will allow them to attain the desired breadth quickly on their own 
if that should be necessary.  3. Independent study courses, where one student assumes the responsibility 
of teaching himself/herself a certain amount of material under the close  supervision of a member of 
the faculty: These courses have also been used as occasions for faculty members to look into other areas 
which they are interested in but have never had a chance to study. In a sense the method discussed here 
extends this approach to more than one student and affords a chance for greater interaction among a11 
those involved, increasing the potential for everyone gaining as much from the course as possible. 
			
