
 Papers A NETWORKED ENROLLMENT SYSTEM Cathy Nicastri Oper&#38;ions Supervisor Dept of Business Systems 
University of Wollongong North fields Ave Wollongong NSW 2520 Australia 6142-213893 Fax: 6142-214474 
cathy@ uow.edu. au INTRODUCTION After numerous complaints regarding the time and effort associated with 
enrolling students into tutorial classes for subjects, tihe Micro­computer Laboratories developed and 
implemented a computer based enrollment system, which manages and controk this tedious chore. The Tutorial 
Enrollment System (TES) allows the students to enrolll themselves into tutorial classes, computer laborato~ 
ses­sions, seminars and workshops for the subjects they are undertak­ing. TES eliminates the need for 
lecturers to distribute tutorial enroll­ ment sheets, which are filled in, sometimes illegibly, by students. 
Traditionally, lecturers process the names and produce a class list. This work takes a substantial amount 
of time and effort during the first weeks of session, particularly for large subjects. This electronic 
system enables the student to decide which time best suits their timetable and at the same time ensures 
that classes are not over-enrollled and prevents students from deleting other stu­dent s enrollments. 
At the conclusion of the enrollments, TIM pro­vides printed class lists and a class management program 
to allow academics to further administer student enrollment details if desired. The Microcomputer Laboratories 
provides all computing resources for teaching for departments within the Faculty of Commerce. The resourees 
at the laboratories consist of a seven laboratory complex, with each laboratory consisting of twenty 
networked IBM compati­bles. TES operates in an Novell Netware environment and is cur­rently used on the 
four Netware servers in the laboratoriefi. During the latest run of TES (Autumn Session 95), well cwer 
2000 students enrollled into subjects in just over one hour, with 140 workstations logged into the system. 
The FacuIty has a number of subjects especially at first year level with well over 500-600 stu­dents 
enrollled and the introduction of TES has streamlinexl the enrollment process, resulting in a more efficient 
system fcm all con­cerned. The advent of microcomputers, networking hardware and operating systems and 
their mass adoption by educational institutions, has Permission to make d giraUhard copy of part or all 
of thts work for personal or or distributed forpmfit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the 
title by permission ofACM, Inc. To copy otherwtie, to republish, to post on servers, @ 1995 ACM ISBN 
# O-8979I-7O4-9D5AW1O $3.50. Winning the Networking Game Louie Athanasiadis Computer Systems O@cer Dept 
of Business Systems University of Wollongong North fields Ave Wollongong NSW 2520 Australia 61-42-213567 
Fax: 61-42-214474 la@uow.edu.au seen a growing number of labor intensive tasks transformed into automated 
procedures. These labor intensive tasks mainly relate to teaching, administration and student assessment. 
The Faculty of Commerce at the University of Wollongong has an independent computing resource unit (Microcomputer 
Laborato­ries). Since its establishment the unit has concentrated on meeting the need for computing and 
communications infrastructure to sup­port teaching. Several networked based systems have been imple­mented 
to help alleviate the administrative obligations associated with subjects in which a large number of 
students are enrollled. These network systems include an assignment collection and dis­tribution system 
(SUBMIT), a multiple choice quiz system (QUIZ) and a tutorial enrollment system (TES) . Some of these 
systems have changed the way subjects are adminis­tered by removing some of the labor intensive tasks 
that lecturers have to deal with. For example in the past after tutors had marked assignments, the marks 
were handed to the lecturer and then trans­posed to a central marks register. This procedure can be prone 
to errors especially for large classes. By using the SUBMIT system, tutors can enter their class marks 
into a central subject register, thus eliminating the need for the lecturer to deal with this. Another 
example involves the network based electronic quiz system which administrators multiple choice quizzes 
to students based on their tutorial class. Once the quiz has been attempted by the students, the marks 
are automatically recorded in the subjects electronic mark book. This mark book can then be imported 
into a spread­sheet and a final mark evrduated with little effort and few errors. One of the tasks that 
needs to be completed in the shortest amount of time is the enrolhnent of students into tutorials, workshops 
and computer laboratories prior to the start of the session. This paper will discuss in detail the use 
and impact of the networked Tutorial Enrollment System (TES) as used by the Faculty of Commerce.  THE 
PROBLEM With an increasing number of students entering the University over the past years, there became 
a need to efficiently and effec­tively manage the administrative duties involved in dealing with subjects 
that contain large number of students. Typically most first eta.muom me is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made of the publication and its hte appeav and notice is givm that copying k or to 
mdirtribute to lists, m-quires prior specijic permission ana70r a fee. Papers year subjects have well 
over 500-600 students enrollled. Academ­ics were faced with the daunting task of manually enrolling stn­dents 
into tutorial classes, workshops, computer laboratories and seminar groups and keeping accurate students 
mark books throughout the session. In the past it had been the practice that during the first week of 
lec­tures, blank class list sheets were placed on notice boards for stu­dents to sign into tutorial groups. 
This invariable led to problems such as students adjusting the list to suit their own needs, substitu­tion 
of student names by other students, adding their names onto a full tutorial class list and illegible 
hand writing. The subject lec­turer then had the chore of processing the class lists, knowing that hard 
decisions needed to be taken and that not all students would be satisfied with the final outcome. This 
manual enrollment pro­cess was very time consuming and error prone and caused difficul­ties for the first 
few weeks of classes. A SOLUTION To replace the manual system of enrollments, a network based application 
was developed to reduce the administrative workload associated with the allocation of students to fixed 
capacity classes. Based on the facilities already available at the Microcomputer Laboratories a networked 
based emolhnent system was designed to operate on a Novell Netware Local Area Network, originally (1988) 
the system ran on one fileserver catering for the needs of one department. However, due to the demand 
for the use of TES, system modifications were made to allow the system to operate in a multiserver environment, 
thus utilizing the four Novell fileserv­ers and the 140 workstations located in the Microcomputer Labo­ratories. 
All four departments within the Faculty have now been using TES for enrollments since 1991. Lecturers 
rue given the option of using this method for student enrollhnents. They are not obligated to use it, 
and may continue using traditional manual sys­tems if they wish. TES operates on a first come, first 
served basis. It is the student s responsibility to ensure that they enroll themselves into the appro­priate 
subject and select tutorial times that best suit their timetable. Students are advised at least two months 
prior to the enrolhnents, which subjects will be using TES and when TES will be available for enrollments. 
TES is normally available over a eight day period, but the majority of students tend to arrive on the 
first day of enroll­ments, to ensure they obtain their prefened classes. Some of these students arrive 
as eady as two hours prior to the starting time, thus creating a crowd control problem in the building 
where TES is operating. To reduce the crowd problem to a manageable size, the administra­tors of TES 
decide how TES will operate for the coming session, eg: for the Spring Session 1995, 100 level subjects 
will be sched­ uled on the first day then 200 level subjects on the second day and 300 level subjects 
on the third day, The one distinct disadvantage for students, is that some students may need to make 
return visits, if enrollled in subjects from different levels, again this is their decision, as they 
could enroll in all subjects on or after the third day. The following is a description of how students 
use the tutorial enrollment system. Figure 1 A list of subjects is displayed on the screen (refer to 
figure 1). The student uses the arrow keys to scroll through the list select­ing the desired subject. 
The student is then prompted to enter their student number, first and last name (at this stage there 
is no pre-Ioaded database that contains this information for verification). Figure 2A list of tutorial 
times, locations and nomber of remaining places are displayed (refer to figure 2), the student scrolls 
through the list selecting the most convenient tutorial time. The number of remaining places is updated 
every five seconds, should a student pause over their enrollment selection, they may miss out on the 
tutorial they wanted. A summary of the student s selection is then displayed on the screen. If a student 
is enrollled in more than one subject they repeat the above process for all other subjects. One critical 
factor in the design of the system was to ensure that duplicate bookings were impossible, but some students 
believe they have found a way round this, by changing their student num­ber slightly and re-enrollling 
into the same subject. Throughout the enrollment period regular checks are made against the TES data­base 
and the Universities student database from Administration. Any abnormalities are canceled. Should a student 
want to alter or delete an enrollmen~ they need to report to the enrollment administrators, who would 
make the changes for them, this ensures that students cannot delete other students enrollments. Students 
with particnkw enrollment prob­lems are sent to the relevant department to obtain assistance. At the 
conclusion of the enrollments, a class management program containing all relevant subject databases and 
printed subject and class lists is distributed to lecturers to allow them to further admin­ ister the 
enrollment process and electronically manage the adrnin­ istiative chores associated with subjects. During 
the Autumn Session 1995, thirty three subjects from the Faculty were administered using TES. Four of 
these subjects had enrollments of 500 or more students, six of the subjects had 250 or more, thirteen 
of the subjects had 100 or more and ten of the sub­jects had 100 or less. 100 level subjects were scheduled 
on the first day, with 200 and 300 level scheduled on the sewnd day (having the two levels together seemed 
to caused quite a crowd problem). Over the initial rush period , 2833 students enrollled into sub­jects, 
with the majority of these transactions occurring within the 6rst hour. By the end of the enrollment 
period, 9231 enrollment transactions had occurred.  SYSTEM OVERVIEW The enrollment system is made up 
of the following modules. Administration/Enrollment program: This program allows for the setting up and 
administering of subjects and allows students to enroll themselves into tutorial classes. This module 
provides two levels of security: the Administration level which allows adminis­trators to create/delete 
subj ects for the enrollment system, and the Enrollment level which allows students to enroll in a tutorial 
class. View Enrollment Status program: This program allows academics to view the enrollment status of 
a subject as enrollments are taking place. This enables them to take immediate action if there appears 
to be a shortage of scheduled classes in their subject. LAO Winning tbe Networking Game Papers Papers 
Student Enrollment prograrm Should the Administration/Enroll­ undertake in such a short period of time 
. ment program display low memory error messages, the Student Enrollment program can be used to enroll 
students, it does not per- The students also believe that the system is very efficient, effective form 
any administrative duties. and fair, but would like to see external access to the system. Single User 
Lecturer program Once enrollments are complete, the TES administrator copies the subject enrollment details 
and a stand alone management program to disk to allow academics to administrator their own database throughout 
the teaching session. Not only does the Tutorial Enrollment system fill the need of enrolling students 
into tutorials but these resulting databases from TES are loaded into the SUBMIT and the QUIZ systems 
(as men­ tioned above), which are used throughout the teaching session to help further reduce the administrative 
load associated with sub­ jects. FUTURE DIRECTIONS Further developments of the TES system will depend 
on the devel­ opment of the computing infrastructure of the Universities admin­ istrative sofhvare environment, 
At the present time, students can select a tutorial class for a subject even if they are not enmllled 
in that particular subject. This design approach was taken knowing that the University s student emollment 
database is often out of date, as it is batch processed periodically. When TES was first developed the 
University had just started to implement a campus wide area network and the building housing the laboratories 
was not connected to the network. To date the campus backbone has a number of weak links, which leave 
it too unreliable and slow for TES to be on-line with the Uni­ versity student database. There are of 
course the obvious security problems such as students and unauthorized staff obtaining access to other 
peoples enrollment records. Given that the above problems can be overcome the future changes envisage 
would involve a program that is linked to the Universit­ ies student enrollment database that updates 
the TES enrollment databases as the student databases are updated. This wonldl allow changes to the TES 
system that validate both the Student s ID and the fact that they are enrollled in a subject before they 
can select tutorial classes for that particular subject. Also when a student withdraws from a subject 
their tutorial selection is canceled. Another change to the TES system that has been discussed is a dial 
up tutorial enrollment module, to allow students to enroll cwer the phone if they have a modem and a 
PC at home. This solution has several problems associated with it, these include the requirement for 
extra phone lines to be installed, the purchase of modems and PCs to run the external enrollments as 
well as a location to set up this equipment. In the end the cost benefit of this arrangement can­ not 
be justified for the 8 day periods (twice a year) that it would be used. CONCLUSION The implementation 
of networked based systems to help alleviate the administrative obligations associated with the teaching 
of sub­ jects has been a success from the academic s point of view. The system and the computing staff 
who manage TES have been praised by several academic staff within the Faculty, for relieving them of 
a substantial administrative burden which they used to Winning the Networking Game 227 Winning the Networking 
Game  
			
