
 ALGOL68 INSTRUCTION AT OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY G.E° lledrick Department of Computing and Information 
Sciences Oklahoma State University Stillwater, Oklahoma 74074 U.S.A. At Oklahoma State University ALGOL68 
is taught to students whose background in programming consists primarily of programming in FORTRAN. Frequently, 
they have had some experience with PL/I although it is not so extensive as their experience with FORTRAN. 
PL/I is usually the only block structured language to which the students have been exposed. The students 
who study ALGOL68 are typ- ically seniors, although there are some graduate students, and an occasional 
lowerclassman. Almost none of these students has any experience with ALGOL 60 or any ALGOL-like language 
at the time he begins his study of ALGOL68. About half of then~ have had limited experience with formal 
specifica- tion of programming languages. The students learn ALGOL68 in one of three formats depending 
upon the number of students enrolled at a given time. The most elaborate treatment is given when there 
are enough students to justify a faculty member spending one-quarter of his time teaching the class as 
a special topics lecture course. This is tile mode of instruction that is preferred by the students. 
A smaller group of students covers the same material in a seminar format ~ather than a lecture format; 
the students in the seminar do not have the same access to faculty as do students in a special topics 
lec- ture course. The final mode of instruction is individual study; it is this instructional format 
which is used when only one or two students enroll for ALGOL68. In this format the students work almost 
entirely on their own except that they do have access to a faculty member when they cannot adequately 
resolve their questions. In each of the three modes, the students are given six programs which they 
are to copy and to run on either of the two machines available to them (an IBM 370/158 and an IBM 1130). 
These pro- grams are complete and correct when presented to the students. By running them the students 
learn the non-ALGOL68 requirements, such as JCL, etc., required to execute the programs, and they achieve 
a familiarity with the form of ALGOL68 listings. Each of these six programs is designed to point Out~ 
a feature of ALGOL68 with which they may not be familiar from their past experience with FORTRAN and/or 
PL/I. *The author's participation in this conference is supported, in part, by NSF Grant MCS 76-06090. 
 In each of the three instructional formats the students are assigned a set of twelve programs to write 
also. Eight of these are presented in the appendix. These twelve programs must be written during the 
semester in which the student is enrolled for the course. The programs are chosen from different areas 
of computer science including numerical analysis, data structures, logic, and other areas. Some of these 
programming assignments are given in the appendix. The students cover the greatest depth of material 
in the lecture course and the least amount of material in the individual study course, although the programming 
assignments are the same for all three modes of instruction. The primary texts for the ALGOL68 course 
are Lindsey and van der Muelen's Informal Introduction to ALGOL68 [5] , and Pagan's A Practical Guide 
to ALGOL68 [6]. The students are expected to obtain a copy of the ALGOL68 report [8] for supplemental 
reading, and are given a set of class notes. It is anticipated that the text Grammars for Programming 
Languages by Cleaveland and Uzglais [i] will be used in the future as supplemental reading also. Neither 
of the primary texts is used in such a way that it forces a structure on the course. In fact, they are 
required primarily for reference material. The ALGOL68 report costs as much as most computer science 
textbooks, but neither of the stated texts are as expensive as one should expect a computer science textbook 
to be. The cost to the student for all three textbooks is approximately the same as it would be for a 
course that requires two "average priced" textbooks. The author feels that these costs to the student 
are justified for two reasons: (i) they give the students a written statement of the syntax and semantics 
of the language; this can be used even when no instructor is available; and (2) no serious student of 
ALGOL68 should be without a copy of the formal report [8] since it is the final authority on the syntax 
and the semantics of the language. Hopefully, the required texts will be useful to the student as he 
continues his studies in graduate school. The students begin their study with a small amount of memorization 
of the basic concepts and constructions. This is followed immediately by a survey of the general program 
structure for ALGOL68 programs. Program structure is examined by first studying straight line programs, 
then by looking at programs which make use of various types of con- trol structures, rewriting each of 
these programs ~6 several times in successively more concise forms. Such exercises serve to demonstrate 
both the ease of programming in ALGOL68 and the power of the language. Following the study of the general 
program structure for ALGOL68 programs the students are introduced to the nested structure of the language 
in a unique way. The contour model, slightly modified, is presented to the students as a run- time environment 
for ALGOL68 programs. The con- tour model is a list structured model of the static and dynamic portions 
of programs written in a block structured language. In the static portion there is one "algorithm contour" 
for each block or pro- cedure. In the dynamic portion there is one "re- cord contour" for each execution 
of each block or procedure. The blocks are linked together to show the relationships among the contours. 
This model must be modified to be able to handle genera- tors, names, and values which are not associated 
with range entry and range exit [2]. The intro- duction of the contour model at this point allows the 
students to obtain both an intuitive feel and a formal specification of the dynamic nature of the run-time 
environment for a language with nested structure. The study of the contour model is extensive using 
the papers by Johnson [4] and by Hedrick [2]. The students examine the Johnston paper [4] thoroughly, 
using examples which are ALGOL68 programs. Each example program is analyzed in depth, and to the point 
of enabling the students to specify what display is changed at what time during the execution of the 
algorithm as specified by the ALGOL68 program. At the conclusion of the study of the contour model, most 
of the students are familiar with what to expect at run-time from ALGOL68, and as an added benefit, also 
have a bet- ter understanding of nested languages in general. After the study of the contour model 
the stu- dents make a study of the assembler code equiva- lent to given ALGOL68 programs. This serves 
much the same purpose as the study of the contour model in that it enhances their understanding of the 
compiler and helps them to know what to expect at run-time. Many educators might say that the use of 
a assembly language in this context is inappro- priate, but this use of assembly language actually improves 
the student's ability to program in ALGOL68. The next item studied by the students is how to read the 
ALGOL68 report [8]. This tends to be a traumatic experience for most students. Indeed it is helpful not 
to let them look at the report until after the first three or four sessions of study of van Wijngaarden 
grammars. Although it is not required of the students, Peck's ALGOL68 Com- panion [7] presents this topic 
in such a way the students rapidly learn how to read van Wijngaarden grammars. At that point the study 
of the report begins. The course will probably be modified to incorporate portions of the text of Cleaveland 
and Uzgalis [i] prior to the start of the study of the report [8]. Once into the study of the report, 
the early part is read in order, and the later part is studied in view of specific particular programs. 
The particular programs are, for the most part, those that the students have constructed earlier in the 
course. A great deal of time is spent on writing actual ALGOL68 programs of various degrees of complexity. 
The students construct the programs while studying the other parts of the course in parallel. The programs 
range from a simple program to find the zeros of a quadratic polynomial at the beginning of the course, 
to some game-playing which requires sophisticated tree searching at the end of the course. In order to 
help the students write these programs, there are separate units on program de- sign and program testing 
based on the article from the Journal of Data Education [3]. These units are not specific to ALGOL68 
but are part of our attempt to instill good programming habits in all of our graduates independent of 
the language that they use to implement their programs. It appears that the ALGOL68 instructional methods 
described in this paper have been quite successful. The students who have completes the course not only 
have a knowledge of the programming language, ALGOL68, but they also demonstrate a greater knowledge 
of the underlying data structures required during the execution of block structured languages than do 
other students at the same aca- demic level in the computer science department. Students who have taken 
the ALGOL68 course demon- strate a better grasp of theoretical program description languages as well. 
There appears to be no significant difference among the three modes of instruction in view of the student's 
knowledge of the material at the end of the course. The stu- dents seem to prefer the lecture format 
to the other formats, however. In view of the faculty time required, the individual study format should 
be preferred, but the lecture format would be pre- ferred for the comfort of the students. The amount 
of student effort required is another point in favor of the lecture format. The problems encountered 
in the teaching of this course include the lack of a single text for the students to follow and the use 
of a compiler which is still being developed. It is possible to eliminate most of the first problem by 
adopting Pagan's text [6] and studying the topics from the text in order. Supplementary material would 
con- tinue to be required for the study of run-time data structures, van Wijngaarden grammars, and transput. 
 The second problem is attributable to the fact that the OSU ALGOL68 compiler has been, and is being 
used for the course, and this compiler is in the development process. Some of the less-used features 
became available after a problem had been assigned. The fact that this developmental compiler is used 
is no longer much of a problem since the features of ALGOL68 implemented are now relatively static and 
changes to the compiler usually are transparent to the users. This course has been offered once or 
twice a year every academic year since 1973-1973. ~ny of the students who have taken this course have 
con- tinued their studies in graduate school. Some have even written theses which are based on ALGOL68. 
Thesis topics have included such things as the MODE algebra, dynamic data structures for modelling program 
execution, and transput topics. 17 REFERENCES [1] Cleaveland, J. Craig and Robert C. Uzgalis. Grammars 
for programming languages. New York: Elsevier, c1977. [2] Hedrick, G.E. An adaptation of the contour 
 model as a runtime environment for ALGOL68. The SOKEN KIYO, v. 6, #3, Jan. 1977. [3] Hedrick, G.E. 
Program planning and testing. The Journal of Data Education, v. 16, #i Oct. 1975. [4] Johnston, John 
B. The contour model of block structured processes, in Tou, Julius T. and Peter Wegner (eds.), Data Structures 
in Programming Languages, SIGPLAN Notices v. 6, #2, Feb., 1971. [5] Lindsey, C.H. and S.G. van der 
Muelen. Informal Introduction to ALGOL68. New York: American Elsevier, c1971. [6] Pagan, Frank G. A 
Practical Guide to ALGOL68. New York: John Wiley and Sons, c1976. [7] Peck, John E.L. An ALGOL68 Companion. 
 Vancouver, B.C.: University of British Columbia, 1972. [8] van Wijngaarden, Aad (ed.) et al. Revised 
Report on the algorithmic language ALGOL68. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1976. APPENDIX Progran~ing Assignments 
for an Introductory Course in ALGOL68 Note. These problems have been selected for the ALGOL68 constructions 
they cause the students to use. Several have come from introductory texts for other languages. The author 
regrets that he is not able to identify the original source of each problem. Assignment #i Problem: 
IA. Construct an ALGOL68 pro-ram which will find the zeros of a polynomial using the method of bisection 
(see Conte &#38; de Boor, p. 28) IB. Construct an ALGOL68 program which will find the zeros of a polynomial 
using Newton's method (see Conte &#38; de Boor, p. 28). Notes: I. Return program decks with your output. 
 2. Variables of mode COMPL are allowed.  3. In written form the operations for +:=,-:,*:=, etc. terminate 
with AB; e.g. PLUSAB for "Plus and becomes, "MINUSAB for "minus and becomes," etc.  Assignment #2 Notes: 
 i. The IS and INST operators are not presently available on the OSU compiler. 2. Individual programmers 
do not have access to the heap in the OSU ALGOL68 compiler. (You may not use global generators in your 
programs.)  3. Strings, as such, cannot be declared, but you may declare row of character variables. 
FLEX is not permitted.  Problem: Construct an ALGOL68 program which will simulate the SAMC computer. 
Author's note: SMAC is a simple i0 instruction, 20 location machine. It handles only integers, i, in 
the range -999 ~ i~ 999. Assignment #3 Notes: i. The OSU ALGOL68 compiler uses reserved words for keywords 
so you cannot use keywords (e.g. FI) for variable names. This is called reserved word stropping. Problem: 
Construct an ALGOL68 program which will i. Read a value, N 2. read N,(x,y) pairs of input values  
3. print the pairs in order from left-to-right; bottom to top as they would appear on an x-y coordinate 
system.  Assignment #4 Problem: A. Construct an ALGOL68 program which will i. Read a list of 0-40 
names 2. Alphabetize the list  3. Print the alphabetized list with last names and first (and middle 
initials).  B. Sample Input Jean-Paul Jonz Mary Ellen Vouz Philip Richard Carpenter C. Sample Output 
Carpenter, P. R. Jonz, J. P. Vouz, M. E. Assignment #5 Notes: i. Please sequence your decks before 
you submit them with the sample output for grading. 2. When you find something that the compiler does 
not support and you feel like it should be supported, please let me have a copy of the deck, a copy of 
the output, and an explanation of why you think the compiler should support a particular construction. 
(e.g. The compiler should support because the text indicates that it is valid ALGOL68.) ]8 3. Certain 
constructions that were valid accord- ing to the old ALGOL68 report are not longer valid. For example 
THEF was valid according to the old report but the construction start- ing with THEF is not valid according 
to the new report. Problem: Let p be a polynomial of the form p(x) = a 0 + alx + a2x2 + . . . + ak 
xk This polynomial, p, can be represented as p = (k, a[0], a[l], a[2] ..... a[k]) Construct a computer 
program that will accept a polynomial p as input and produce a polynomial q; as output. With p represented 
as above q is to be computed and represented as q = (k = i, a [I], 2"a[2], 3"a[3], . . ., k*a[k]) 
Problem: You have a "little black book" that contains the names, addresses and telephone numbers of your 
friends. For each one you have information about their likes and characteristics. For this problem your 
black book contains only names of members of the opposite sex, and you keep the black book on computer 
cards. i. Make up five ficticious people and rate them on a scale from one to five according to the 
table (you may add to the table, if you wish) below. Characteristics rating appearance compatibility 
 conversion financial situation morals scholarship Likes rating Classical music pop music movies 
TV parties sports world affairs 2. Based on the rating scheme design three algo- rithms to choose a 
date from your little black book. These should i~clude methods to choose a date for a) the homecoming 
football game and homecoming dance b) the FLATLANDER FRAT-RAT BRAWL c) a relaxing evening. 3. Write 
an ALGOL68 program that will accept your little black book as input; and tell you who to call first when 
you want that date. Input: 1. Ratings tables for each person in your black book  2. Type of date you 
want  Output: Name and phone number of the first person you want to call. Assignment #7 Program 7A: 
Construct an ALGOL68 program which will find all three digit positive integers that are equal to the 
sum of the cubes of their digits. Program 7B: Construct an ALGOL68 program which will read a positive 
integer, N, and print the complete factorization of N (all prime factors). If N is 12 then the output 
should be 2*2*3. Program 7C. Construct an ALGOL68 program which will read a number, its radix, and a 
new radix; the program should then produce the representation of the number in the new base. Problem: 
Assume that you have the tabular approximation of a function at integral values of the ordinate; such 
as, x y Xl f(xl) + gl x2 f(x2) + g2 Xn ~(Xn) + ~n For this problem {Xl, x2, x3, . . ., x n} g I. We 
will represent f(xi) + ~i by Yi; where, f(x i) is the true function values at x i and gi is the error 
in our value. (This situation frequently occurs when we are taking data for an experiment.) For this 
problem we will make the additional assump- tions that Yi, f(xi) + ci ~ R, and that x I < x 2 < . . 
. < x n. For this problem you are to write an ALGOL68 pro- gram that will find approximations to f at 
input points x, x ~ I. The approximations are to be made using each of four methods of interpolation. 
The methods are: i) linear interpolation, 2) Newton's backward interpolation, 3) Aitken's interpolation*, 
and 4) Lagrangian interpolation. You can find these methods in any numerical analysis book. In particular, 
you might want to look at Grove, Wendell E. Brief numerical methods. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 
c1965. Input Input for this program should be i) a positive integer N, which indicates the number of 
points in the table; 2) a set of N (x,y) pairs which forms the tabular representation of the function; 
and 3) a set of x value (x ~ I), where function is to be evaluated. Output Output is to be the tabular 
representation of the function, a copy of each input x value and the corresponding y value for each interpolation 
method used. For example, your output could appear as ORIGINAL FUNCTION x y 0 4.0  1 5.0 2 7/0  3 
9.2  4 16.0  5 26.9  6 32.1  *Also called Aitken's process of repeated interpolation. 19 INTERPOLATED 
FUNCTION VALUES x LINEAR INTERPOLATION NEWTON'S BACKWARD INTERPOLATION 0.5 4.5 4.7 4.3 17.0 18.0 AITKEN'S 
INTERPOLATION LAGRANGIAN INTERPOLATION 4.8 4.4 18. i 17.9 (Note: These values are not necessarily correct.) 
 Test cases Make sure your test cases are complete; e.g., What happens where f(x) is undefined? What 
happens when x g I and x is in the table? What happens when x ~ I and x is not in the table?, etc. Answer 
each of these questions and any similar questions you can think of about the operation of the program. 
Don't forget the cases where you have correct input and get correct output. For each case, is the action 
your program takes reasonable? Why or Why not? If not, how can you correct it? Documentation Full and 
complete documentation is expected. 
			
