
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G. W. Evans, eds. AN AIRCRAFT TAXI SIMULATION MODEL FOR THE UNITED PARCEL SERVICE LOUISVILLE AIR 
PARK W. Swain Ottman Angela C. Ford Gregory R. Reinhardt United Parcel Service 1400 North Hurstbourne 
Parkway Louisville, KY 40223, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT The Louisville International Airport arrives and departs 
over 200 flights on a daily basis for United Parcel Service (UPS). The number of arrivals and departures 
continues to grow with the expansion of the airport and UPS.. A simulation model was developed to analyze 
the daily taxi and takeoff operation of UPS aircraft. Inputs to the model include aircraft schedules, 
flight patterns and runway information. Customized outputs include aircraft departure statistics for 
each flight and runway utilization. The model assists planners in developing aircraft departure schedules 
that minimize taxi and ramp delay times. INTRODUCTION Each day over 150 UPS aircraft arrive and depart 
at the Louisville International Airport. Taxi and ramp delays during the operation of these flights 
can interrupt the service commitment of over one million packages. Customers are demanding later pick-ups, 
earlier deliveries, competition is increasing and the market is expanding rapidly, which increases the 
effects of poor planning or decision making. Just a single aircraft departing late can result in thousands 
of dissatisfied customers and a potential loss of millions of dollars. Over the past five years, both 
UPS and the Louisville International Airport have expanded. These combined expansions have resulted in 
limited ramp space and modified taxi paths. Limited ramp space has made taxi paths, departure times and 
parking positions even more critical to a successful launch. All three must be carefully planned in order 
to minimize delay times. The Taxi Simulation Model was designed to represent the aircraft departure operation 
under normal operating conditions. The model takes into account the flight schedule, parking positions, 
direction of takeoff and other variables based on aircraft type and airport regulations. The model has 
been modified several times to accommodate planned expansions to both the airport and UPS. It has also 
been modified to analyze proposed changes to UPS and airport properties that would potentially reduce 
ramp and taxi delays. 2 PROBLEM DEFINITION 2.1 Objectives The Taxi Simulation Model has gone through 
several phases due to changes in airport and UPS properties. The modifications made to the model have 
created different objectives. There have been three main objectives of the Taxi Simulation Model that 
have evolved over time. The first objective of the Taxi Simulation Model was to be able to determine 
the taxi times, taxi delays and ramp delays associated with various changes in flight departure schedules 
and parking plans. Planners could analyze the effects of changing one or all departure times and/or parking 
positions, allowing them to make decisions regarding departure operations without interrupting the delivery 
of the packages. The second objective of the model was to analyze the stages of the airport expansion 
and potential changes in the airport property. The original Louisville runways were in a T or X formation, 
where both runways could not be used at the same time. After the first phase of the airport expansion, 
the runways were in a V formation, where one of the old runways was in use with one of the new runways. 
The V formation allowed both runways to be used at the same time, but were still limited. After the final 
phase of the airport expansion, the runways are now in an H or parallel configuration. These runways 
can now be used at the same time, increasing the arrival and departure rate in Louisville. Each of the 
three phases required extensive planning since the airport and UPS must operate during the construction. 
The model allowed the planners to formulate a parking plan for each phase. After the final airport expansion, 
the third objective of the Taxi Simulation Model was to analyze the different stages of the UPS changes 
and expansions. Some of the changes in UPS property were caused by the airport expansion, but most are 
due to the current Hub 2000 expansion project. Hub 2000 is the construction of a new hub (terminal) within 
the middle of the airport, between runways, for UPS 's use in the sortation of packages during the operation. 
The Hub 2000 project will increase the number of aircraft that UPS can process. It involves new buildings 
and parking positions which will change ramp and taxi procedures. The project has many phases, all of 
which need operating procedures. The Taxi Simulation Model will help the planning team determine the 
best plan for each phase years in advance.  2.2 Model Scope The taxi model simulates the aircraft arrival 
and departures at the UPS Louisville Air Park (see Figure 1). The model runs in two different scenarios 
depending if the aircraft are departing or arriving. The departure model is designed to evaluate the 
effect of changes to aircraft schedules and aircraft parking positions. The model scope of this paper 
is limited to the operations directly related to the departure of aircraft. The daily operations in Louisville 
include both Next Day Air (night) and a Second Day Air (day) sorts. The two sort operations are separate 
and the model was written primarily for the Next Day Air Sort. During the Next Day Air sort, there are 
UPS arrivals and departures, along with sporadic delays from other arriving aircraft during the operation. 
The model assumes that there are no arrivals on the main runways during the departure sequence, but can 
accommodate small aircraft arrivals on the cross runway. The model begins with the aircraft ready for 
departure from its ramp parking position. The aircraft will begin its taxi procedure with the removal 
of the chocks and pylons. The marshalling crew will direct the plane to move into the middle of the ramp. 
The aircraft then proceeds down the ramp to the throat of the ramp where it will access a taxiway. The 
plane will travel down the taxiway to the runway where it will be ready for takeoff. The plane will then 
takeoff and exit the system. MODEL DEVELOPMENT AND  PROJECT ORGANIZATION The Taxi Simulation Model 
was developed using Arena® from Systems Modeling Corporation. The first version of the model represented 
the original T or X airport configuration. After this model was validated, a second Figure 1: Louisville 
International Airport Runways and UPS Facility Layout  model was constructed to examine the future parallel 
runway layout. The processes in the simulation model include the following: Model initialization  Aircraft 
blockout  Travel on the UPS ramps  Travel on the taxiways  Aircraft rollout and liftoff  Input data 
files were built by identifying the requirements for the model. Then, data fields were created for initializing 
the aircraft entities. All data files are read first to initialize the model. Aircraft blockout is the 
first step in the model and occurs at the time read from the data file. The ramps are divided up into 
sectors and a simulation resource is used to ensure only one aircraft per sector is allowed to block 
out at the same time (see Figure 2). Q Q  Q  B1 B2 B3 Figure 2: Ramp Sectors and Resources Travel 
on the ramps is modeled as an aircraft moving from sector to sector. A simulation resource must be seized 
before an aircraft is allowed to move into a sector. After traveling through the sector, the resource 
is released. Ramp taxi speed is an input variable and is applied to all aircraft moving on the ramps, 
Ramp sector distances are set by an input variable to the model. Once an aircraft reaches the end of 
the ramp, it must enter the FAA-controlled taxiway. The taxiways are modeled using the guided transporter 
constructs of the Arena® simulation language. A network of links and intersections was constructed to 
represent the travel paths. The aircraft entity boards a transporter and moves to its assigned runway. 
Movement and travel on the taxiways is then automatically controlled by the transporter logic. Traffic 
is controlled at the intersections on a FIFO basis. One hundred foot zones were defined in the network 
links to maintain a minimum following distance of two zones. The aircraft transporter s destination is 
the beginning of the runway. Air Traffic Control clearance is modeled by a simulation resource representing 
the controller. After obtaining clearance, the aircraft must then seize the runway resource. The resource 
is held for a given amount of time equal to the takeoff separation for that aircraft type. The project 
group included representatives from Ramp Operations Industrial Engineering, Flight Operations IE, and 
Operations Research. Flight schedules, ramp parking plans, and ramp movement procedures were gathered 
from the Ramp Operations IE interviews. Flight Operations IE supplied the FAA taxiway and runway rules 
needed to accurately describe the actions of the pilots. MODEL DESCRIPTION 4.1 Model Inputs The model 
is designed to be as flexible as possible so the user can change system parameters in external data files 
without having to alter the actual model. The Taxi Simulation Model is driven by 3 external data files: 
Departure file: Contains statistics on each outbound aircraft, including departure time, destination, 
flight number, aircraft type and parking position. Path file: Defines the runway that each destination 
will use to take off, depending on the direction of takeoff due to weather.  Arrival file: Contains 
flights arriving on the shorter cross runway. This runway is used for small jets and propeller driven 
aircraft.   4.2 Model Features The Taxi Simulation Model details the movement of aircraft from the 
parking position to the runway. An aircraft on the ramp will not travel until the space ahead is clear 
and there is no cross traffic. Aircraft movement on the taxiways is even more detailed to include controlled 
intersections and minimum following distances. Acceleration, deceleration, and turning velocity can also 
be specified in the model settings. Since the model is data driven, new scenarios can easily be created 
by editing the input files. Parking assignments and departure times can be changed without having to 
re-compile the model. An AutoCAD® drawing of the airport property was imported as a background for the 
animation. Scaled drawings for each aircraft type were also used to accurately depict the operation. 
These animation features allowed the planners to visualize their changes, (see Figure 3).  4.3 Model 
Outputs Runway and aircraft performance parameters are collected and reported in multiple output files. 
Overall statistics by flight are directed to a customized output report file. Statistics reported in 
the customized output report include: Flight Number  Parking Position   Scheduled Blockout  Actual 
Blockout  Minutes Late  Ramp Taxi Time  Taxi Delay Time  Total Taxi Time  Turbulence Delay  Takeoff 
Time  Runway Utilized  The additional following statistics are included in the Arena output report: 
 Time Between Departures for each runway  Number Waiting for each runway  Number Waiting at intersections 
 Number Waiting on the ramps  Runway Utilization  The collection of these statistics was facilitated 
through the use of the Arena® Time Persistent Statistics and Tallies features for discrete systems. MODEL 
VALIDATION The Taxi Simulation Model was validated concurrently with the model development and is ongoing. 
There are two main methods being used in the validation process: the examination of output reports and 
model traces, and visual validation through observation of the model s animation. Validation has followed 
the same basic order as the model development: Input Data  Aircraft Taxi  Aircraft Takeoff  Approval 
of the input data for the external data files was the first step in the validation process. Because the 
input data came from a number of different sources, it was thoroughly examined for consistency and accuracy. 
Initially, some of the information provided was out of date and was subsequently updated. Validation 
of the taxi process included examination of the following processes: Parking Procedures  Ramp Travel 
 Taxiway Travel  Intersection Decisions  Takeoff Procedures  The parking procedures involve where 
the aircraft is parked and how the it is positioned. If the aircraft is parked with the nose in, additional 
time is required to push the aircraft out into the ramp. Ramp and taxiway travel validation involves 
UPS and airport procedures that determine which way aircraft can travel on the ramps and taxiways. Intersection 
decisions are needed when two aircraft come head to head to determine which aircraft has the right of 
way. Takeoff procedures are determined by the aircraft type. Certain aircraft types take longer to get 
off the ground and require a longer time in between departures due to turbulence. Once these processes 
were confirmed, the output reports were used to validate them. The simulated taxi times from the output 
report were compared to actual taxi times captured by real-time UPS systems. This comparison reassured 
the users that the model was an accurate depiction of the operation. Various users, including UPS industrial 
engineers and planners, as well as operational personnel have been closely involved in validating the 
model. This collabora­tion has been critical to the success of the validation process. The model animation 
allows users to visualize aircraft taxiing and departing. Observing the model animation also increases 
awareness of the other operations (marshaling, maintenance, fueling, unloading, loading, etc.) and raises 
questions that are extremely helpful during validation. In addition, this involvement creates excitement 
and instills confidence in the model. 6 SUMMARY The Taxi Simulation Model was developed as a flexible, 
data driven model to investigate the aircraft departure procedures at the UPS Louisville Air Park. It 
has been modified to fit the needs of United Parcel Service as additions and changes have been made to 
the airport property. The results of the simulation have assisted the industrial engineers in making 
critical decisions concerning parking positions and departure times. The initial success and acceptance 
of the taxi model for parking and departing aircraft laid the groundwork for its transition into a useful 
operational tool. Currently, the model is used to analyze the phases of the Hub 2000 project. The Taxi 
Simulation Model will help determine the parking plans and departure schedules for the 21st century. 
  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES W. SWAIN OTTMAN is a Senior Programmer Analyst in the Operations Research group 
of United Parcel Service Airlines. He received a Bachelor of Engineering Science in 1989 and a Master 
of Engineering in 1991 in Engineering Mathematics and Computer Science from the University of Louisville. 
Besides working on the Taxi Simulation Model, he has developed simulation models of an aircraft parts 
distribution warehouse, an aircraft wheel and brake maintenance shop, the aircraft fueling operation 
and a UPS air hub. ANGELA C. FORD is an Operations Research Simulation Analyst in the Operations Research 
Group of United Parcel Service Airlines. She received a Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering 
in 1992 from the University of Louisville, and is pursuing a Master of Engineering in Industrial Engineering 
and a Master of Business Administration at the University of Louisville. She has been with UPS for eight 
years, and joined the Operations Research group in 1998. She is a member of the Institute of Industrial 
Engineers. GREGORY R. REINHARDT is the Director of Operations Research for United Parcel Service Airlines 
in Louisville, Kentucky. He received a Bachelor of Science in General Engineering in 1979 from the United 
States Naval Academy and received a Masters of Engineering in Engineering Management from the University 
of Louisville in 1994. He has worked with simulation models since 1987 and his work includes airport 
equipment allocation, warehousing solutions, aircraft congestion studies and material handling design 
of automated hubs. Many languages have been applied to these studies which include Slam, Siman, Arena 
and Automod. He is a member of INFORMS and the Management Science Roundtable 
			
