
 AN EXPERIMENT ON HIGH SPEED FILE TRANSFER USING SATELLITE LINKS by C. Huitema and I. Valet Projet 
Pilote NADIR c/o INRIA Rocquencourt B.P. 105 78153 LE CHESNAY Cedex France Abstract One of the first 
applications of satellite te- lecommunication systems being studied within the NADIR pilot project is 
high speed (several Mbits/s) file transfer. After a short description of the French "TELECOM I" satellite 
communication system, the paper points out that usual protocols such as HDLC cannot be simply adapted 
to fit satellite transmission requirements (high bandwidth, long propagation delay and various error 
rates). Spe- cific problems, such as choice of frame length, error correction procedure, numbering scheme, 
and flow control mechanism are discussed, and a set of feasible solutions to be experimented are proposed. 
 I -Introduction Recent developments of telecommunication satel- lite technology is now allowing to 
use satellite for telematic applications, as illustrated by the SBS project. In France, the telecommunication 
satel- lite TELECOM I will be launched in 1983. In order to study new types of informatic applications 
that are made feasible by taking advantage of satellites, the French governmentdecided in 1980 to start 
the pilotproject NADIR. NADIR is funded by the Direc- tion G@n6rale des T@l@communications (Ministry 
of PTT) and the Agence de l'Informatique (Ministry of Industry). One of the first applications being 
studied within NADIR is high speed (several Mbits/s) file transfer. In spite of new very interesting 
charac- teristics (high bandwidth and broadcasting) satelli- te links also involve long propagation delays 
(300 ms) and not very well known error rates. After a short description of the TELECOM I system, the 
paper points out that usual protocols such as HDLC cannot be simply adapted to fit~teLlite transmission 
requirements. Specific problems, such as choice of frame length, and flow control mecha- nisms are discussed 
and a set of feasible solutions to be experimented are proposed. 2 -The TELECOM I system Within the 
TELECOM I satellite, five transpon- ders will be shared for business communications. The TDMA system 
will provide numeric links either on a call per call basis, or in a semi-permanent fashion. Multipoints 
and point-to-point links wi be available, at data rates from 2400 bits/s to 2 Mbits/s. Point-to-point 
links will be either duplex, either simplex. TELECOM I will guarantee a bit error rate lower than 10 
E-6 during 99 % of any period of tlme. Forward error correction will be available if nee- ded, in order 
to guarantee an error rate lower than 10 E-tO. More details on TELECOM I can be found in [3] and [4]. 
 3 - Why a non-standard protocol ? 3.1. HDLC HDLC is the standard line-level protocol de, i- ned by 
ISO. It is bit-oriented and flags are used for frame delimitation. A 16 bits CRC transmitted along with 
each frame is used for error detection. Frames in error are ignored by the receiver. Information frames 
are numbered, either modu- lo 8, or modulo 128 (extended numbering). The sender can transmit up to X 
unacknowledged frames, X being a number called the "frame-window", (X is less than 8 or than 128, depending 
of the numbering space). The receiver can detect lost frames if the difference between the number of 
two frames received consecutively is not equal to I. By sending a "~eject" (REJ) command, the re- ceiver 
can force the sender to retransmit all unac- knowledged frames. By sending a "Selective Reject" (SREJ) 
command, the receiver will force the sender to retransmit the frame number N ; this command also acknowledges 
all frames received before the frame number N. All unacknowledged frames are retransmitted after timeout. 
 254 CH1694-91811000010254500.75 &#38;#169; 1981 IEEE The "Receiver not Ready" (RNR) command allows 
to prohibit the sender from transmitting any infor- mation frame until a following "Receiver Ready" command 
is received. This mechanism, with the "frame-window", can be used for flow control purpose. 3.2. The 
choice of frame length An optimum frame length should be a function of the link data ~te and the bit 
error rate (BER). Unfortunately, experience shows that bit error rate on a satellite link is not constant. 
It may vary drastically with weather conditions. Variations may be very fast, from day to day or even 
from hour to hour. Bit error rate can stretch from I. E-8 to I. E-5. Worst case nearly prohibits effective 
data transmission if transmis- sion rate is of the order of several Mbits/s; forward error correction 
should be used in those conditions. A very long (e.g. 16 Kbytes)frame length and a high BER lead to 
a prohibitive number of retrans- missions. Figure 3.2 shows the ratio of retransmis- sion for various 
frame lengths (from I Kbyte to 16 Kbytes). Calculation is made using the following formula : FRAME-LENGTH 
Frame error rate=FER= I - (I -BER) Retransmission % = 100 ~I -FER )  Using short frames [e.g. I or 
2 KbyteJ leads to less retransmissions. But CPU load is a function of the number of frames transmitted 
per time-unit : when the frame length decreases, CPU load increases. A trade off has to be found between 
transmission efficiency (short frames for less retransmission) a~d CPU power (long frames for less CPU 
load). 3.3. Error correction Neither Reject (REJ) nor Selective-Reject (SREJ) in HDLC allow, as shown 
on figure 3.3.1, a satellite link utilisation better than 90% for any data rate and any BER. -  REJ 
mode leads to a high retransmission ratio: not only the erroneous, but all unacknowledged frames, have 
to be retransmitted. -SREJ mode does not allow to correct more than one error during one retransmission 
delay. Should the BER grow larger than a treshold value (e.g. 10 E-6 for a 2 Mbit/s satellite link), 
the effi- ciency would be jeopardized. Figure 3.3.2 shows, as a function of BER and data rate, three 
domains : -  I : low BER, low data-rates : REJ gives good results (efficiency better than 90%). -2 
: medium BER and data rates : SREJ can be used with an efficiency better than 90%. -3 : high BER and 
data rates : a better pro- tocol has to be studied. Two other drawbacks of HDLC have to be noted : errors 
have to be corrected as fast as possible, and the retransmission is trigged by non-redundant negative 
acknowledgments. Correcting errors as fast as possible leads to keep a "in-core" copy of all unacknowledged 
frames; therefore, 300 Kbytes need to be kept in memory when using SREJ-mode with a 2 Mbit/s link. More 
details on HDLC performances can be found in ~I 1 and [2~ .  3.4. Frame numbering With the HDLC "REJ" 
mode, unacknowledged fra- mes are those transmitted during a roundtrip delay, i.e. twice the propagation 
delay (about 600 ms). with the "SREJ" mode, unacknowledged frames may be those transmitted during two 
roundtrip delays : one for the "Send frame, receive SREJ" cycle, and an- other one for the "Send retransmission, 
receive ac- knowledgment" cycle. For a data rate of 2 Mbit/s, about 300 Kbytes are transmitted in 1.2 
second ; thus HDLC extended numbering scheme (i.e. modu!~o 128 ) leads to use frames longer than 2400 
bytes. At a data rate of 6.3 Mbit/s, frame longer than 8000 bytes should be used. If shorter frames 
need to be used, a larger numbering space is necessary. For the receiver, a better efficiency is obtai- 
ned if any received frame can be stored immediately in the mass storage,whether the previous one has 
been already received or not. Thus, each frame must carry some information about its address. It is then 
possible to use, either a byte numbering sche- me, (no assumption being made on frame length), or a 
frame numbering scheme, with fixed length frames. In the latter case, the frame length is to be nego- 
'tiated before starting the transfer. It should be pointed out that a numbering scheme, different from 
the HDLC "modulo- M" one, can be devised. Each frame ~er each byt~of the file could also be numbered 
starting from the beginning of the file. This "absolute" numbering scheme is easier to im- plement since 
any frame of the file is uniquely numbered. Using a 32 bit number, a file as big as 4000 Mbytes can be 
transmitted in a single transfer.  3.5. Flow control Usual flow control mechanisms are intended to 
allow the receiver to control the sender, in order  255  4 - Experimentation schedule NADIR's experimentation 
on high speed data transfer will be conducted during spring 1982. CiI-HB "Mini 6" minicomputers will 
communicate by using various protocols through a satellite simula- tor called ANIS. ANIS was specially 
designed by the project, to emulate satellite links at various speeds (up to 2 Mbit/s) and bit error 
rates (up to I. E-5). Experiments using a real satellite will be conducted later, probably with an experimental 
sa- tellite (e.g. OTS or ECS) and with TELECOM I after it is launched (1983). Experiments will be made 
by using both full- duplex and simplex satellite links. When simplex links are used, control information 
(error and flow-control) will be transmitted back on a low- speed terrestrial link (e.g. provided by 
a packet switched network). 5 - Solutions to be experimented    5.1. Frame length Experiments will 
be conducted with various frame lengths in order to determine a trade-off between transmission efficiency 
and CPU load. Retransmission ratio will be monitored during each experiment. The link BER will be estimated 
from the mesured retransmission ratio. During a given experiment, a fixed frame length will be set, 
before each experiment, either by an operator, or by an experiment management sys- tem, according to 
BER observed during previous ex- periments.  5.2. Error correction Every frame received, in order or 
not, will be acknowledged by the receiver by sending back a re- dundant acknowledgment. Acknowledgment 
syntax will be : "ACK, NI, N2" Meaning that the receiver acknowledges all frames transmitted between 
numbers NI and N2, in- cluding frames NI and N2. Two retransmission strategies will be experi- mented 
: either retransmit all unacknowledged fra- mes after the whole file has been transmitted, or retransmit 
as soon as an error has been detected. In the second case, an error is detected by the sender either 
if no acknowledgment has been r~cei- ved during a timeout period, or if an acknowledg- !ment is received 
that does not overlap the previous ione. AS these retransmission schemes don't suffer from HDLC -SREJ 
limitatien, their efficiency should only be a function of bit error rate and frame length : FRAME-LENGTH 
E = (I -BER)  5.3. Frame numbering  "Absolute" numbering, such as defined above (3.4.), will be used. 
Both frame numbering and byte numbering will be tested. 5.4. Flow control  In order to guarantee that 
the receiver is either faster than the sender or than the link, a maximum data rate will be negotiated 
before each transfer. The receiver, in case of transient congestion, will try to buffer incoming frames. 
If the receiver is no longer able to accept incoming frames, it will simply discard them, and not acknowledgedlthe~. 
These frames will, of course, be automatically re- transmitted by the error recovery procedure. This 
should be acceptable since the choosen recovery procedures don't significantly degrades the link performance. 
 6 - Conclusion  High speed file transfer appears to be a very attrac~ve utilisation of satellites 
communication systems. Some problems have still to be solved, but it is expected that experiments will 
allow to choo- se sensible solutions. In this paper, the case of multidestination file transfer has 
not been discussed. Among other subjects, problems related to multidestination file transfer are also 
being studied within the pilot project NADIR. References  <RefA>I <SinRef><author>A.K. Kaul</author>, "<title>Performance of high level data 
link</title>" <journal>Comsat Technical.Review </journal><volume>Vol. 8</volume> <pages>pp 41-47 </pages><publisher>Spring</publisher> <date>1978</date></SinRef> 2 <SinRef><author>M.C. Easton</author>, "<title>Batch Throughput Efficiency 
of ADCCP/HDLC/SDLC Selective Reject Protocols</title>" <journal>IEEE Transactions on Communications</journal>,<volume> Vol. COM-28, N° 2, </volume>
<date>Febr. 1980 </date></SinRef></RefA>
 257    
			
