
 Chapter 4: A Discrete Model of Thin Shells Eitan Grinspun Columbia University  Figure1:Ameasureof 
discrete strainis usedto fracturea thin shellin this simulationofa shattering lightbulb. Abstract Wedescribeadiscretemodelforthedynamicsofthin.exiblestruc­tures, 
such as hats, leaves, and aluminum cans, which are charac­terizedbya curved undeformed con.guration. 
Previously such thin shell models required complex continuum mechanics formulations and correspondingly 
complex algorithms. We show that a simple shell model can be derived geometrically for triangle meshes 
and implemented quicklyby modifyinga standard cloth simulator. Our technique convincingly simulates a 
variety of curved objects with materials ranging from paper to metal, as we demonstrate with sev­eralexamplesincludingacomparisonofarealand 
simulatedfalling hat. This chapter is based on the publication by Eitan Grinspun, Anil Hirani, Mathieu 
Desbrun, andPeter Schr¨oder which appeared in the Proceedings of the Symposium for Computer Animation 
2003, and on subsequent collaborations with the group of Denis Zorin at NewYork UniversityandZo¨eWoodatCalPolySanLuis 
Obispo. 1 Introduction Thin shells are thin .exible structures with a high ratio of width to thickness(> 
100)[Ciarlet 2000]. While their well-known counter­ parts, thin plates, relax to a .at shape when unstressed, 
thin shells are characterized by a curved undeformed con.guration. Cloth, re­cently studied in the computer 
animation literature, may be mod­eled asa thin plate, sincegarments are typically constructed from .at 
textiles. In stark contrast, thin-walled objects which are natu­rally curved(e.g., leaves, .ngernails), 
or put into that shape through plastic deformation(e.g., hats, cans, carton boxes, pans, car bodies, 
detergent bottles) are thin shells and cannot be modeled using plate formulations. Thin shells are remarkably 
dif.cult to simulate. Because of their degeneracyin one dimension, shells do not admit to straight­forward 
tessellation and treatment as three-dimensional solids; in­deed, the numerics of such approaches become 
catastrophically ill­conditioned, foiling numerical convergence and/or accuracy. Ro­bust .nite element 
methods for thin shell equations continue to be an active and challenging research area. In this chapter 
we develop a simple model for thin shells with applications to computer animation. Our discrete model 
of shells Figure 2: The local coordinate frame in a small neighborhood of a thin shell: two axes span 
the middle surface, and the normal shell director spans the thickness. captures the same characteristic 
behaviors as more complex mod­els, withasurprisingly simple implementation.Wedemonstrate the realism 
of our approach through various examples including com­parisons with real world footage (see Figure 4). 
 2 Kinematics Since it is thin, the geometry of the shell is well described by its middle-surface (see 
Figure 2). At any point on the middle sur­face the local tangent plane and surface normal induce a coordinate 
frame in which to describe motion along the surface and motion along thickness. In the discrete setting, 
the topology of the middle surface is represented by the combinatorics of an oriented 2-manifold sim­plicial 
complex, M = {v, e, f}, where v = {v1,v2,...}, e = {e1,e2,...}, f = {f1,f2,...} are setsofvertices,edgesandfaces 
respectively. The geometry of the middle surface is given by the discrete con.guration map, C : v . R3, 
which assigns to every vertex, vi,aposition, C(vi),in the ambient space.Together M and C correspond to 
the usual notion of a triangle mesh in R3;in our exposition we assume .xed combinatorics M, and discuss 
a tem­porally evolving con.guration, Ct where the subscript refers to a speci.c instant in time. Restricting 
our attention to elastic ( memory-less ) materials, the physics can be understood in terms of the undeformed 
con.g­uration (the stress-free shape) and the deformed con.guration (the stressed shape at the current 
instant in time), C0 and C1, respec­tively. The elastic response of a material depends on the change 
in  Figure 3: Frames from the simulation of tumbling thin shell. shape of the elastic body, and on 
the constitutive laws that describe the restoring forces associated to this change in shape. The former 
is a purely geometric quantity. What is the change in shape between C0 and C1? Since rigid motions (translations 
and rotations) do not affect shape, the answer must be invariant under composition of C0 (likewise C1)with 
any rigidbody transformation.Asimple theoremisthatanyreasonable measure of change in shape, or generalized 
strain, may be written asafunctionofonlytheedge lengthsand dihedral anglesof C0 and C1. The proof lies 
in showing that the con.guration can be com­pletely recovered from the edge lengths and dihedral angles, 
up to an unknown (but here inconsequential) rigid body transformation. We will also expect our measure 
of strain to be zero when shape has not changed, and non-zero whenever shape has changed. In particular, 
strain should see any local change in shape. Perhaps the simplest forms of generalized strain which satisfy 
these desiderata are two expressions that are evaluated at a speci.c edge ei. Comparing C0 to C1, let 
s e(ei) be the difference in length of edge ei, and let s .(ei) be the difference in dihedral angle at 
ei. While these are perhaps the simplest possible measures of gener­alized strain, other more complex 
formulas can offer attendant ad­vantages. Recent research in discrete shell models has focused on functionsevaluatedover 
meshfaces which aggregatein one term the con.guration of all the incident edge lengths and dihedral an­gles 
[Gingold et al. 2004]. Nevertheless, our goal here is to develop the simplest discrete model of thin 
shells capturing their qualitative elastic behavior.  3 Constitutive Model Having de.ned the geometry 
of thin shells, we turn our attention to the governing physical equations. The stored elastic energy 
of a thin shell is at the heart of the equations which govern its response to elastic deformations. The 
stored energy, W [C0,C1], shouldbea function of the local strain, integrated over the middle surface. 
We choose the simplest expression for energy that is consistent with Hookean mechanics. In 1676 Robert 
Hooke stated The power[sic.] of any springy body is in the same proportion with the extension. This statement 
was the birth of modern elasticity, which states that a .rst order approximation for the response of 
a material is a force proportionalto strain,and consequently(bythe de.nitionofwork as force over distance) 
that the .rst approximation of stored energy is quadratic in strain. We propose an energy with two kinds 
of terms, measuring stretching and bending modes respectively: X` ´ 2 X` ´ 2 keek.. WM [C0,C1]= · s (ei)+ 
· s (ek) , ik ei.Mek.M This expression has several desirable properties. First, it is pos­itive whenever 
the shapes of C0 and C1 differ, and zero other­wise. Second, evaluations over subsets of M satisfy the 
usual in­clusion/exclusion principle: for A, B . M, WM = WA + WB - WAnB , which is consistent with continuum 
formulations in which energy is de.ned as an integral of energy density over the middle surface. Third, 
because strain is invariant under rigid body transfor­mations of the undeformed and deformed con.gurations,N¨other 
s theorem guarantees that the resulting dynamics will conserve linear and angular momentum. Consider 
the following interpretations of the membrane and bending terms: Membrane Elastic surfaces resist stretching 
(local change in length). While some materials such as rubber sheets may undergo signi.cant deformations 
in the stretching or shearing(membrane) modes, we focus on inextensible shells which are characterized 
by nearly isometric deformations, i.e., possibly signi.cant deforma­tions in bending but unnoticeable 
deformation in the membrane modes. Most membrane models for triangle meshes satisfy this small-membrane-strain 
assumption with choice of suitably large membrane stiffness coef.cient, kie . Rewriting the membrane 
term in the following form permits an alternative interpretation: «2 2 |ei| W e= ke (ei)= ke (|ei|-|e¯i|)|e¯i|2 
- 1 |e¯i| where |ei| is the length of edge i, quantities with a bar (such as e¯i)refer to the undeformed 
con.gurationC0 and remaining quanti­ties are with respect to C1;note that we have dropped the subscript 
on kie indicating a uniform material stiffness over the domain of interest. This is a unitless strain 
measurement, squared, and then integrated over the area of the local neighborhood, and multiplied by 
the material-dependent parameters. Observe that under regu­lar re.nement of a triangle mesh, the local 
area indeed scales as |e¯j |2, which has units of area. The units of the material parameters are energy 
per unit area, i.e., surface energy density. In engineering modelsof shells,the material parameterisgivenasavolume 
energy density, and the energy is integrated over shell thickness yielding a surface energy density. 
Ef.cient implementations of this formula precompute the quantities ke|e¯i|2, which depend only on the 
unde­formed con.guration. Bending Consider the proposed discrete bending energy in rela­tion to its continuous 
analogues. Models in mechanics are typically based on tensors, and in particular shell models use the 
difference of the second fundamental forms [Gray 1998] in the deformed and undeformed con.gurations (pulling 
back the deformed tensor onto the undeformed con.guration). These treatments derive tensorial expressions 
over smooth manifolds, and as a .nal step discretize to carry out the numerics. The shape operator [Gray 
1998] is the derivative of the Gauss map1: geometrically, it measures the local curvature at a point 
on a smooth surface. Our bending energy is an extrinsic measure of the difference between the shape operator 
evaluated on the deformed and undeformed surfaces.Weexpress this difference as the squared difference 
of mean curvature: * 22 ¯ [Tr(. S) - Tr(¯= 4(H . . - , (1) S)]H) ¯ where S and S are the shape operators 
evaluated over the unde­¯ formed and deformed con.gurations respectively; likewise H and . * ¯ H are 
the mean curvatures; S is the pull-back of S onto O, and we use Tr(. * S)= . * Tr(S) = Tr(S) . . = H 
. . for a diffeomorphism .. This measure is extrinsic: it sees only changes in the embedding of the surface 
in R3 . Integrating (1) over the reference domain we .nd the continuous .exural energy R O 4(H . . - 
H¯)2dA¯. Next, we discretize this integral over the piecewise linear mesh that represents the shell. 
We derive the discrete, integral mean-curvature squared op­erator as follows. We .rst partition the undeformed 
surface ¯ 1This is the map from the surface to the unit sphere, mapping each sur­face point to its unit 
surface normal.  Figure 4: Real footage vs. Simulation: left, a real hat is dropped on a table; right, 
our shell simulation captures the bending of the brim. Notice that volumetric-elasticity, plate, or cloth 
simulations could not capture this behavior, while earlier work on shell simulation required signi.cant 
implementation and expertise. ¯ into a disjoint union of diamond-shaped tiles, T , associated to each 
mesh edge, e, as indicated on the side .gure. Following [Meyer et al. 2003], one can use the barycenter 
of each trian­gle to de.ne these regions or alternatively, the circumcenters. Over such a diamond, the 
mean cur- R ¯¯ vature integral is ¯Hd A¯= .|e¯| (for T a proof see [Cohen-Steiner and Mor­ van 2003]).Asimilar 
argument leads R ¯ to: (H . . - H)dA¯=(. - .¯)|e¯|. T¯ Using the notion of area-averaged value from [Meyer 
et al. 2003], we ¯ deduce that (H . . - H)| ¯=(. - ¯¯ T .)/h¯e,wherehe is the span of the un­deformed 
tile, which is one sixth of the sum of the heights of the two tri­angles sharing e¯. For a suf.ciently 
 .ne, non-degenerate tessellation approximating a smooth surface, the average over a tile (converging 
pointwise to its continuous counterpart) squared is equal to the squared average, leading to: R ¯(H . 
. - H¯)2dA¯=(. - .¯)2|e¯|/h¯e. T We might instead consider a formula of the form (. - .¯)2|e¯|. Here 
the energy functional becomes dependent only on its piece­wise planar geometry not on the underlying 
triangulation. An at­tractive claim, this is appealing in that a material s physical energy should depend 
on its shape, not on the discretization of the shape. Unfortunately, there is no discretization of (1) 
that simultaneously is (a) dependent only on the geometry not its triangulation, and (b) converges to 
its continuous equivalent under re.nement. Indeed, the area integral of (1) is in general unbounded for 
a piecewise pla­ nar geometry! A discrete energy satisfying both (a) and (b) may exist for smoother surfaces,but 
our focus is piecewise planar (tri­angle mesh) geometry. Following the argument found in [Meyer et al. 
2003], there may be numerical advantages in using circumcenters instead of barycen­ters for the de.nition 
of the diamond tiles (except in triangles with ¯ obtuse angles). This affects the de.nition of he and 
of the lumped mass. Since we only need to compute these values for the unde­formed shape, the implementation 
and performance only of initial­ization code would be affected. Bobenko notes that when circum­centers 
are used, this formulation of discrete shells coincides (for .at undeformed con.gurations) with the derivation 
of the discrete Willmore energy based on circle packing [Bobenko 2004],. Aswehavejust seen,we canexpress 
our discrete .exural energy as a summation over mesh edges, `´ 2 |e¯k|W .(ek)= K. .k - .¯k , (2) ¯ hk 
where the term for edge ek is where .k and .¯k are corresponding comple­ments of the dihedral angle of 
edge ek measured in the deformed and un­deformed con.guration respectively, K. is the material bending 
stiffness, and h¯k isathirdoftheaverageofthe heights of the twotriangles incident to the edge ek (see 
the appendix for another possible de.nition of h¯k). Note that the unit of K. is energy (not surface 
energy density). This formulation is consis­tent with the physical scaling laws of thin shells: if the 
(deformed and undeformed) geometry of a thin shell is uniformly scaled by . along each axis, then surface 
area scales as .2 as does the total membrane energy, however the total bending (curvature squared) energy 
is invariant under uniform scaling. Following the reasoning for (1), we could have formed a second energy 
term taking the determinant instead of the trace of S. This would lead to a difference of Gaussian curvatures, 
but this is al­ways zero under isometric deformations (pure bending). This is not surprising, as Gaussian 
curvature is an intrinsic quantity, i.e., it is independent of the embedding of the two-dimensionalsurface 
into its ambient three-dimensional space. In contrast, .exural energy measures extrinsic deformations. 
 4 Dynamics The treatmentofthe temporalevolutionofathinshellisbeyondthe scope of this chapter; we brie.y 
summarize the basic components required to simulate the motion of thin shells. Our dynamic system is 
governed by the ordinary differential equation of motion x¨= -M-1 VW (x) where x is the vector of unknown 
DOFs(i.e.,theverticesofthe deformed geometry)and M is the mass matrix.Weuse the conventionalsimplifyinghypoth­esis 
that the mass distribution is lumped at vertices: the matrix M is then diagonal, and the mass assigned 
to a vertex is a third of the total area of the incident triangles, scaled by the area mass density. 
xi +.tix.i +.t (1/2 - ß)x¨i + ß¨ Newmark Time Stepping We adopt the Newmark scheme [Newmark 19 59] for 
ODE integr ation, ` ´ 2 xi+1 = i xi+1 , `´ x.i+1 = x.i +.ti (1 - .)x¨i + .x¨i+1 , where .ti is the duration 
of the ith timestep, x.i and x¨i are con.gu­ration velocity and acceleration at the beginning of the 
ith timestep, respectively, and ß and . are adjustable parameters linked to the accuracy and stability 
of the time scheme. Newmark is either an explicit(ß =0)or implicit(ß> 0)integrator:we used ß =1/4 for 
.nal production, and ß =0 to aid in debugging. Newmark gives control over numerical damping via its second 
parameter .. We obtained the best results by minimizing numerical damping (. =1/2); this matches BaraffandWitkin 
s observation that nu­merical damping causes undesirable effects to rigid body motions. Seealso[Westetal.2000]fora 
discussionofthe numericaladvan­ tages of the Newmark scheme.  Dissipation Shells dissipate energy via 
.exural oscillations.To that end we complete our model with an optional damping force ¯¯ proportional 
to (.. -..)V. where ..=0 for elastic deformationsbut is in general non-zero for plastoelastic deformations. 
This is con­sistent with standard derivations of Rayleigh-type damping forces using the strain rate tensor 
[BaraffandWitkin 1998]. Discussion This discrete .exural energy (2) generalizes es­tablished formulations 
for(.at)plates both continuous and dis­crete: (a) Ge and coworkers presented a geometric argument that 
the stored energy of a continuous inextensible plate has the R form O cH H2 + cK KdA for material-speci.c 
coef.cients cH and cK ¯[Ge et al. 1996]; (b) Haumann used a discrete hinge en­ ergy [Haumann 1987], similarly 
Baraff and Witkin used a dis­crete constraint-based energy[BaraffandWitkin1998],oftheform WB(x)= P e¯.e 
2. Our approach generalizes both (a)and (b), and produces convincing simulations beyond the regime of 
thin plate and cloth models (see Section 5). The proposed discrete model has three salient features: 
(a) the energy is invariant under rigid body transformation of both the un­deformed and the deformed 
shape: our system conserves linear and angularmomenta;(b)thepiecewise natureofour geometrydescrip­tion 
is fully captured by the purely intrinsic membrane terms, and the purelyextrinsic bendingterm; most importantly,(c)itis 
simple to implement.  5 Results We exercised our implementation on various problems, including .xed 
beams,falling hats, and pinned paper. Computation time, on a2GHz Pentium4CPU, ranged from 0.25s 3.0s 
per frame; timings are based onaresearch implementation that relies on automatic dif­ferentiation techniques. 
 Figure 5: Three pairs of .at and v-beams with increasing .exural stiffness K. (left to right) of 100, 
1000, and 10000; the non-.at cross section of the v-beam contributes to structural rigidity. Beams We 
pinned to a wall one end of a v-beam, and released it undergravity. Figure5demonstratestheeffectofvarying.ex­ural 
stiffness on oscillation amplitude and frequency. The .exural energy coef.cient has a high dynamic range; 
extreme values (from pure-membrane to near-rigid) remain numerically and physically well-behaved. Observe 
that increasing .exural stiffness augments structural rigidity. Compare the behavior of beams: the non-.at 
cross section of the v-beam contributes to structural rigidity. This difference is most pronounced in 
the operating regime of low .ex­ural stiffness(but high membrane stiffness). Here the material does not 
inherently resist bending, but a V-shaped cross-section effec­tively convertsabending deformation intoastretching 
deformation. Figure 6: Modeling a curled, creased, and pinned sheet of paper: by altering dihedral angles 
of the reference con.guration, we effect plastic deformation. Whilethe renderingistexture-mappedwekept 
.at-shaded triangles to show the underlying mesh structure. One can mimic this experiment by holding 
a simple paper strip by its end; repeat after folding a v-shaped cross-section. Elastic hats We dropped 
both real and virtual hats and com­pared (see Figure 4): the deformation is qualitatively the same, dur­ 
ing impact, compression, and rebound. Adjusting the damping pa­rameter, we capture or damp away the brim 
s vibrations. Adjusting the .exural stiffness, we can make a hat made of hard rubber or textile of a 
nearly-rigid hat and a .oppyhat). Plastoelasticity As discussed in the early work of Kergosien and coworkers, 
a compelling simulation of paper would require a mechanical shell model [Kergosien et al. 1994]. Using 
our simple shell model, we can easily simulate a sheet of paper that is rolled, then creased, then pinned 
(see Figure 6). Here the physics require plastic as well as elastic deformations. We begin with a .at 
sur­ ¯ face, and gradually increase the undeformed angles, .e. Notice: modifying the undeformed con.guration 
effects a plastic deforma­tion. The kinematics of changing .¯e span onlyphysically-realizable bending, 
i.e., inextensible plastic deformations. In contrast, directly modifying x¯could introduce plastic deformations 
with unwanted membrane modes. We introduced elastic effects by applying three pin constraints to the 
deformed con.guration. Observe the half­crease on the left side. The energy of the undeformed state is 
no longer zero! The (plastically-deformed) left and (untouched) right halves haveincompatible undeformed 
shapes, consequently the un­deformed con.guration is not stress-free.  Recent extensions More recently, 
we demonstrated that sim­ple, discrete models of thin shells can also produce striking exam­ples of shattering 
glass (see Figure 1) [Gingold et al. 2004], and paper origami (see Figure 7) [Burgoon et al. 2006]. Implementation 
An attractive practical aspect of the proposed model is that it may be easily incorporated into working 
code of a standard cloth or thin-plate simulator such as those commonly used by the computer graphics 
community [Baraff and Witkin 1998]. One must replace the bending energy with (2). From an imple­mentation 
point of view, this involves minimal work. For exam­ple, consider that [BaraffandWitkin 1998] already 
required all the computations relating to .e. These and other implementation de­tails were outlined in 
[Grinspun et al. 2003].  6 Further Reading Acomprehensive surveyof thisexpansivebodyof literatureisfar 
beyond the scope of this chapter; as a starting point see [Arnold 2000; Cirak et al. 2002] and references 
therein. Here we highlight only a few results from the graphics and engineering literature. Recently, 
novel numerical treatments of shells, signi.cantly more robust than earlier approaches, have been introduced 
in me­chanics by Cirak et al. [Cirak et al. 2000] and in graphics by Green et al.and Grinspun et al. 
[Green et al. 2002; Grinspun et al. 2002] among others. These continuum-based approaches use the Kirchoff-Loveconstitutiveequations, 
whose energy captures curva­ture effects in curved coordinate frames; consequently theymodel a rich variety 
of materials. In contrast, thin plate equations assume a .at undeformed con.guration. Thin plate models 
are commonly used for cloth andgarment simulations and have seen successful numerical treatment in the 
computer graphics literature (see [House and Breen 2000] and references therein). Thin plates havealso 
been useful for variational geometric modeling [Celniker and Gossard 1991; Greiner 1994;Welch andWitkin 
1992] and intuitive direct manipulation of surfaces [Qin and Terzopoulos 1996; Terzopou­ los and Qin 
1994]. In graphics, researchers have used two kinds of approaches to modeling plates: .nite-elements 
and mass-spring networks. In the latter resistance to bending is effected by springs connected to opposite 
corners of adjacent mesh faces. Unfortu­nately, this simple approach does not carry over to curved unde­formed 
con.gurations: the diagonal springs are insensitive to the signof the dihedral angles betweenfaces. In 
this chapter we have developed a very simple discrete model of thin shells. One price that must be paid 
for this simplicity is that, while we have taken care to ensure the correct scalingfactors for each energy 
term, for an arbitrary triangle mesh we cannot guar­antee the convergence of this model to its continuum 
equivalent. In [Grinspun et al.] we present experimental results comparing the convergence of the discrete 
shell and other discrete curvature oper­ators. 7 Acknowledgments Thework describedhereisthefruitofacollaborationwith 
Mathieu Desbrun, Anil Hirani, and Peter Schr¨oder[Grinspun et al. 2003]. Recent work on modeling thin 
shells is part of an active collabora­tion with Miklos Bergou, Rob Burgoon, Akash Garg, David Har­mon, 
Adrian Secord,Yotam Gingold, Jason Reisman, MaxWardet­zky,Zo¨eWood,andDenis Zorin.The authoris indebtedtoAlexan­der 
Bobenko, Jerry Marsden, and AnastasiosVayonakis for insight­ful discussions. Pierre Alliez, Ilja Friedel, 
Harper Langston, An­thonySantoro and Steven Schkolne were pivotal in the production of the images shown 
here. The author is gratefulfor the generous support providedby the National ScienceFoundation (MSPA-MCS 
0528402), Elsevier, and nVidia.  References <RefA>ARNOLD,D., 2000. Questions on shell theory.Workshop on 
Elas­tic Shells: Modeling, Analysis, and Computation. Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Bekeley. 
BARAFF,D., AND WITKIN,A. 1998. Large stepsin cloth simula­tion. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH, 43 54. BOBENKO, 
A. I. 2004. A Conformal Energy for Simplicial Surfaces. Published online at http://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0406128, 
August. BURGOON, R., GRINSPUN, E., AND WOOD, Z. 2006. Discrete shells origami. In Proceedings of CATA. 
CELNIKER,G., AND GOSSARD,D. 1991. Deformable Curve and Surface Finite Elementsfor Free-Form Shape Design. 
Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 91) 25, 4, 257 266. CIARLET, P. 2000. Mathematical Elasticity. 
Vol. III, vol. 29 of Studies in Mathematics and its Applications. Amsterdam. The­ory of shells. CIRAK, 
F., ORTIZ, M., AND SCHR¨Subdivision ODER, P. 2000. surfaces:A new paradigm for thin-shell .nite-element 
analysis. Internat.J. Numer. Methods Engrg.47, 12, 2039 2072. CIRAK, F., SCOTT, M., ANTONSSON, E., ORTIZ, 
M., AND SCHR¨ ODER,P. 2002. Integrated modeling, .nite-element anal­ysis, and engineering design for 
thin-shell structures using sub­division. CAD 34, 2, 137 148. COHEN-STEINER,D., AND MORVAN,J.-M. 2003. 
Restricted delaunay triangulations and normal cycle. In Proc. 19th Annu. ACM Sympos. Comput. Geom., 237 
246. GE, Z., KRUSE, H. P., AND MARSDEN, J. E. 1996. The limits of hamiltonian structures in three-dimensional 
elasticity, shells, and rods. Journalof Nonlinear Science6, 19 57. GINGOLD, Y., SECORD, A., HAN, J. Y., 
GRINSPUN, E., AND ZORIN, D. 2004. Poster: A discrete model for inelastic de­formation of thin shells. 
In ACM/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation 04. GRAY, A. 1998. Modern Differential Geometry of 
Curves and Surfaces. Second edition. CRC Press. GREEN, S., TURKIYYAH, G., AND STORTI, D. 2002. Subdivision-based 
multilevel methods for large scale engineer­ing simulation of thin shells. In ProceedingsofACM Solid 
Mod­eling, 265 272. GREINER,G. 1994.Variational design andfairingof spline sur­faces. Computer GraphicsForum 
13, 3, 143 154. GRINSPUN, E., GINGOLD, Y., REISMAN, J., AND ZORIN, D. Computing discrete shape operators 
on general meshes. sub­mitted for publication. GRINSPUN,E.,KRYSL,P., ANDSCHR¨ODER,P. 2002. CHARMS: a 
simple framework for adaptive simulation. ACMTransactions on Graphics 21,3(July), 281 290. GRINSPUN, 
E., HIRANI, A., DESBRUN, M., AND SCHR¨ODER, P. 2003. Discrete shells. In ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Computer 
Animation. to appear. HAUMANN, R. 1987. Modeling the physical behavior of .exible objects. In Topics 
in Physically-based Modeling,Eds. Barr, Bar­rel, Haumann, Kass, Platt,Terzopoulos, andWitkin,SIGGRAPH 
Course Notes.  HOUSE, D. H., AND BREEN, D. E., Eds. 2000. Coth Modeling and Animation. A.K. Peters. 
KERGOSIEN,Y.L.,GOTODA,H., AND KUNII,T.L. 1994. Bend­ing and creasing virtual paper. IEEE Computer Graphics 
and Applications, 40 48. MEYER, M., DESBRUN, M., SCHR¨ODER, P., AND BARR,A.H. 2003. Discrete differential-geometry 
operators for triangulated 2-manifolds. In Visualization and Mathematics III, H.-C. Hege and K. Polthier, 
Eds. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 35 57. NEWMARK,N.M. 1959.Amethodof computation for structural dynamics. 
ASCEJ. of the Engineering Mechanics Division 85, EM 3, 67 94. QIN,H., AND TERZOPOULOS,D. 1996. D-NURBS:Aphysics­based 
framework for geometric design. IEEETransactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics2, 1, 85 96. TERZOPOULOS, 
D., AND QIN, H. 1994. Dynamic NURBS with Geometric Constraints for Interactive Sculpting. ACMTransac­tions 
on Graphics 13, 2, 103 136. WELCH,W., AND WITKIN,A. 1992.Variational Surface Model­ ing. Computer Graphics 
(Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 92) 26, 2, 157 166. WEST,M.,KANE,C.,MARSDEN,J.E., AND ORTIZ,M. 2000. Variational 
integrators, the newmark scheme, and dissipative systems. In International Conference on Differential 
Equations 1999,World Scienti.c, Berlin, 1009 1011.   </RefA>
			
