
 Proceedings of the 1990 Winter Simulation Conference Osman Balci, Randall P. Sadowski, Richard E. Nance 
(eds.) A FLEXIBLE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING MULTI-LEVEL, HEURISTIC-BASED PRODUCTION CONTROL 
STRATEGIES G. Don Taylor, Jr. Department of Industrial Engineering 4207 Bell Engineering Center University 
of Arkansas Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701 ABSTRACT Operational flexibility can be used to great advantage 
in many manufacturing and assembly environments. This opera- tional flexibility can be in the form of 
flexible workstations or cells, flexible planning and control strategies, or some combi- nation of both. 
Effective evaluation tools are needed to help in the development of these flexible control strategies 
(FCSs). In some environments, due to the large number of scenarios that require examination, it is necessary 
for the evaluation tools themselves to maintain a great deal of flexibility. In this paper, a flexible 
simulation framework is described. The effectiveness of the framework is tested in the devel- opment 
phase of a heuristic-based, three-level FCS. The production basis for this experimentation is a mixed 
technol- ogyprinted circuit board assembly plant. The performance of the flexible framework is discussed 
with a focus on the advan- tages and limitations of the approach in this challenging envi- ronment. 1. 
INTRODUCTION Flexible control strategies (FCSs) can be used to advantage in many manufacturing and assembly 
environments. While they may be advantageous, they may also be very difficult to develop and implement. 
This is especially true at the opera- tional level, where a number of factors can interact dynami- cally 
to rapidly change system status. Perhaps equally as diffi- cult is the development of evaluation tools 
to determine the benefits and restrictions associated with using a particular FCS. This paper focuses 
on the development of an effective eva!uation tool to support FCS development in a difficult environment. 
 2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION The evaluation tool presented in thispaper is used to support the development 
of a heuristic-based, dynamic FCS in a flexible assembly system (FAS) environment. This FCS is described 
in detail in [Taylor 1990]. The FCS makes use of a natural control hierarchy composed of three levels, 
taking advantage of flexibility in product mix determination at the system level, product routing flexibility 
at the cell level, and flexibility in buffer sequencing at the machine level. At- each of the three levels, 
control strategies are evaluated for use as stand-alone operational control elements and as members of 
integrated multi-level FCSs. Although production data for the research in [Taylor 1990] is obtained from 
several sources in North America, Europe, and Asia, the primary production basis and test facility for 
the research is a mixed technology printed circuit board assembly plant in Connecticut. This facility 
provides actual production data and serves as a valu- able validation source for solution approaches. 
It is described in more detail in [Taylor and Graves 1990]. The complex FCS structure and difficult operating 
environment presented in [Taylor 1990] and [Taylor and Graves 1990] make the development of effective 
evaluation tools a difficult task in severm ways. One source of difficulty is the inherent dynamic nature 
of the operational control problem in a FAS. Each processing center and eachproduct in the system provide 
a source of random events. Product mix andproeess availability contrib- ute dynamically to the creation 
of system level and cell level bottlenecks. The evaluation tool selected must be able to successfully 
capture the effects of random events. Another source of difficulty arises when a large number of scenarios 
must be evaluated m FCS development. Heuris- tic-based solution techniques often require the examination 
of a large number of scenarios. This is especially true in the test case presented in this paper because 
heuristic solutions are employed at multiple levels. The FCS also makes use of interfacing heuristics 
between the three control levels employed. The examination of each scenario requires that changes be 
made to evaluation tools. It is desirable to mini- mize these changes as the effects of various heuristic 
solution approaches are explored. Finally, it may be said that the electronics industry pre- sents a 
difficult operating environment. The industry is char- acterized by rapid changes to product structures 
and process technologies. In printed circuit board assembly, rapid changes to component packaging technology 
have led to much greater product variability than previously encountered, and product life cycles are 
increasingly shorter. Assembly pro- cesses are also rapidly changing, and manufacturers are attempting 
to build flexible .processes that are capable of assembling a wide range of rmxed technology products 
as the product evolution continues. Suri [1985] has divided evaluative models for flexible manufacturing 
systems into five categories; static allocation models, queueing network models, simulation models, pertur- 
bation analysis, and Petri-nets. Each of these modelling tech- niques have advantages and disadvantages. 
Buzacott and Yao [1986] suggest that analytical models may be superior to simu- lation models but claim 
that analytical approaches are not practical in many cases due to their slow development and degree of 
abstraction from reality. 3. SOLUTION APPROACH In spite of inherent difficulties, it appears that there 
is no better evaluation tool than discrete event system simulation for evaluating the FCS problem in 
electronics assembly. No other modeling tool provides the ability to accurately quantify the effects 
of using various FCS scenarios in a hishly dynamic environment. The extra development work is justifiable 
in this case. At the core of the solution approach is a flexible simula- tion framework (FSF) that helps 
to minimize the set-up time associated with the transfer between alternative scenarios. Other authors 
have suggested similar solution approaches and have offered helpful ideas. Shroer and Tseng [1987] develop 
general purpose simulation generators to represent assembly stations, manufacturing cells, and inventory 
transfer functions. These components can be liked together to model many manufacturing systems. Ben-Arieh 
and Moodie [1987] describe a knowledge based routing system (KBRS) which consists of a static data base, 
a dynamic data base, behavioral knowledge, procedural knowledge, and a simulation driver. 567 G.D. Taylor, 
Jr. Their approach is to tune the KBRS as suggested by observed system behavior. As in [Shroer and Tseng 
1987], the approach in this paper breaks the simulation task into component parts linked together to 
create a scenario. The solution approach is also similar in several ways to the work described in [Beh-Arieh 
and Moodie 1987]. The primary driver is discrete event sys- tem simulation using the SIMAN language. 
A static data base maintains key processing parameters. Dynamic data such as work in process information, 
queue length status, machine status, and product attribute information are managed through the combined 
use of StMAN and FORTRAN. The heuristics which control operational decision making expli- citly include 
procedural information such as the ability to determine which alternatives are feasible. Additionally, 
the heuristics implicitly include behavioral knowledge and attempt to make decisions based on expected 
behavioral improvements in the FAS as a result of the decision. As in [Ben-Arieh and Moodie 1987], observed 
behavior is used to tune the heuristics in each of the experimental scenarios based on current and historical 
information. Figure 1 presents the simulation model architecture in more detail and indicates that the 
actual modelling methodol- ogy may be broken down into four major components; the SIMAN model frame, 
the SIMAN experimental frame, FOR- TRAN subroutines, and external data files. At the heart of the simulation 
architecture is the station code which resides in the SIMAN model frame and represents each process in 
the manufacturing environment. The SIMAN experimental frame contains information defining system experimental 
conditions, specifying replication data, and stipulatmg that the statistical output be routed into data 
files for subsequent examination using the SIMAN output processor. The flexible control heuristics range 
from qmte simple to very complex depending upon the scenario and reside primarily in inter- changeable 
FORTRAN subroutines. 4. PERFORMANCE OF THE FLEXIBLE MODEL The performance of the FSF is tested in a variety 
of FCS scenarios. Initially, a baseline model which is characterized S IHAI~ EXPERIMENTAL by a total 
lack of processing flexibility is examined. This sce- nario provides a basis of comparison for scenarios 
featuring some degree of flexibility in operational control. The base- line makes use of a fixed product 
mix, first-come-first-served sequencing, and one routing per product. The most difficult feature of the 
baseline modelfrom a simulation viewpoint is the inclusion of finite-sized, blockable machine buffers 
in the presence of multipleproducts with different routings. Fortu- nately, the station code in the FSF 
contains enough flexibility to allow for this feature. Station release information is car- ded as an 
entity attribute in the FSF. In this way, at any par- tieular work station, it is possible to release 
or block any of several machines which may have been the immediate assem- bly predecessor station for 
any particular workpieee. The addition of system level control heuristics to regulate product mix adds 
to the complexity of the simulation task, yet the FSF performs well. In spite of the complexity of the 
mix task which includes the loading problem (which products to input), the release problem (when to input), 
and the lot size problem (bow much to input), the FSF allows most scenarios to be examined with relative 
ease by simply exchanging sce- nario specific heuristic coding in the subroutine labeled "mixer code" 
in Figure 1. The coding changes are somewhat more difficult for scenarios involving "pull" processing 
or hybrid "push/pull" processing environments instead of the baseline "push" strategy. In these scenarios, 
additional changes must be made to the system controller in the SIMAN model frame to help initialize 
the system with work in pro- cess. The utility of the FSF is further demonstrated by examin- ing the 
effects of adding inter-cell routing flexibility. This flexibility refers to the ability to conduct assembly 
operations in alternate sequences, but does not extend to the ability to use alternative resources for 
specific assembly operations. The cell level controller in the FSF, labeled "router code" in Figure 1, 
recognizes routing decision points for each product based upon precedence constraints and provides the 
opportu- nity to make routing decisions based on a variety of different heuristic procedures. One major 
difficulty associated with using the FSF must be overcome when a high degree of routing flexibility is 
avail- FRAME SIMAN MODEL FRAME FOKTPJ~/~ SUBROUTINES .-................... . .o ............... ....................... 
. :......................... i I_ . I 8LOCKfNGI 1) RESOURCES CODE I 2) PARAMETERS  a) ~AN,~NGS 4) LOT 
SIZE $TA'I'ION CODE 61 STA'IqSnCS 4} BELT o, ~=~,..^..,.,,.,,.,~ " ~ w ............. FAILURE [  I CODE 
I ................ rl.--:l ..................... L1 , ,-"-.-.....4: ...... I I I UTP t IDATA I PROCESSOR[ 
/ FILES i MACHINE CONTROLS r I " : I ~,~ ISEQU..ENCERI / R/S h 1 i) SEQUENCER I CODE ~ il~lT. / / INTERFACE 
/ I -]2) MACHINE STATUS \ '  " i "\ CEU. CO - OLS I :: I ~ i ! 11) MIXER INTERFACE ! 2) D.B. INTERFACE 
- I 3) SYS'[EM STATUS ~ , ........... i ....... ; I I ..... ' .........  IPROOE ,N I IPAr~AME'rEJ:~ 
I I rnLEs I DATA FILES Figure l. Simulation Model Architecture 568 '~. Y 7:.>,- I MIXER I " 1 CODe 
I , , --1 I DATABAS I INTERFACE [ A Flexible Simulation Framework for Evaluating Multi-Level, Heuristic-Based 
Production Control Strategies able. As previously mentioned, the basis FAS is characterized by a finite 
queueing strategy with blocking, and the simulation code specifies that machine releases bebased upon 
product attributes. With alternate routing sequences, it is possible in rare occurrences that two blocked 
cells or stations can hold the release attributes for each other, resulting in a "gridlock" effect that 
eventually paralyzes the entire assembly system. Additional rules must be included in the router code 
to pre- vent this phenomenon while using the FSF. The FSF performs especially well when evaluating sce- 
narios which make use of machine level sequencing heuristics to manage the selection of jobs from individual 
machine buf- fers. Figure 1 shows that a combination of SIMAN and FOR- TRAN is used for the sequencing 
task. This allows the FSF to make use of certain features available in the SIMAN lan- guage to make the 
programm/ng task to incorporate different sequencing strategies less complicated. For example, the SIMAN 
RANKINGS block canbe used in the experimental frame in combination with product attribute manipulation 
in the SIMAN model frame and FORTRAN subroutines. Other scenarios make use of the SEARCH and REMOVE blocks 
to select jobs from individual queues based upon a particular condition or product attribute. The FSFreceives 
more rigorous testing when scenarios which make use of flexible controls at multiple levels are examined. 
The FSF strategy of providing an interface bet- ween heuristic policies at each level in the control 
hierarchy appears to be an effective one. Consider the scenario which includes flexibility in both cell 
level routing and system level product mix determination. As stand-alone policies, the router and the 
mixer have differ- ent and sometimes conflicting goals. These differences can be managed effectively 
using the FSF. Integrating heuristic code, residing in a FORTRAN subroutine, is called at peri- odic 
intervals to determine what action is required based upon a dynamically maintained data base which receives 
input from both system and cell level sources. Scenario changeover time using this approach is quite 
acceptable, requiring only the exchange of substitutive subroutines. In other multi-level control scenarios, 
a different approach to integration may be pursued using the FSF con- cept. Instead of providing actual 
interfacing subroutines, it is possible in some cases to coordinate the heuristic decision making at 
each level by ensuring that complementary policies are guiding dec/sions at each level. This strategy 
is justified when more direct integration attempts result in a model that is an abstraction of reality. 
Consider, for example, the sce- nario which includes flexibility in cell level routing and machine level 
sequencing. It is certainly possible to use a common machine buffering concept where jobs could he selected 
from a central location by a number of different processing steps as machines become available. The jobs 
could be selected using any sequencing criteria deemed appropriate. Since a number of potential processes 
would be pulling jobs from this queue based upon specific precedence constraints, the routing problem 
and the sequencing problem would be solved concurrently. Although this approach is a viable method of 
solving a routing/sequencing problem, it violates the assumption that only finite sized individual machine 
level buffers exist in the basis facility. When scenarios are examined making use of flexibility at all 
three levels in the control hierarchy, the true utility of the FSF is recognized. Since it is desirable 
to examine a number of different heuristic alternatives at each control level, and because a number of 
alternatives are available for integrating those heuristics, then a large number of permutations exist. 
Therefore, it is extremely beneficial that the FSF permits the use of interchangeable control and integration 
subroutines. The FSF described in this paper standardizes, as much as possible, the inputs and outputs 
required by these subroutines to ensure that they are interchangeable. The result is that a large number 
of alternative control scenarios are able to be examined using the FSF in a short amount of time. In 
addition to providing the ability to easily examine the effects of changes to system policies, the FSF 
is designed to facilitate the examination of changes to system conditions such as input lot size, buffer 
size, set-up times, etc. Sensitivity analysis is performed using data from the basis facility to test 
the ease of using this feature. Generally, all sensitivity analy- sis can be performed by changing input 
parameters in the SIMAN experimental frame or static data base files. 5. CONCLUDING REMARKS As pointed 
out by Pritsker [1987], it is difficult to evaluate the worth of a model because measurable criteria 
are gener- ally not available to quantify the value. However, the FSF described in this paper tremendously 
reduces changeover time between scenarios and allows the rapid examination of multiple heuristic alternatives. 
Through the inclusion of spe- cific Interfacing mechanisms between control subroutines, and through standardization 
of inputs and outputs to those subroutines, the FSF helps to isolate operational control problems and 
helps to mimmize the management task associ- ated with operational flexibility. This feature is especially 
important as additional operational flexibility is made avail- able. Additional research could focus 
on the further standard- ization of inputs and interfaces in an effort to make control and integration 
subroutines even more interchangeable. One of the key limitations associated with the current approach 
is that exotic scenarios may require changes to the subroutine input/output, perhaps resulting in significant 
coding changes elsewhere. Although SIMAN and FORTRAN are used with a great deal of success in this study, 
perhaps other tools would be equally or perhaps even better stated for additional work. This approach 
shows the advantages of seeking flexible, creative solutions in the development of new evaluation tools 
for flexible environments. The FSF approach has proven to be effective for use in the test environment 
of flexible elec- tronics assembly. Furthermore, it appears that this approach may be valuable in a variety 
of relfited manufacturing and assembly situations that require the examination of a large number of scenarios. 
REFERENCES <RefA>Ben-Arieh, D. and C.L Moodie (1987), "Knowledge Based Routing and Sequencing for Discrete 
Part Production," Journal of Manufacturing Systems 6, 4, 28%297. Buzacott, J.A. and D.D. Yao (1986), 
"Flexible Manufacturing Systems: A Review of Analytical Models," ManagementScience 32, 7, 890-905. Pritsker, 
A.A.B. (1987), "Model Evolution H: An FMS Design Problem," In Proceedings of the 1987 Winter Simulation 
Conference, A. Thesen, H. Grant, and W.D. Kelton, Eds. IEEE, Pisca-tawny, N J, 567-574. Sehroer, B.J. 
and. F.T. Tseng. (1987.), "Modelin. tg ~ .lex mplexCom Manufacturmg Systems Using Simulation," In Proceedings 
of the 1987 Winter Simulation Conference, A. Thesen, H. tbrant, and W.D. Kelton, Eds. IEEE, Piscataway, 
NJ, 677-682. Suri, R. (1985), "An Overview of Evaluative Models For Flexible Manufacturing Systems," 
Annals of Oper-ations Research3, 13-21. Taylor, G.D. (1990), "A Dynamic Production Control Metho- dology 
for Flexible Assembly of Mixed Technology Cir- cuit Boards," Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Industrial Engineering 
and Operations Research, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. Taylor, G.D. and R.J. Graves (1990), 
"Impacts of Flexible Routing in Control Architectures for Material Flow Sys- tems," In Proceedings of 
the 1990 Material Handling Research Colloquium, I.W. Pence, Ed. MHRC, Atlanta, GA, 341-353.</RefA> 569 
			
