
 ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 22, Number 4, August 1988 A HAND BIOMECHANICS WORKSTATION David E. Thompson 
1, William L. Buford, Jr. ~, Loyd M. Myers 2, David J. Giurintano 2 and John A. Brewer lll t 1. Louisiana 
State University, 2. GWL National Hansen's Disease Center Abstract Interactive graphics for hand surgery 
was used to apply mathematical modeling and describe the kinematics of the hand and its resultant effect 
on hand function. Dynamic high resolution displays and three- dimensional images were tailored for use 
with a specific patients' hand and a new and powerful design and analysis tool produced. Meth-ods were 
developed to portray kinematic information such as muscle excursion and effective moment arm and extended 
to yield dynamic information such as torque and work. This prototype workstation has been developed in 
concert with leading orthopedic surgeons and ther- apists. CR Categories.and Subject Descriptors: 1.3.0 
(Computer Graphics): General; J.6 (Computer Aided Engineering)- Computer Aided Design (CAD); J.3 (Life 
and Medical Sciences) -Biology; Health. General Terms: Computer Aided Design, Computer Graphics, Ortho- 
pedic Surgery, Hand Surgery, Hand Therapy, CT and MR Imaging.  1 Introduction The ascension of computers 
for modeling in science and engineering is certainly a well acknowledged and accepted trend. What has 
not been made widely known, however, is the limited application of this same technology to medicine. 
While an engineer uses computers daily through Computer Aided Design (CAD) to assist him in his endeavor, 
there are no such tools for the private medical practitioner. At best, a surgeon's secretary uses a word 
processor or his accountant uses a spreadsheet or accounting package to assist him in the business aspect 
of his practice. There are no interactive computer modeling tools in use today to assist medical specialists 
such as orthopedic surgeons or physical therapists. This situation is the result of the fact that no 
conclusive evidence for the value of such modeling in the treatment of patients exists. Several years 
ago, Louisiana State University and the Rehabilitation Research Branch at the National Hansen's Disease 
Center joined efforts to initiate a basic research program on the biomechanics of the human hand. In 
this work, it became obvious that computers could do many things to assist us in this research. What 
we also discovered, however, was that the computer could be used as a bridge between mathematics and 
the clinical world of the orthopedic surgeon. Through interac- tive graphics, the surgeon could 'see' 
mathematical phenomena and thereby learn from the knowledge base which the mathematics repre- sented. 
What made this so valuable was that the surgeon could gain Permission to copy without fee all or part 
of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To coRy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169;1988 ACM-O-89791-275-6/88/O08/0335 
$00.75 from mathematical models and graphics without becoming an expert in their use. However, as the 
mathematics became better developed, it was determined that powerful workstations were a prerequisite 
if the simulations were to remain robust and interactive. Thus, we began to envision n workstation which 
would be of direct use in the practice of orthopedic surgery, in research and in education. In the following 
sections, the initial demonstration prototype for this workstation will be discussed along with suggestions 
for future enhance- ments.  Background In this work, we have designed a workstation environment which 
in- volves orthopedic surgery, physical therapy, mathematic modeling, in- teractive graphics, and kinematics. 
1.1 Biomechanies of the Hand The hand is a marvelous mechanical structure comprised of bones, llg- aments 
which serve to loosely connect structures, muscles which act as tension motors, tendons which serve as 
cables to connect muscles to bone, and a covering of protective soft tissue and skin. Muscles pro- duce 
torque and/or movement at joints only through tension, and for every muscle there are one or more muscles 
which serve to oppose it through counter-torque and/or opposing motion. The hand and the action of the 
flexor tendons have been extensively investigated and the literature on the hand has a long heritage. 
In 1850, Fick [11] initially developed experimental procedures for deter- mining the moment arms of the 
joints of the hand. Fick was a leader in studying the mechanics of muscles [12]. However, a hundred years 
lapsed before any other investigators extended his studies. Most studies were principally concerned with 
anatomy or were anecdotal in nature. In 1961, Landsmeer [18] proposed three models of a tendon crossing 
a joint, thereby demonstrating that there are important differences in the action of tendons at various 
joints. Brand [4] explained how a transfer of a tendon from a lesser func- tional location could be used 
to replace a deficiency in the hand's ability to perform the most elementary tasks. Brand proposed that 
the effects of muscle forces imposed on joints should be balanced. He stated the importance of knowing 
the proper axes of motion of joints and the ne- cessity of observing the excursions of tendons required 
to produce joint motion and torque. Transfer operations must use muscles which meet force and excursion 
requirements or the range of motion of the joint will be reduced, not just at the joint to which the 
transfer was made, but for all of the joints the transfer crosses. Flatt [14] and Fischer [13] measured 
cadaver specimens to ascertain the relationship to forces and torques for the fingers and what factors 
were important for surgical replacement of joints altered by rheumatoid arthritis. In Brand [6] and Brand, 
et al. [5], a muscle model was used to convert cadaver measurements into a table of relative tension 
and excursion po- tentials for each muscle of the forearm and hand. Brand discussed the general effects 
of edema, friction, and scarring on the ability of tendons to effect joint motion or produce torque. 
Data on the mechanical lever-  ¢SIGGRAPH '88, Atlanta, August 1-5, 1988 age of tendons, termed their 
moment arms, was presented along with joint ranges of motion and tendon excursions for most muscles in 
the hand. The human hand presents the mathematical modeler with a formidable task: representing the behavior 
of 44 separate muscle-tendon units, 27 major bones, and at least 18 joint articulations re- sulting in 
27 or more degrees of freedom. The modeler must also en- code the behavior of the tissues surrounding 
the muscles and bones and the ligamentous structures which modify their action. A great deal is known 
about hands, but little is known about how the mechanisms of the hand work together to achieve their 
function. Recently, mathematical models have been developed to describe the internal forces of hands 
(An et al. [2,3]). Such models are only ap- propriate for the static hand and have no general solution 
since most joints have more than a sufficient number of muscles to control the joint. This arrangement 
presents a mathematical closure problem, and forces the modeler to make additional assumptions about 
the distribu- tion of forces, torques, or energy expenditure between the muscles. To solve this problem, 
various optimization methods have been employed and the results, while extremely valuable, are limited 
in their scope. Most of the methods currently employed in reconstructive surgery of the hand are, however, 
subjectively based with diverse results and are not based on quantifiable analyticaLzationale. Surgical 
procedures on joints and muscle-tendon systems are performed daily without regard for fundamental biomechanical 
principles. Much of the work in our lab is directed towards understanding the mechanics of the hand. 
Results of this research [24,1,6,26], include measurements of required muscle excursions, and determinations 
of ef- fective muscle-tendon moment arms throughout each joint's angular range of motion. The moment 
arms for the muscles which cross the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint of the thumb (refer to Figure 11) form 
the basis for a model of CMC joint kinematics [24,21]. When defined in mathematical terms or even when 
using cleverly defined graphical plots [26], the analytical results for a simulated tendon transfer go 
un- used in the environment which has the greatest need: the orthopedic clinic. Through the use of a 
realistic interative graphics description of the musculo-skeletal system, the results of a proposed operation 
can be appreciated by a technically naive clinician. Ou [21] developed a single joint model to predict 
the excursions of all eight tendons which serve as motors for the CMC joint of the thumb. For the model, 
the tendon's path was assumed to be a straight line from the pulley point to the attachment point. Although 
quite simple, Ou's model showed good agreement with the experimental data for all eight muscles of a 
rigid thumb. Buford [7,9] extended Ou's work by developing a detailed interac- tive computer graphics 
simulation of the math model and adding a menu-driven program allowing clinical data to be entered and 
a tendon transfer operation to be simulated and observed. Buford defined the bones of the thumb by digitizing 
X-rays of a cadaver specimen used by Ou. The simulation was displayed on an Evans and Sutherland PS330 
color graphics system connected to a VAX host computer. A graphics control program allows the user to 
interactively rotate, flex-extend, or abduct-adduct the thumb at the CMCjoint. The metacarpal and distal 
interphalangeal joints are similarly user-controlled and were modeled as simple flex-extend joints. With 
real time interaction, one can ob- serve the tendon paths, the moment arms of the tendons at the CMC 
joint, display the results, and see the resultant excursions of proposed transfer operations. Three dimensional 
control coordinates of the CMC joint model de-  termined by Buford et al. [7,8] for the eight muscles 
of the thumb are used as parameters representing muscle tendon lines of action in this graphical simulation. 
Giuxintano [15] further improved this work by describing the paths of the flexor tendons as combinations 
of elemen- tary building blocks to represent tendons in sheaths, tendons or muscles which bowstring 
across joints, or tendons which behave according to Landsmeer's [18] model and traverse the joint space 
in a circular path. Tension fractions can be used to provide an estimate of the relative moment producing 
potential of each muscle. 1.2 The Man-Computer Interface Ideally, the interaction between man and computer 
is at an intuitive level sufficient to allow non-computer professionals to use advanced computer analysis 
tools. The need for real user-friendliness has never been so acute as in this application. The intended 
eventual user of this workstation will be a surgeon or therapist with limited or no computer knowledge 
or experience who wishes to use the system daily. The time pressures of a real clinical situation cannot 
be overemphasized and the system must therefore offer services not otherwise attainable and it must be 
fast and user-friendly. In our laboratory, surgeons and thera- pists have used the workstation and have 
commented that they know how they want the simulation to behave, but can not express themselves using 
simple menus and keyboard commands. Modern man-computer interactions are shaped more by the inade- quacies 
of the operating system or workstation tools than by what is natural and direct. Surgeons and therapists 
should not have to be ex- pert typists or fluent in FORTRAN, command languages, or database details. 
The use of the computer should be obvious, natural, and direct; man should interact on his terms and 
in his style, not forced to cryptic commands and methods based on what is readily accomplished in as- 
sembly language. Our work on man-computer interaction is therefore directed at understanding the use 
of speech, vision, and gesture and devising new workstation tools to accomplish natural interaction[25]. 
 1.3 Imaging The field of medical imaging has expanded enormously. Ordinary ra- diographic (X-ray) imaging 
is a relatively mature field. Simple X-rays, however, do not provide the information necessary to define 
three di- mensional structures. When computerized tomographic (CT) scans were introduced, the resulting 
improvement in visualizing three dimen- sional structures was so great that every major medical center 
in the world now has a CT scanner. Unfortunately, while the CT scanner proved of enormous benefit in 
resolving the details of bone structures due to the large density gradients involved, soft tissue information 
was limited. The development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) de- vices, however, allows a dramatic 
improvement in the details of soft tissues but poor resolution in bone since the current technology is 
prin- cipally based on hydrogen protons which are notably absent in bone structures. These developments 
in imaging have influenced the development of a workstation presented here. Indeed, without the ability 
to define the three dimensional database for every patient's hand, the concept would have little practical 
application. Although the initial scientific studies reported in the literature regarding CT and MR imaging 
were involved in clarifying and improving the visualization of each image slice, there is now an added 
emphasis on visualization of complete three dimensional structures derived from many serial sections. 
One of the earliest of these was reported by Vannier et al. [29,30] who discussed the use of the computer 
in planning facial reconstructive surgery. Earlier works which used some form of biomechanics modeling 
or 3-D visualization of tissue structures were reported by Williams and Seireg [27], Day [10], Hemmy 
et al. [16], and Herman and Liu [17]. Murphy et al. [20] and Rhodes et al. [22] describe the use of CT 
imaging, recon- struction algorithms, and CAD techniques to design custom prostheses. White [32] and 
Vogel [31] describe the application of CAD techniques to provide radiologists and surgeons detailed views 
and models to assist in radiographic therapy and prosthetic implants. Systems combining ad- vanced 
interactive three dimensional visualization techniques tailored to specific patients with a fully articulated 
kinematic model have not been described previously. This has added impetus to our research into the 
tools and knowledge required to construct the first workstation for orthopedic biomcchanics that encompasses 
the simulation of both the kinematics and dynamics of the human hand. The most recent work in our laboratory 
involves a special 3-D graph-  ics editor for segmenting image data containing multiple bones which 
 appear fused following edge detection. Myers et al. 119] use an in- teractive technique to split bone 
profiles at joint spaces. Scherrer and Hillberry [23] used mathematical descriptions to accurately represent 
 articular surfaces but assumed that the surface data existed and was not merged with the adjacent bone 
surface. 2 Methods and Materials 2.1 Image Data The algorithms we have developed use data taken from 
a cadaver hand specimen mounted in wax on a positioning fixture. This was attached    '~" Computer 
Graphics, Volume 22, Number 4, August 1988 to a Siemens Somatom DR3 CT scanner. For this work, 172 non- 
overlapping slices were taken (KV = 125, Mas = 780) at one millime- ter increments. The specimen was 
rotated 90 ° and 111 slices at one millimeter spacing were taken to improve joint reconstruction opera- 
tions. The planar scans were reconstructed as 512x512 voxel images with a mathematically pure convolution 
kernel to insure the integrity of the data in subsequent enhancement operations. All image data was transferred 
to magnetic tape for porting to the computing and display systems. 2.2 The Computing and Display Environment 
A Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/750 was used to store the raw and converted scan data and generate 
the 2-D edge data and the composite 3-D database. The graphics display system was an Evans and Sutherland 
PS 390 high performance raster color graphics unit which handles display transformations, data structure 
interactions, and interactive device I/O in teal time. The full hardware environment is depicted in Figure 
1. Software was developed along three major lines: 1. Scan data analysis programs were developed in FORTRAN 
on the VAX system and a database was written to disk in a format equiv- alent to a PS 390 vector list. 
 2. A display data structure language was used to define the hierarchl- cal display data structure. The 
bottom nodes of this structure are the vector lists for the data derived from the image scans. Named 
elements of the structure define transformation nodes which are required to position the elements relative 
to each other and to dy- namically alter their positions through rotations about their axes of motion. 
 3. Input devices are logically connected to the display transforma- tions at the named nodes using a 
function network. This code allows the user to interact with the image in real time.  The elements of 
the software are depicted in Figure 2. DEC  rE VANS S SUT.~RLA.0 ] VAX 11-750 CONTROL UNIT I Sio mlchonl¢| 
SeseoroS Computer MINC 11-2S Figure h The computing and display systems provide a high speed, multiprocessor, 
multitasking environment for- real time interactive graphic simulation of a kinematic model of the hand. 
PS3SO DISPLAY DATA STRUCTURES ( Z dl PS390 FUNCTION NETWORKS ASC41 Commctn , Mes~Oe Ouou4 I1 , h .......... 
....  2.3 Hand Image Generation A program to generate a vlewable hand structure from multiple serial 
CT or MR scans has been developed by our group. Although oth- ers have developed similar techniques, 
our goal has been to identify the soft tissues and bones and to segment the bones into individual datasets 
with as little human intervention as possible. If the workstation is to be used by paramedical personnel, 
this segmentation must be accom- plished as quickly as possible. These algorithms permit a database for 
each individual patient that is tied to a kinematic model permitting joint angulation. While all current 
3-D imaging techniques result in a single large data structure which moves as n single entity, our method 
derives independent data structures for each object of interest in the hand. This is a major advance 
and an essential ingredient in coupling the display to an articulated kinematic model. This procedure 
requires four steps: (1) A set of serial CT or MR scans is obtained with a scan density determined by 
the application; (2) The entire bone structure is identified as an entity; (3) This structure is segmented 
into whatever detail is necessary; and (4) Joint axes are aligned and defined. The last three steps are 
discussed in further detail in the following sections. 2.3.1 3-D Reconstruction Edge points are determined 
by a comparison of the pixel intensity data with a bone threshold value. This is typically 176 CT units 
[17,30]. The resultant edge points are then closed with n generalized curve-tracing algorithm (Figure 
3). Based on the zoom factor, reconstruction center, table position and the slice orientation, the pixel 
position data for each 2-D slice is converted into 3-D coordinates centered about the physical CT scan 
aperture center at table position zero. By utilizing such an "absolute" coordinate system, we are able 
to load and generate im- ages from multiple scans taken at varying zoom factors, reconstruction centers, 
and orientations, combining them into a single image without using intermediate transformations. This 
technique establishes a gross orientation, but precise alignment of sagittal and transverse scnus is 
accomplished interactively with the aid of a movable depth clipping plane to correctly align the images. 
We have found it necessary to use scans taken at various orientations to generate the requisite joint 
detail. The vectors resulting from the conversion of the scan data are stored in their edited, transformed 
states upon completion of the edit session to ensure that their precise alignment is retained. 2.3.2 
Segmentation The vectors representing bone outlines (Figure 4, 5) from the trans- verse and sagittal 
sets of orthogonal sections were combined into a single 3-D structure and sent to the FS 390 for display, 
segmentation, and transformation. Segmentation is accomplished by the use of an interactive 3-D graphics 
editor (Figure 6, 7) which provides the user with the following real-time operations: o Full rotation, 
translation, scaling, front and back surface clipping, and manipulation of the relative positions of 
sagittal and trans-verse scans to allow for the correction of error in the positioning of the-specimen 
at the time of the scan. o When in the hand icon block (mid left of display), the graphics tablet allows 
the user to select icons which represent bone data files into which subsequently picked individual curve 
vector lists will be stored or removed. o When in the menu block (lower left of display), the cursor 
is used 1o select editing operations which include: -storage of the next selected vector list to the 
current bone file -removal of the last selected vector list from the current bone file -interactive splitting 
of n single vector list into two sub-lists -restoration of previously split vector list  o When the 
cursor is within the 3-D viewing window, it is used to spec- ify the individual curve vector to which 
the current menu selection  Figure 2: The interrelationships of the three types of software. operation 
will apply.  SIGGRAPH '88, Atlanta, August 1-5, 1988 Color on the PS 390 is used to great advantage 
in the editor software. As shown in Figure 6, the currently active bone data file icon is high- lighted 
in red in the menu window. A change of color of the displayed curves denotes they have been picked and 
appended to the active data file. Red is used within a dialogue box to send error messages to the user 
when an abnormal condition has occurred. In curves where the division between bones is ambiguous, the 
original CT scan is searched fox a path of minimum intensity between two user- specified points (Figure 
8). The algorithm searches a progressively widening neighborhood composed of the average intensities 
of the eight adjacent rays of an expanding radius until a minimum is found. The search is restricted 
to a user definable angle about the line segment connecting the initial points. The search angle, maximum 
radius of search, and search type may be interactlvely altered by the user in order to obtain the best 
possible surface for a given structure. In the case of multiple minima about a certain point, the algorithm 
minimizes the gradient of the growing curve. Curves generated in this fashion become part of the data 
structure and can be edited reeursively. 2.$.3 IdentiFying Joint Axes Following the completion of the 
segmentation process for each bone, the sagittal and transverse vector lists are combined into a single 
3-D structure. The user then interactively defines a position and orientation for the bone and its joint 
axes of motion which are incorporated into the kinematic hand model. 2.4 Biomechanies Modeling on the 
Workstation As an example of the manner in which additional biomechanical models are integrated into 
the system, a special multi-joint model of the flexor tendons [15] will be discussed. Out kinematic model 
of the flexor tendons does not incorporate force analysis, and elastic, viscous, and inertial effects 
are ignored. The model has been designed, however, so that these features may be added to the simulation. 
This model has been used because of its realism and its accurate prediction of tendon excursion. The 
model can describe the paths of the Flexor Pollicis Longus (FPL), the Flexor Digitornm Prohndus (FDP), 
and the Flexor Digitorum Superficialis (FDS) ten- dons. It is assumed that the axes of rotations of the 
joints of the fingers are fixed with respect to the proximal bone segments. In this work, these positions 
were determined through cadaver dissection and verified by insertion of these data into the display simulation. 
The CMC joint of the thumb and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints of the finger were assumed to be three 
degree of freedom joints. The proximal interpha- langeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP)joints 
of the thumb and fingers were modeled as one degree of freedom joints. This model uses elemental building 
blocks to construct the paths of the flexor tendons. These blocks are connected by control points tied 
to the data structure in a manner that permits them to move with the appropriate bones as the fingers 
articulate. I-Iomogeneous matrix transformations are used to transform the control points from a reference 
position to any new position of a finger in space. The various tendon elements are shown diagramatically 
in Figure 9. Here tendon model element A is used to simulate a tendon traveling in a straight line. The 
tendon could be traveling through a tendon sheath, bowstringing across a joint, or exiting from a sheath 
and inserting onto a bone. Element B is a simulation of a tendon traveling in a circular path as it crosses 
a joint. Landsmeer's [18] third model is the basis of this simulation. Element Cis a tendon dividing 
and then reconnecting to create a loop. The division and reconnection of the FDS is the basis for this 
building block. Tendon model element D is used to model a tendon segment dividing and inserting into 
a bone with dual attach- ment points. This building block models the most distal path of the FDS. The 
FPL crosses the web space of the thumb from the wrist in a straight line, travels through a sheath and 
inserts into the distal bone. To represent this path, one combines elements A and B in the sequence A-B-A-A'from 
proximal to distal. Figure 10 shows the construction of the FPL model from the building blocks. In a 
similar manner, the path of the FDP is also constructed by combining elements A and B. The only difference 
in the two paths is FDS ® ffi CONTROL POINT Figure 9: A diagram of the basic tendon building blocks 
used in the flexor tendon models. the use of Landsmeer's third model at the MCP joint of the finger as 
opposed to the tendon bowstringing across the CMC joint of the thumb. This results in the FDP model sequence 
B-A-B-A-A (reference tendons shown in purple in Figure 10). The path of the FDS may be anatomically described 
as following Landsmeer's third model at the metacarpal joint, traveling through a tendon sheath, dividing, 
reconnecting, and then dividing again before attaching to the middle phalanx. The path of the FDS is 
represented by the combination of elements B-A-C-A-D (reference tendons shown in gold in Figure 10). 
In the workstation, the PS 390 is continually updating the values of the viewing transformations and 
the functional rotations of the joints of the hand. On demand, these values are passed to the VAX and 
used to compute the positions of the control points and a set of splines used to represent each tendon. 
These are returned to the PS 390 for immediate display. The major limitation of the model is the speed 
of computation in the VAX. In this manner, any biomechanical model which can be related to the display 
data structure and its transformations can be added to the simulation. This extensibility is' one of 
the features essential for the continued growth of the workstation and its reportoire of models and functions. 
 ¢S[GGRAPH '88, Atlanta, August 1-5, 1988 The techniques developed and reported here are based on excessive 
radiation exposures necessary to obtain the detailed CT scans we have used. The expected improvements 
in imaging technology will, how- ever, allow the immediate application of our methods to clinical use. 
In this project we have demonstrated not only the technical feasibility of implementing a biomechanics 
workstation, but also the real neces- sity for applying the computer as a clinical, research, and educational 
tool. When combined with the continued development of the hardware and software for workstations and 
new user friendly environments, the future for this technology is indeed bright and promising.  Acknowledgement 
 The funding for this research was provided by the U.S. Public Health Service, Department of Health and 
Human Services under research con- tract 240-83-0060. Additional computing support was provided by the 
Computer Graphics Research and Applications Laboratory, Depart- ment of Mechanical Engineering, Louisiana 
State University through a joint research program with Digital Equipment Corporation. Evans and Sutherland 
has provided a PS 390 display system for use in this project. The images for this research were provided 
by Digital Diagnostics, Inc. of Baton Rouge, LA (Dr. Charles Grieson, Director). They pro- vided both 
support and scan time for this project. References <RefA>[I] Agee, John M., Brand, Paul W., Thompson, David 
E. The Moment Arms of the Carpometacarpal Joint of the Thumb: Their Laboratory Determination and Clinical 
Application. Proc. of the 37th Annual Mtg., Am. Soc. for Surgery of the Hand. -14, [New Orleans, LA, 
Jan 1982]. [2] An, K.N., Chao, E.Y., Cooney III, W.P., Linscheid, R.L. Normative Model of Human Hand 
for Biomechanical Analysis. J. Biomechanics, 1~,10 [1979], 775-788. [3] An, K.N., Ueba, Y., Chao, E.Y., 
Cooney III, W.P., and Linseheid, R.L. Tendon Excursion and Moment Arm of Index Finger Muscles. J. Biomeehanics 
16,6 I1983], 419- 425. [4] Brand, Paul W. Biomechanics of Tendon Transfer. Sym- posium on Tendon Transfer 
in the Upper Extremity. Or-thopedic Clinics of North America, 5,2 [April 1974], 205- 230. [5] Brand, 
Paul W., Beach, R.B., Thompson, D.E. Rela- tive Tension and Potential Excursion of Muscles in the Forearm 
and Hand. J. Hand Surgery, 6, 3 [May 1981], 209-219. [6] Brand, Paul W. Clinical Mechanics of the Hand. 
CV Mosby Pub., [St. Louis, 1985]. [7] Buford, Jr., William L. An Interactive Three Dimen-sional Simulation 
of the Kinematics of the Human Thumb, Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept of Engineering Sci- ence, Louisiana State 
University, 1984, also University Microfilms International, [Ann Arbor, MI, 1985] 85-15 133. [8] Buford, 
William~ Myers, L. and Thompson~ D. E. A Computer Graphics System for Musculoskeletal Model- ing. Proc. 
8th Annual EMBS Conference, 1, [Fort Worth, TX 1986], 607-610. [9] Buford, William L. and Thompson, D. 
E. A System for 3D Interactive Simulation of Hand Biomechanics. IEEE Trans. Biomedical Engr., BME 3~,6 
[June, 19871 434- 453. [10] Dev, Parvoti. A Simulator for the Analysis of Wrist Position Control. Proceedings 
of the 1082 Ameri-can Control Conference, [Arlington, VA., June 14-16, 1082], 1199-1204. [II] Fick, R. 
Statische Berachtung der Muskulature des Oberschenkels. Z Ratiouelle Med, 9~ [1850], 94-106. [12] Fick, 
R. Handbuch der Anatornie und Mechanik der Gelenke unter Berficksichtlgung der Bewe-genden Muskein. 1904-1911, 
3, Specielle Gelenk und Muskelmechanik, Gustav Fischer, [Jena, 1911]. [13] Fischer, C. W. A Treatise 
on the Topographical Anatomy of the Long Finger and a Biomeehanieal In- vestigation of its Interjoint 
Movement. Ph.D. thesis, En- gineering Mechanics, Univ. of Iowa, Univ. Microfilms, Inc. [Ann Arbor, MI 
1969]. [14] Flatt, Adrian E., Fischer, G.W. Biomeehanical Factors in the Replacement of Rheumatoid Joints. 
Ann. Rheum. Dist., g8, [1969]. [15] Giurintano, David J. and Thompson, D.E. A Kine-matic Model for the 
Flexor Tendons of the Hand. Proc. IEEE/EMBS, Paper 40.330.4, [November, 1987]. [16] Hemmy, David C., 
D.J. David, G.T. Herman. Three- Dimensional Reconstruction of Cranio-Facial Deformity Using Computed 
Tomography. Neurosurgery, 13, 5 [Nov. 1983], 534-541. [17] Herman, G.T., Liu, H.K. Three -dimensional 
display of human organs from computed tomograms. Computer Graphics and Image Processing, 9 [1979] 1-21. 
[18] Landsmeer, J.M.F. Studies in the Anatomy of Articu- lation. Acta. Morphol. Neerlando-Seaudinavia, 
3, [1961] 287-321. [19] Myers, Loyd M., W.L. Buford, and D.E. Thompson. A Graphics Editor for 3-D CT-Scan 
Data for Musculo- Skeletal Modeling. Proc. Computer Assisted Radi- ology [Berlin, July 1987], 477-483. 
[20] Murphy, S.B., P.K. Kijewski, S.R. Simon, H.P. Chan- dler, P.P. Griffin, D.T. Reilly, B.L. Penenberg, 
and M.M. Landy. Computer-Aided Simulation, Analysis, and De- sign in Orthopedic Surgery. Orthopedic Clinics 
of North America, 17,4 [October 1986] 638-649. [21] Ou, C. Austin. The Biomechanies of the Car-pometacarpal 
3oint of the Thumb. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Louisiana State University, 
[Baton Rouge, LA, Dee. 1979]. [22] Rhodes, Michael L., Kuo, Y.M. and Rothman. S.L.G. Systems Integration 
for the Manufacturing of Custom Prostheses and Anatomical Models. Proc. Computer Assisted Radiology, 
[Berlin, July 1987], 416-423. [23] Scherrer, P.K., and t-Iillberry, B.M. Piecewise Mathemat- ical Representation 
of Articular Surfaces. J. of Biome- ehanies, 1~, [1979], 301-311. [24] Thompson, David E. Biomechanies 
of the Hand Perspec-tives in Computing, 3, 3 [Oct. 1981], 12-19. [25] Thompson, David E., Brewer, J.A. 
and Scott, S.R. Human-Machine Interaction: The Audio Connection, Computers in Mechanical Engineering, 
I, 2, [1982], 14- 18. [26] Thompson, David E., Buford, W.L., Brewer, J.A. and Myers, L.M. Simulating 
Hand Surgery: A Work in Progress. SOMA, 2, 2 [June, 1987], 6-12.</RefA>    
			
