
 A Low Cost Device for the Real.Time On-Line Entry of Handprinted Characters David D. Thornburg Innovision 
P.O. Box 1317, Los Altos, CA 94022 A low-cost device for the recognition of hand-printed characters 
is described. This device incorporates a special tablet surface which provides stroke sequence and direction 
information to the host computer where this information is used with a simple dictionary to identify 
the drawn character, The tablet has been interfaced to several commercially available personal computers. 
The learning and recognition algorithms are sufficiently compact that the combined software (including 
the character dictionary) fits in about 3kB of BASIC code. I. INTRODUCTION As the placement of personal 
computers in homes and schools continues to increase at an explosive rate, an increasing fi'action of 
the general public is being asked to cope with data entry systems which are optimized for trained office 
workers. Modern personal computers typically present information to the user through a television display 
tube, and receive information fiom the user through a typewriter-like keyboard. The television screen, 
for today's generations, seems to be a readily accepted means for displaying information generated by 
the computer. Except for people who are proficient with the typewriter however, it is not clear that 
a conventional keyboard is the optimum vehicle for entering information. The problem is especially noticeable 
when the computer is introduced to children who are as young as eight or nine. Informal observations 
by the author and others who have spent many hours watching hundreds of children use a wide variety of 
personal computers has led us to believe Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. @ 1980 ACM 0-89791-024-9/80/0900-0179 $00.75 179 that it is only dogged 
perseverance which keeps these enthusiastic youngsters going as they scan the Sholes ("QWERTY") keyboard 
looking for the fight keys to type. If interacting with a computer didn't have other rewards to offset 
this problem, many people might give up in frustration. Even highly motivated users must lose some sense 
of continuity as their attention is diverted from answering a question to the task of finding the right 
keys through which their answer may be conveyed to the computer. Clearly, an improved interface between 
people and computers is needed in order to make the computer accept information in a form which is convenient 
for people to use. Of two natural modes of communication, speech and handwriting, it is our belief that 
the latter lends itself to more cost effective implementation on small personal computer systems. Furthermore, 
when a child is writing an answer to a question, his or her brain is continuing to work on the problem 
even as the hand is forming a character. It is certainly easier to stop in the middle of a wrong character 
when you discover a mistake while printing than it is to stop once you have hit a wrong key or spoken 
the wrong word. This alone suggests that handwritten character input might significantly assist in the 
learning process for children who are using computers for CAI or creative activities. We have accordingly 
developed a device, presently sold under the name "PrcstoDigitize~ :rM'' (1) that satisfies several design 
criteria which we perceive to be of importance to the young people we see as its principal users: * The 
device should allow the computer to adapt to each user's printing style. -k Most users should be able 
to to learn to write on the tablet in a short time (30 minutes or less). The tablet should be available 
for a sufficiently low price so that every personal computer could be equipped with one if desired. Additional 
constraints which come from the limited amount of memory available in most personal computers were considered 
appropriate design challenges as well. II. BACKGROUND Research in simple methods for recognizing hand-printed 
characters has been carried out by several people in the last twenty years. Generally, hand-printed character 
input devices have fallen into two classes - those which use X-Y digitizer tablets and those which use 
special tablets tailored to the task of character recognition. Early work incorporating generalized graphics 
tablets was carried out by Bernstein (2, 3), Groner (4, 5), Miller (6), Ito and Chui (7), Weaver (8), 
Simek and Tunis (9), and Driscoll and Gordon (10), among numerous others. Generally, these resarchers 
used high resolution (200 dot per inch) graphics tablets which were interfaced to fidrly large computer 
systems. A major portion of the software effort was devoted to "pre-processing" of the input data to 
discrilninate small random pen movements from bonafide changes in pen direction. This, in essence, was 
a separate pattern recognition task in itself. Once the smoothed and filtered data was captured, the 
resultant information was manipulated by a recognition program which identified the drawn character. 
This program needed to handle characters of various size, position, and rotation on the tablet surface. 
The mixed success of various approaches is indicated by the volume of research in the area. In exploring 
different approaches to character recognition one can use both stroke direction and stroke sequence (8), 
one of these (9), or neither (10). The variety of software approaches to the problem is thus quite large, 
A further consideration of importance is whether the resultant system is to be adaptive to the user's 
strokes or if it should anticipate any allowable method for generating a given character. Explorations 
in various software techniques are described in the above referenced papers. Generally, highly accurate 
character recognition has been obtained by these various authors. Even so, the high cost of the input 
device (about $1000, for example) coupled with large memory requirements for the algorithms and dictionary 
(e.g., 24 K bytes (3)), precludes the use of these approaches on the many thousands of computers presently 
in schools and homes - a great number of which have 8 K or fewer bytes of RAM available to the user. 
The use of "special" tablets customized to the character recognition task pre-dates the graphics tablet 
work by several years (11, 12). The early work of Dimond (11, 12) centered around a tablet containing 
seven conductive lines spaced about two dots which acted as writing guides. A hard-wired dictionary allowed 
his device to be used for the recognition of hand-printed numerals. His attempts to expand the concept 
to the full alphabet were less successful. A modification of the Dimond tablet, coupled to the use of 
both stroke setmence and direction information, was carried out by Irland and Morison (13). Their work 
resulted in succesful recognition of the entire alphabet, provided that the user always followed pre- 
defined stroke sequences and patterns. Brown (14) developed a special tablet which was coupled with a 
software dictionary incorporating all allowed methods for generating a character. While all of these 
tablets benefited from the reduced need for pre-processing of the input data stream, none of them (to 
our knowledge) was successfully incorporated into a commercial product. The commercial introduction of 
the PrestoDigitizer TM (1) in late 1979 allowed the massive number of personal computer users to have 
access to a low-cost character recognition device that could supplement, and in some cases replace, their 
reliance on a keyboard as the principal means for conveying information to the computer. III. PRESENT 
APPROACH The most common configuration of the PrestoDigitizer TM tablet is shown in Figure 1. A frame 
about 10 cm square 180 contains a circuit board which can be seen through a 6.5 cm square opening. The 
circuit board is etched into seven distinct regions, six of which are connected to inputs on the parallel 
user port of the personal computer. Since many computer manufacturers have a parallel input port for 
digital joysticks and other add-on peripherals, the use of a simple parallel interlhce guarantees the 
easy adaptation of this technology to most of the personal computers on the market today. Most commonly, 
the tablet is interfaced to the microprocessor bus through a PIA, such as the 6522 chip commonly used 
with 6502- based personal computers. Fz~ch of file six tablet regions is connected to a different bit 
of one of the PIA ports and a special pen which contains an electrical stylus contact is connected to 
the ground connection on the user port. When the user touches the pen to any of the conductive regions 
of the tablet surface, the corresponding input of the parallel port is brought from a logical 1 to a 
0. In this manner, the user is able to have the computer keep track of the region of the tablet in which 
the pen is located. PrestoDIgltlzerTM I I ' 'tl.J ! I Innovlslon >- connector for the compu|or parallel 
port the PrestoDigitizerT~ablet FIGURE 1. The function of the PrestoDigitizer TM tablet is completely 
controlled by software. For use in character recognition, the program which supports the PrestoDigitizerTM 
can monitor the PIA and make note of the sequence in which the pen moves from region to region. This 
is illustrated 181 for the letter B in Figure 2. In this figure we have numbered file six regions of 
the tablet which are monitored by the computer. To draw the letter B as shown, the user starts by placing 
the pen in region 1 and moves it through region 3 to region 4. The pen is then picked up and moved to 
region 1 again. The second stroke takes the pen through regions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 4 in sequence. The sequence 
[13412354] is then associated with one way of writing the letter B. To signal the completion of the letter, 
the user then touches the pen to region 6. An alternative to using region 6 to signify the end of a character 
is to measure the time the pen is lifted fiom the tablet surface and perform the recognition task on 
the accumulated strokes if this time exceeds a specified amount (typically 0.5 see). Our experience with 
new users suggests that it is better to disable the automatic time--out method of end-of-character detection 
during the training sessions, since there is typically some trepidation on the user's part associated 
with the training task. Once the tablet is mastered, however, most users have found the use of pen-up 
time to be a "natural" way to indicate the end of a stroke sequence. 6 3 stroke sequence for the letter 
B FIGURE 2. Once the user has signaled the completion of this character, the recognition program compares 
this sequence of strokes against a dictionary of previously stored stroke sequences which are correlated 
with the letters of the alphabet and with the numerals. If a match is found with one of these stroke 
sequences, the resulting character will be typed on the screen or treated in the same manner as if it 
were entered from the keyboard. New users can train themselves on the PrestoDigitizer TM ~hirly easily. 
We have found that it is better to start out with programs which use a limited character set (e.g., the 
numerals and a few other symbols) before having the operator teach the computer his or her complete repertoire 
of letters. This allows the computer user to become familiar with the new writing surface, and allows 
him or her to see how much variation in the stroke sequence will be tolerated by the program which is 
performing the recognition task. Usually by the time the third set of strokes has been received by the 
computer, the accuracy of the recognition program will be nearly perfect. We have found that the recognition 
accuracy improves if the "learning" process is carried out using carefully defined strokes, with close 
attention being paid to the regions in which the pen is moved during the formation of each character. 
Once proficiency is gained on the tablet (which takes a small fraction of the time required to understand 
a typewriter keyboard), many users find that they can print characters at their normal printing speed 
with error-flee recognition of these strokes by the computer: The fact that this device adapts to individual 
requirements and desires has proven to be a major fcature of the tablet. Raffler that start out with 
a pre-defined stroke set that all users must copy, the user first interacts with a "learning" program 
which accepts operator generated stroke sequences which are then used to create a dictionary of various 
letters and numerals. As long as the user is consistent, the identification process will work perfectly. 
Ordinarily, the user would draw stroke sequences which appear graphically similar to the desired letter 
or numeral, but some users with physical impairments have found it to their advantage to use other strokes 
to uniquely represent each letter. The tablet design allows recognition of the entire English alphabet 
and numerals, while still allowing the recognition program to use exact string matching for character 
identification. Since string comparison in certain BASIC's is very fast, the time delay between signaling 
the end of a character and seeing it displayed on the screen is almost imperceptible. As with other special 
character recognition tablets (11 - 14), the coarse nature of the PrestoDigitizer TM pattern provides 
considerable latitude in allowable character size, position, and rotation. By implementing these characteristics 
in the tablet design we have effectively eliminated the time and memory consuming pre-processing steps 
which appear to be required for character recognition in systems which use generalized X-Y digitizer 
tablets. Typical memory requirements for training and recognition software, plus the user-defined character 
dictionary, is between 2 and 3 K bytes of BASIC. This is sufficiently compact to allow some useful programs 
to be written around the tablet in machines with as little as 8 K bytes of free RAM. Since the technology 
described above is commercially available world-wide, we have an opportunity to explore its utility with 
a wide variety of users, each of whom has a wide variey of applications for file computer to which the 
tablet is connected. It is feedback from this "real-world" laboratory which will determine the appropriateness 
and value of what we have done.  REFERENCES <RefA>1.) PrestoDigitizer (patent pending), Innovision, P. O. 
Box 1317, Los Altos, CA 94022. 2.) M. I. Bernstein, RAND Corp. ARPA Report, RM- 3753-ARPA, October, 1964. 
3.) M. I. Bernstein, Proc. IEEE 1968 Workshop on Pattern Recog., p109 (Thompson Book Co., Washington, 
D.C., 1968). 4.) G. F. Groner, Proc. 1966 Fall Joint Comp. Conf., p591, (Spartan Books, Washington, D.C., 
1966). 5.) G. F. Groner, Proc. IEEE 1968 Workshop on Pattern Recog., p103 (Thompson Book Co., Washington, 
D.C., 1968). 6.) G. M. Miller, Proc. 1969 Joint Fall Computer Conf., p399, (AFIPS Press, Montvale, N 
J, 1969). 7.) M. R. Ito and T. L. Chui, Patt. Recog., vl0, p341 (1978). 8.) A. C. Weaver, "On-Line Character 
Recognition", NTIS Report PB-235 875, (1974). 9.) J. G. Simek and C. J. Tunis, IEEE Spectrum, v4, 37, 
p72 (1967). 182 10.) R. J. Driscoll and J. A. Gordon, Digital Proc. of Signals in Commun., p293 (1977). 
11.) T. L. Dimond, Prec. East. Joint Computer Conf. (IRE), p232 (1957). 12.) T. L. Dimond, U. S. Patent 
3,108,254 (1963). 13.) E. A. Irland and C. G. Morison, U. S. Patent 3,142,039 (1964). 14.) R. M. Brown, 
IEEE Trans. on Elect. Computers, EC- 13, p750 (1964).</RefA> 
			
