
 A MAINTENANCE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR DATA NETWORK SERVICES R.T. Begbie The Computer Communications 
Group TransCanada Ottawa, Introduction Over the last decade the common carriers who comprise the TransCanada 
Telephone System have experienced rapid growth in the types and number of data services being offered. 
Over the past 6 years TCTS has introduced three new shared data network services, Multlcom, a 4-wlre 
analogue switched network conditioned for data transmission, the Dataroute, an all digital data transmission 
network and Datapac, a packet switched digital data network. In the customer equipment field, market 
demand has resulted in the rapid introduction of new modems and terminal systems. These new data network 
services have placed strong demands on maintenance personnel and equipment. The result has been a considerable 
re-assessment of maintenance capability and the introduction of new plans and technologies in order to 
maintain service quality in this growing segment of the communications business. From a maintenance 
viewpoint networks are used as a transport medium for the data user. In some cases more than one network 
type may be used for a single end-to-end customer service. As illustrated in Figure 1 each network is 
usually provided with its own Network surveillance and control structure and is responsible for maintaining 
its own health as a stand-alone carrier medium. From an over-all service maintenance point of view the 
network is only a subcomponent of an end-to- end customer service. Associated components such as terminals, 
modems, network access channels, etc, are other essential subcomponents. We draw a clear dlfferentiatlon 
organiza- tionally and technologically between Network (transport medium) maintenance and overall, end-to- 
end customer service maintenance. The overall customer service maintenance responsibility is left with 
a customer service organization which has service testing, trouble sectlonallzatlon and customer llason 
responsibility for the end-to-end service. This paper deals with the customer service maintenance requirements. 
A fundamental building block to achieving this division of responsibility has been the establishment 
of Computer Communications Service Centres which are responsible for the maintenance of data services 
within a geographical area. This paper describes a maintenance system architecture, partially implemented 
within Bell Canada, for end-to-end testing and maintenance of data network services. This paper emphasizes 
the end-to-end, Overall, maintenance requirements. L- Telephone System Ont. KIG 3J4 The Computer Communications 
Service Centre (CCSC) One of the new organizational concepts now being implemented is the CCSC. The 
Computer Communications Service Centre is a multlfunctlonal maintenance centre which is responsible for 
the maintenance of all data services in its geographical area of responsibility. The centre is designed 
to physically integrate the personnel involved in all aspects of maintenance functions for data services 
in its ~urisdlctlonal territory. NETWORK MAINTENANCE f SURVEI LLANCE ICUSTOMER 1~ ~ DATA NETWORK ~1~1 
CUSTOMER ] 'UTER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE CENTRE 2  END TO END CUSTOMER SERVICE MAINTENANCE FIGURE 1 DATA 
NETWORK MAINTENANCE STRUCTURE The Service Centre provides the capability to effectively centralize various 
aspects of maintenance. This includes customer trouble reporting, testing, service implementation and 
quality analysis of end- to-end customer data services. The primary purpose of the Service Centre is 
to receive and process customer and employee initiated trouble reports. The processing consists of inter- 
acting with the customer, testing the customer's transmission facility and associated equipment,  3-4 
 isolating or sectionaling troubles found, referring the trouble to the appropriate personnel for repair 
and maintaining customer service records. The Centre represents the single customer interface for all 
service problems. Other responsibilities include implementation co-ordination and testing of new services, 
continuous analysis of the quality of customer service, initiating corrective maintenance work and interfacing 
with various network control centres. The CCSC is essentially "people oriented" modules or functions 
which require the services of certain hardware elements in order to perform effectively. The following 
maintenance functions are resident in the centre: Centralized Report is responsible for receiving, Function 
routing, tracking and disposition of all customer trouble reports. A "single number to call" for all 
service problems. Centralized is responsible for overall Implementation implementation control of all 
Function personnel and resources related to new, change or disconnect orders. Centralized is responsible 
for the direc- Dispatch Function tion and control of all personnel involved in outside installation, 
repair and preventative maintenance activities. Centralized is responsible for network Analysis Function 
surveillance information analysls~ customer service analysis and for correlating network and customer 
service problems. Centralized Test is responsible for controlling Control Function the end-to-end testing 
and sectionalization of impairments to all data services emanating from and entering the operating area 
of the Service Centre. The Centralized Test Control Function (CTC) as outlined here allows for the physical 
and organiza- tional integration of testing into the CCSC. The separation of the personnel performing 
the tests from the actual test systems and equipment is intentional and designed to achieve physical 
and organizational integration with the other CCSC functions while providing minimum hardware re-alignment 
and associated costs when new CCSC's are formed to meet growing service demands and organizational changes 
and rearrangements. Each CCSC is interconnected with a remote Test Equipment Centre (TEC) Figure 2. Physical 
equipment associated with the testing function is either located in the TEC or distributed throughout 
various network locations.  C~USTOMER I~CUSTOMER I~ CCSC CENTRALOFFICE TEC ~~1 CENTRALOFFICE CENTRALOFFICE 
FIGURE 2 COMPUTER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE CENTRE CENTRALOFFICE 3-5 The Centralized Test Control Function 
 The Test Equipment Centre  In recent years the role of the tester has significantly changed. As new 
service offerings become more complex with the introduction of mini- computers and microprocessor technology 
particularly in the data terminal field~ the testing function has significantly changed. We have attempted 
to mechanize as quickly as possible the repetitious test se~ up and execution functions to allow the 
tester to spend more time in the analysis of test results and resul- tant human deelslonmaking function. 
The nature of his Job function must change with technological change and the increasing volume of tests 
and resultant analysis to be performed. Our emphasis has been on the mechanization of the test function 
and the automated access of the testing equipment to the customer service to be tested. Test personnel 
who perform the Centralized Test Control function within the CCSC utilize a work station arrangement 
called a Test Control Console. See Figure 3. The console consists of two alpha num beric cathode ray 
tube (CRT) devices and a single keyboard, 20 llne call director and double headset Jacks. One CRT output 
device is associated with a "customer record" data base computer system located in the remote Test Equipment 
Centre. The companion CRT is associated with the control of test systems in the TEC and the control of 
access to the various types of networks. The single keyboard is logically assoclated 9 under tester control, 
with either CRT function. Each Test Control Console is connected to a local Test Control Console controller. 
A controller can support up to sixteen (16) Test Control Consoles. The Controller also supports 300 LPM 
printers which are shared between Test Control Consoles. The Controller consists of a PDPII/40 processor, 
32 KW of core and an RKII disc system for local, temporary storage activity. The Controller clusters 
all the Test Control Consoles in a CCSC and provides the interface for the digital communications channels 
to the remote Test Equipment Centre. The communications channel will generally run at 9.6 to 50 KB/S, 
depending on the number of consoles to be supported within a CCSC. All operational communication between 
the TCC's and the Test Equipment Centre is in a digital format via the TCC Controller. FIGURE3 TEST 
CONTROL CONSOLE  3-6 A single Test Equipment Centre (TEC) will normally support several CCSC's. The 
layout of physical equipment is illustrated in Figure 4, and a brief description of each operational 
system follows. a) Trouble Report and Information Handling System (TRIHS) TEST EQUIPMENT | ~,' CENTRE 
NATSC NETWORK ACCESS DATA NETWORKS FIGURE 4 TEST EQUIPMENT CENTRE This system provides administrative 
support and  record storage/retrieval services for the various operational groups within the CCSC. 
Trouble reports received from customers are entered directly onto the system through CRT terminals 
by Centralized Report Centre personnel. Trouble reports are routed to CRT terminals at Analyzers, Dispatchers 
or Test Control Consoles as directed. The system provides for a "paperless" test centre operation. The 
data base capabilities of the system stores equipment records on each customers service as well as trouble 
history logs and information on the progress of all outstand- ing impairments. The system provides a 
"trace" of progress on all outstanding troubles, allowing field forces and management to analyze and 
obtain a picture of CCSC controlled maintenance activity on a real-time basis. A Bell Canada, TRIHS 
system in Toronto, for example, currently contains 25,000 customer servlce records. The TRIHS system 
was the first system to be developed because the mechanization of administrative functions within the 
CCSC was essential to the longer term mechanization of the testing function. Automated test systems require 
the ability to access data base information for the retrieval of service information from the customers' 
equipment records. A tester operating the Test Control Console will utilize one of the CRT terminals 
in the console to access the TRIHS system and retrieve customer service records to determine the test 
procedures to be used. He will receive trouble reports from TRIHS and He will also administer the "closing 
out" of the trouble report and updating of the customer trouble record. The system provides for the storage 
of up to twelve of the most recent trouble occurrences on the service. The TRIHS system is based on 
a Digital Equip- ment Corp. PDPII/40 with 126 megaword, moving head disc drives. The software architecture 
is based on the Digital Equipment Corp. RSXIID operating System. b) The Network Access and Test System 
Controller (NATSC) All communication between the CCSC and the Test Equipment Centre as it relates to 
test system control and network access is handled by the Network Access and Test System Controller (NATSC). 
This Controller is the central unit in the TEC and supervises all resources and testing activity. Some 
of its major functions are: I) It receives all test requests for network access from Testers in the 
CCSC. 2) It performs the access function into the network and in some cases controls remote test instruments 
at distributed points throughout the network. s) Upon tester demand, it controls the operations of other 
test systems within the TEC (i.e. modem and terminal test systems). 4) It provides the results of testing 
activity to the tester located at the Test Control Console in the CCSC. The NATSC is based on a Digital 
Equipment Corp. PDPII/40 processor, RKII disc system and several types of communications interface devices. 
 c) Intelligent Terminal Test System (ITTS) This minicomputer based system is designed to test a range 
of terminal services. It was originally designed to perform a host computer emulation when testing intelligent 
(binary synchronous control, BSC) types of terminal systems. It can monitor channels operating in several 
types of asynchronous and synchronous protocol formats for in-service analysis and the sectionalization 
of difficult system problems. It can also communicate in an interactive mode, in the above protocols, 
with several terminal systems offered by TCTS. In this interactive mode, particularly with BSC terminal 
systems considerable processing power is required to effectively simulate a host computer system in order 
to fully exercise and test a multi-terminal system. The ITTS is a multiuser system, where up to five 
testers can utilize the system simultaneously. The system is based on a Digital Equipment Corp. PDPII/IO 
processor with RKII dual disc drives and both synchronous and asynchronous communications input/output. 
 d) Automated Data Test System (ADTS) This minicomputer based system is used to test data terminals 
and modems utilizing the Direct Distance Dial (DDD) network. The system has replaced several manual types 
of test boards.  The system is designed to accomodate three types of user control. Centralized testers 
can initiate tests on the system. Tests can also be initiated by Installer/repairmen from remote points 
in the network by calling the system over the DDD network and communicating with the system via a keyboard 
interactive terminal or via a special hand-held key- board device. In the latter mode of control multi- 
frequency signals are used to specify a test on the system and test results are returned via audio response 
from voice answer-back peripherals on the system. The system performs the following types of tests: 
I) Analogue signal generation and measurement for modem static tests. 2) Pseudo-random word generation 
and receptio.~ under controlled distortion levels for terminal testing.  The system retains a history 
of all tests performed and their results for later administrative analysis. The system is based on a 
Digital Equipment Corp. PDPII/40 processor, RKII disc system and specialized instrumentation. Twenty 
DDD network access lines are provided on this multi-user system. Network Access  As indicated in Figure 
4 Test Systems in the Test Equipment Centre (TEC) must have an access capability into the various network 
locations. One of the functions of the Network Access and Test System Controller is to control and "set 
up" access to a customers service at various network locations and place an "applications" test system 
such as ADTS or ITTS on the service to perform tests and hence sectionalize a service impairment. The 
method of access and the degree of access automation implemented to date varies according to network 
type. To provide automated access to all network configuration will require considerable time to economically 
develop and in some cases it may not be economically achieved. Some of the methods currently used to 
achieve access are the following: a) Voice-frequency, analogue, private line channels  The TECis provided 
with digital control lines to certain central offices which are equipped with Remote Access Equipment. 
An accessing relay is wired into the circuit when the circuit is installed. The relay when activated 
remotely, temporarily extends the circuit to remotely controlled test instruments located in that central 
office. The NATSC computer in the TEC, under control of the tester, commands the remotely controlled 
instruments in the central office to perform transmission tests on the accessed customers circuit and 
return the measurement results to the NATSC and hence to the testers Test Control Console (TCC). Test 
Systems within the TEC can also be connected to the accessed circuit over the test access channels established 
between the TEC and the central office equipped for remote access. b) Digital data channels on the Dataroute 
network  3-7 Test access lines have been established between the TEC and major regional Dataroute centres. 
These access channels are terminated on a digital test access arrangement within the Dataroute central 
office. Via this arrangement a high speed digital trunk can be selected (usually 56 KB/S or 1.5 MB/S) 
and lower speed customer subchannels can be selected and ter- minated in either direction for test purposes. 
Thus the test access lines from the TEC and hence the test systems within the TEC can be connected to 
the customer circuit for digital testing. c) Direct Distance Dial (DDD) Network The TEC is equipped 
with DDD access lines to establish connections with data services on the DDD Network for modem and terminal 
testing. Systems such as ADTS can call into the network in an automated msnner utilizing automatic calling 
units (ACU's) associated with the test systems. d) Telegraph Network This network which extensively 
utilizes frequency division multiplex (FDM) carrier equipment has test boards located at certain major 
offices. Test Access lines for digital data testing have been established between the TEC and these test 
board locatlo~. Channel protocol analysis and interactive terminal tests are accomplished over these 
test access channels by ITTS located in the TEC. e) Datapac This packet switched network service has 
been developed with certain software maintenance processes imbedded into the switching nodes. It is planned 
that these processes will be controlled by the NATSC in the TEC. The TEC will be equipped With digital 
communication channels to certain "gateway" nodes on the network. Over these channels the NATSC will 
establish calls into the network for the purpose of controlling the maintenance processes distributed 
in nodes throughout the network. These malntenace processes will return customer access llne protocol 
data to the TEC for analysis. They will logically connect TEC test systems to a customers network access 
llne to perform maintenance functions such as inter- active terminal testing. SUMMARY The preceding 
description of a maintenance system architecture for Data Network Services is being implemented in a 
modular building block approach. As new data services are added, new "applications" oriented systems 
may be added or existing systems such as ITTS and ADTS may be augmented. Utilizing this architecture 
the basic objectives achieved are the following: l) The resources of a restricted number of centralized 
minicomputer based test systems are placed at the disposal of many remote users at Computer Conmunica~ 
tions Service Centres. 2) The dislocation of test equipment is minimized as organization growth and 
changes result in the creation of new Computer Communications Service Centres. 3) The repair, maintenance 
and operational enhancing of these multi-user systems is made easier with fewer systems in fewer locations. 
 4) Functionally fntegrated customer maintenance (CCSC's) can be created according to geographical need. 
 We believe this maintenance systems architec- ture represents a sound plan upon which we will base the 
maintenance needs of current and future network services. <RefA>REFERENCES 1. S.C.K. Young and C.I. McGibbon, 
The Control System of the Datapac Network, Proc. of the Third International Conference on Computer Communications, 
Toronto, Aug 3-6, 1976 p.p. 137-142. 2. S. Frankel, G. Pearce and W. Chan, A Mini- computer Based Performance 
Monitoring System for the Dataroute, Proc. of the National Telecommunications Conference, New Orleans, 
December 1975 p.p. 7-21-7~24.  3. A.A. McKenzle, The ARPA Network Control Centre, Fourth Data Communications 
Synposlum, Octoher 7-9, 1975.  4. R.T. Begbie, Network Test System Makes Optimum Use of Remote Terminal 
Intelligence, Canadlan Electronics Engineering, February 1975, p.p. 22-23.</RefA>   3-8 
			
