
 A MESSAGE HANDLING SYSTEM FOR PUBLIC NETWORKS Toshihiko Nakayama, Yoshihiro Shimazu and Katsuhiko Haruta 
 Musashino Electrical Communication Laboratory, NTT 3-9-11, Midoricho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180, JAPAN 
 ABSTRACT As a message handling system installed in the public communication networks, SSC (Store and 
Processing Service Control Facility) provides convenient communication processing services using storage 
and conversion technologies. The SSC conversion facilities, including media conversion from teletex codes 
to facsimile image, increase the communicable terminal range. Mailbox services, using four different 
kinds of personal Message Boxes in the SSC, bring about much benefit to personal communications. The 
SSC service requesting procedures facilitate multi-address delivery, timed delivery and automatic conversions. 
The SSC is a prototype which realizes the Message Handling Systems being studied in CCITT. The system 
is under developmental research in the NTT Laboratory. This paper describes the basic SSC development 
concept, the relationship to the CCITT standard, the SSC service outline and the field trial system configuration. 
 I. INTRODUCTION Nippon Telegraph &#38; Telephone Public Corporation (NTT) is promoting construction 
of the Information Network System (INS), in which telecommunications and computers are integrated-. The 
INS will make cheaper, more convenient and diversified telecommunications services available to customers. 
In the INS, any given terminal equipment will be able to communicate information freely with different 
categories of terminals through selecting communication processing functions incorporated into the network. 
 Domestic public communication networks in Japan are now provided by telephone, telex, facsimile and 
the DDX (Digital Data Exchange) networks in NTT. Each network is available for such sole use communication 
as telephone and facsimile. As the first stage to achieve the INS, the DDX is to be expanded throughout 
the country to cope with potential demands for non-telephone services. Permission to copy without fee 
all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, 
and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
 otherwise, or to republish, requires a fce and/or specific permission. Circuit switched service started 
in December 1979, and is scheduled for all major cities in Japan by the end of 1987. Packet switched 
service started in July 1980, and will be extended to cover all municipalities by the end of fiscal 1987. 
 However, many facsimile terminals are connected to telephone network. Low speed data terminals, which 
have low communication traffic, may also be accommodated in the telephone network due to cost effectiveness 
considerations. Therefore, the communication processing center will bring about greater user benefit 
to integrate services all over the different networks, providing such communication processing services 
as temporary information storage, transmission speed conversion, recording document size conversion, 
media conversion, etc. As one of the communication processing centers, the SSC (Store and Processing 
Service Control Facility) has been developmentally researched in the NTT Laboratory. By storage and conversion 
technologies, the SSC provides many convenient telecommunication services, including communications between 
the different categories of terminals and mailbox services. This paper describes the basic SSC development 
concept, the relationship to the CCITT standard, the SSC service outline, and the field trial system 
configuration in the INS Model System. 2. APPROACHES TO NETWORK SERVICE ENHANCEMENT The SSC is a center 
for service facilities enhancement in public networks and is designed to offer a variety of message communications 
services to data terminals and facsimile terminals accommodated in the DDX, telephone and telex networks 
'~(Fig.l). The main SSC service features are communication range increase and facilitating personal communications 
by storage and conversion technologies. Since these communication processing facilities are used commonly 
by indefinite terminals, services will be provided at sufficiently low cost.  2.1 Communication Range 
Increase  In the existing communication networks, only communication between the same kind of terminals 
in the same network is usually possible. Therefore, customers are requiring communications between different 
category terminals. SSC makes this possible by storage and conversion techniques. That is, the messages 
are once received by the SSC 103 &#38;#169; 1983 ACM 0-89791-113-X/83/0010/0103500.75 according to 
originating terminal attribute and are then delivered in accordance with destination /~Faesimil~ Fig. 
I Inter-Network Communication via SSC terminal attribute. Provided that the several networks have the 
same service center in common, inter-networking services between the networks can be made possible. 
(I) Network Interface and Subscriber Data Arrangement Automatic conversion by using the subscriber attribute 
information registered in the networks, without demanding detailed instructions from a user, is preferable. 
To fulfill these conditions, common signaling data links, through which the SSC retrieves the subscriber 
data, including the terminal attribute data registered in each network, are necessary between the SSC 
and each network. Each network will have Gateway Switches, with which the communication processing nodes 
are connected. The communication processing nodes include the voice sto~age centers-and the facsimile 
storage centers besides the SSCs. The Gateway Switches will have the following commonly used functions 
for the communication processing nodes; - Call distribution to various communication processing nodes. 
 - Subscriber data base management and interconnection compatibility check referring to the data base. 
 - Communication processing charge accounting and recording. (2) Media Conversion The media conversion 
functions for the SSC are significant from the following two viewpoints. - Increase in communicable 
terminal categories. - Communication cost reduction by making transmission and storage information amount 
as small as possible.  104 Table I Content Category Simple message Document, like teletex Fa~imile 
image Voice (carded as data) Communication Media Comparison Information TypicalTypical Amount for TransmissionVolume 
a Unit SpeedUnit (bytes) (bits/see) line 50 or less page 3,000 2,400(CCITT A4) page 35,000 48,000 (CCITT 
A4) minute 240,000 32,000 The communication media are classified into data, image and voice, as shown 
in Table I. Among them, the character to text conversion is one of the most effective media conversion 
functions. While facsimile terminals are widely used in Japan, the Kanjl (Chinese ideograph) character 
terminals or communicating Japanese word processors are expected to become widespread. Since the facsimile 
text information amount is much larger than the character text information amount, the document edited 
by the word processor should be transmitted in the character code form, rather than by facsimile image 
form after printing out. Therefore, when a KanJi character terminal has to send documents to a facsimile 
terminal, the communication cost can be reduced by character to facsimile media conversion at the nearest 
point to facsimile terminal after transmitting the character text over a long distance. More widespread 
and more economical interconnection among terminals of different categories will be possible by the advancement 
of other recognition and conversion technologies. Therefore, the SSC has open ended architecture, which 
enables introducing the modularized conversion element according to the conversion technology advancement. 
 (3) Method Dealing with Diversified Terminals Terminal Class Terminals are classified according to 
their protocols (Fig.2). Layered and modularized protocol handling structure is necessary to economically 
support diversified terminal protocols and easily enable to add new terminal classes. In this structure, 
each terminal attribute is defined as a set of protocol elements collected from each protocol layer one 
by one. According to this definition, the SSC can communicate with a certain terminal choosing a necessary 
protocol element for each protocol layer. Protocol Layers Network i i I l l t I Physical Link Network 
Transport Session [ Application Presentation  E xa Xl / x. 22 I DT~IHDLC(X.75~----stM, Q bit Document 
 X. 21 (bis) ~----[HDLC(X.75~- I X. 25 S. 62 V. 24 etc. H HDLC(S.71)[-----~TEL+X.25 CONTROL HDLC flame 
CC V. 27ter ~ ~D;~ TEL h , T. 30 I PICTURE  DDx s×.20(Uis "d DDX-PS t'lx" 28 call .3 text V_ 21_ I 
 I vV21Telex23etc oTETEL X28data Teaex CC  DDX~S~, X-21 H X-21 h Under international ~ ~ X. 21 (bis)d 
DTL1 25 ~ln standardization I" I r '7 r-------~ r-------7 J I-4 I--~ ~--~ I--. Universal DDX!PS [HDLC(X.25)~"-J 
X. 25 CC : Call control DT : Data transmission Fig. 2 Terminal Classes and Protocol Structure for SSC 
 However, since some existing terminals do not completely fit the layered protocol model, their terminal 
classes should be specially defined according to their protocol similarity in the layered model. In the 
early development stage, the supported terminals will be restricted to those with standard protocol 
and message communication oriented characteristi cs, such as teletex terminals. Service Control Procedure 
 For message handling services, it is required to specify the protocols concerning such service control 
procedures as multi-address, mailbox, media conversion and delivery time, which are not specified between 
the terminals. These have to be .specified as the application level protocols in order to minimize the 
functional modification to existing terminals and switching systems in the networks. By the application 
level protocol, the service control information is transmitted together with user messages collectively. 
Though some operators for data terminals may want to send a service request to the SSC using conversational 
procedure, the SSC adopted a collective input for control information, considering that a facsimile terminal 
without a keyboard printer cannot control conversational procedures. It is difficult to unify the service 
control procedure among the existing terminals, since the input/output functions concerning man-machine 
interface differ among those terminals. Therefore, it is effective to compensate man-machine interfaces 
by the SSC in order to improve the service control procedures corresponding to the terminal characteristics. 
In fact, the procedures were improved by means of such additional functions as collective address in 
multi-address designation, on-line service parameter registration like the CCITT X.28 protocol. In the 
case of an intelligent terminal, it is effective to edit the service control information on the terminal 
site by the aid of the terminal local processing functions. 2.2 Mail Box Services Facilitatin$ Personal 
Communication  Throughout the extended communication range, mailbox services using storage techniques 
facilitate personal communications. (I) Highly Reliable Communications  Instead of terminal storage, 
a user can use highly reliable storage supervised by the network, without the necessity to attach/detach 
his own storage in such form as flexible magnetic disks to/from the terminal. Even when a terminal is 
not operative, for such local terminal reasons as being operator absent, communications using the network 
storage are possible. It is dangerous for a user to leave the terminal when his own storage memory is 
left in it, since the storage can be easily extracted from the terminal and it can be copied without 
permission. On the contrary, the information stored in the network facilities has higher security. Another 
reliable support for personal communications is notification of request handling states or of the results, 
using network facilities. A user need not positively collect this information by only terminal to terminal 
communications. (2) Convenient Personal Communication Since no proxy will be allowed for confidential 
personal communications, a person himself must send and receive messages, even though he is untrained 
in using the terminal. It is necessary, therefore, that terminal operation for the communication be as 
simple, brief and infrequent as possible. For example, whenever a person wants to send a message to plural 
people and to send it at a designated time, he has only to operate the terminal once to activate the 
SSC. On the contrary, in case of message receiving, since receiving time is unknown, it is preferable 
that the message can remain in the network storage until the designated person operates the terminal 
to retrieve the message from the network storage, for himself. In mailbox services, personal storage 
is independent from a terminal. Even when a user is away from his own terminal, for instance on a business 
trip, he can read out messages recelved in his personal storage and he can transfer them to some other 
terminals, through an appropriate terminal near by. Mailbox services are also convenient, even when 
the messages are to be read by indefinite people. In this case, the SSC saves a user from such laborious 
work as accepting requests and sending required messages through his terminal. That is, a user only has 
to register the messages to his personal storage, so that the SSC can automatically send them according 
to the requests. MHS I o I I I I Fig. 3 MHS Model Functional View 3 RELATIONSHIP TO CCITT'S MHS STANDARDIZATION 
 The standards of computer based store and forward message services in association with public data networks 
are being studied in CCITT SG VII as Message Handling Systems (MHS), Standard recommendations concerning 
the basic part of MHS services and relevant protocols will be produced in 1984. The SSC will be a prototype 
for the MHS realization. 3.1MHS model The MHS model is composed of Users, User Agents (UAs) and Message 
Transfer Agents (MTAs), as shown in Fig.3. A User is either a person or a computer application process, 
and it sends a message or receives one. The UA is the functional component of the MIIS model that interacts 
directly with a user and represents him to other Message Handling Service users. The UA is a set of computer 
processes that interacts with the Message Transfer System (MTS) on behalf of the user by means of messages. 
The MTS comprises a number of MTAs. Operating together, the MTAs relay messages and deliver them to the 
intended recipient UAs. The collective assembly of UAs and MTAs is called the MHS. 3.2 Physical mapping 
The SSC has UA functions and MTA functions, as shown in Fig.4. The UA part of the SSC provides the following 
functions. . - Communication with user terminal via switching networks, and sending/receiving messages 
together with service control information between user and its personal storage, called Message Boxes 
(described in 4.1). - Management of the user's message boxes, which are allocated to each user. Each 
user may have several message boxes. Switching Switching Switching networks SSC networks SSC networks 
 vi Set User Intelligent function terminal Fig. 4 Physical ~pping  106 In case the user terminal is 
an intelligent terminal, UA functions, such as message storage management, may be attached in the user 
terminal. Such terminal may communicate directly with the MTA part of the SSC. It can also communicate 
to the SSC UA part, independent from the terminal UA part. The MTA part of the SSC provides the following 
functions. - Communication with other SSCs or MHSs MTA part via switched networks and relaying messages 
on a store and forward basis. - Message transfer between message boxes which may exist in either the 
same SSC or different SSCs.  - Media conversion, which is performed under message transfer between message 
boxes if necessary. 3.3 Necessary protocols  Except application layer protocols, necessary protocols 
are specified with networks and terminals. As application layer protocols, the following CCITT's MIIS 
protocols are applicable to the SSC, as shown in Fig.5. P1 protocol P2 protocol P3 protocol P4 protocol 
 .,"q- or  (--q Subscriber Terminal : between the MTA parts of the SSCs : between the UA parts of the 
SSCs or of terminals : between the MTA part of the SSC and the user terminal with UA functions : between 
the UA part of the SSC and the user terminal without UA functions Private MB (s) Open MB (s) Receiving 
MB Receiving MB ~ Message or Sending MB Transfer Sending MB [--hand Subscriber io% Conversi DDX Terminal 
DDXCircuit Switched Packet Switched Network Network(Telex Network) Private MB (s) Open MB (s) [ BulletinBoard 
~--b,. >----7 Receiving MB System I Sending MB I Terminal J I Geteway[ Switch Telephone Network I MB 
: message box I  Subscriber Terminal Fig. 6 Message Box Arrangement Concept 4. SSC SERVICES  4.1 Service 
Scheme  The SSC services are summarized as mailbox based services, as illustrated in Fig.6, in order 
to produce the above mentioned features. The storage in the SSC is partitioned into Message Boxes (MBs) 
for each user. Using these message boxes, the SSC communication service outline is shown in Fig.7. In 
order that a user can use his MBs as his agent, his MBs should be independent from any terminal in the 
public networks. However in the SSC, each FIB is logically connected to a designated terminal, called 
a home terminal (HT), for the following reasons. SSC SSC P2 UA part UA part P1 MTA part MTA part I Fig. 
5 Application Layer Protocols for SSC  SSC Gateway ] switch   PnvateMB s l Open MB (s) 107 mal 
Service Requesting Ten.q____ MB : RMB : SMB : m : Message Box Category Private MB Open MB Bulletin 
Board Receiving MB Sending MB . ..... F-r-1 I I --"I message transfer II conversion if necessary I I 
delivery time I can be designated I (delayed delivery) I I I I I k any category message box, except 
SMB receiving message box sending message box message Fig. 7 Table 2 Purpose privately communicating 
openly reporting advertisement to large number of people automatic message receiving substituting home 
terminal inquiry for sending request " handling status or results Recipient Terminal terminal trouble 
"T -------'X  substitute ] delivery to terminal receiving (automatic ' i ~. delivery to MB I I becomes 
usable I I I %. ........... -47-1 i no oa on, ) from originator to recipient SSC Service Outline Message 
Box Characteristics Supervision by Home Terminal* Accessible Writing ReadingCreate/ Name Terminal Lock 
by Lock by Cancel Restriction Password Password @ free @ @ @ @ free 0 @ 0 fixed X by SSC X X X fixed 
X at '1' O X 0 f'Lxed X at '0' @ X 0 * Supervision needs supervising key password for each MB (~ Possible 
0 Possible, but not recommended X Impossible 108 There will be some confusion, if individual MB administration, 
including creation, cancelling and change, is allowed by all terminals. Each MB can be freely named by 
its owner. Since a network routes a call by a destination address indicated by a subscriber line number 
or a terminal number, a destination address for a message should include a subscriber line number as 
well as an MB name. Message boxes are segregated into the following four categories in accordance with 
their purposes (Table 2). Private Message Box (PMB) A user can- store, receive or send private messages, 
including confidential messages, into or from his PMB(s). In order to protect each PMB from access from 
indiscriminate people, it can be locked by passwords. The passwords should be managed by the user for 
himself. 9pen Message Box (OMB) An OMB accommodates information required to be positively read out 
by others. When open messages are required to be sent, a message requiring person can derive information 
from the OMB instead of the information owner. The OMB owners should propagate their OMB's names beforehand, 
since the accessible people are restricted to the range of people who know his terminal number and the 
OMB name. A more positive report, or advertisement to a wide range of people, can be stored in the common 
OMB provided by the SSC's virtual terminal. This kind of OMB is called Bulletin Board. Receivin~ Message 
Box (RMB) An RMB cannot be locked by a password, when information is written in it, since it is open 
to receive information. The receiver can transfer the received messages in the RMB to his PMB, if necessary. 
Another RMB feature is automatic delayed delivery. If the destination terminal is busy or in trouble, 
messages arriving at it are once received by the RMB on behalf of the terminal. When the terminal becomes 
usable, the SSC delivers the stored messages to the terminal. Sendin~ Message Box (SMB) An SMB is somewhat 
different from above mentioned message boxes. It is virtually provided to a user, so that a user can 
handle some auxiliary functions helping communications with the same procedures as those for other message 
box communications. For the period after a user sends a request to the SSC, until the SSC starts to 
deliver the message, the message is effectively stored in the sending terminal SMB. When the delivery 
is completed, the SSC writes the notifications based on the communication results in the SMB, after erasing 
the original message. If the user wants to cancel the requirement before its delivery, especially when 
the delivery time was designated, he has only to erase the message in the SMB according to the ordinary 
message erasing procedure. 4.2 Service Request Procedure  As mentioned above, the SSC service control 
information is transmitted in the application protocol level as a service access command. These commands 
are composed of four different function parts, as follows. Indicator / Address / I Group + Group  
Function Indicator A function Indicator has three functional variations. One is a message box communication 
request, such as message delivery, message retrieval and delivery status inquiry. Second is a maintenance 
request, such as message box creation, cancel and profile change. Third is a utility request, such as 
abbreviated address registration In the following, an access command for a message box communication 
request is discussed Destination Address Group The basic form of a destination address is as follows. 
 IHome Termlnal, [Message Box l" Key Password l Number I" I Name l for Writing  For multl-address 
delivery, all addresses are connected by the delimiter ",". If a message is wanted to be directly delivered 
to a terminal, message box name and password are omitted. A key password is needed if the message box 
writing is locked by a password. Message Address Group A message address group is needed when transferring 
or reading messages in message boxes, instead of inputting them from the terminal. A message address 
group is generally composed of four parts, as follows. Home "I Messagei Key [Terminal~ Box Password 
L Number I I Name! for Reading . For plural message addresses, message addresses are connected, but 
separated by ",". A key password is needed if the message box reading is locked by a password. Each message 
number was assigned by the SSC when the message was stored in the message box. The user is able to know 
the message number by reading the message box directory Parameter Group Other additional service conditions, 
such as delivery time, are designated as parameters 4.3 Service Control Sequence and Delivery Notification' 
 Service control sequence is composed of three phases illustrated in Fig.&#38; In phase one, when the 
SSC received an access command, the SSC checks 109 4.4 Security Consideration Orisinator Recipient 
Call ~? up Access Command Inquiry Address J Response Terminal Class : Acknowledgement User Message I 
Acceptance Message Call Re~lease Call Set up --I Delivery Message f'4 Conversion, if necessary < User 
Message / i Call Release _ Call Set up   ~! L .3 03 ¢~ Notification Call l~elease t_ "t --[--J ~ ,-~ 
: Inter Office Signal Fig. 8 Service Control Sequence Example  syntax for the access command formula, 
terminal class identity, message box name existence, password coincidence and necessity for media conversion, 
etc. If any check is no good, the SSC prompts the requesting person to retry by indicating error occurrence. 
If all checks are good, the SSC replies with an acceptance message, including an acceptance number. After 
the message delivery completion in phase two, the delivery notification is reported. Normally, in the 
SSC, notifications are written in the SMB and remain in it so that the requesting person can read them 
at a convenient time. However, non-delivery notifications are forced to deliver to the terminal in phase 
three, as well as being stored in the SMB directory, in order to help the user's quick response. Notifications 
are classified as follows.  - Receipt Notification(RN) : This shows the message has been delivered to 
the destination terminal. - Delivery Notification (DN) : This shows the message has been delivered to 
the message box. - Non-Delivery Notification (NN) : This shows that the delivery attempt has resulted 
in failure. In order to use a message box as a user agent, the user wants to read and write his message 
box via any terminals, though he does not want it to be read by any other person except him. To answer 
these inconsistent requirements, the SSC proposes the following scheme. Accessible Terminal Restriction 
 The SSC makes it possible for each message box to restrict accessible terminals, readable and writable, 
respectively. Password Application The SSC provides the following three password categories. - Writing 
Password : When a user desires that no message should be stored in his message box by any other person, 
he can lock it by a writing password. - Reading Password : The lock by this password is used to prevent 
any unidentified person from reading messages in the message box. - Supervision Password : The supervision 
password is validated when a user changes the message box profile including password registration and 
change. Furthermore, the message box profile change is restricted to the HT. Quick Response to Messase 
Stolen The maintenance of such passwords is put in the user's hand. If the message is stolen because 
the key password had leaked for some unexpected reason, it is necessary that the user immediately change 
passwords. For this purpose, the SSC records the information for each message stored in a message box 
concerning what terminal read the message last. A user can determine this information in the directory 
for each message box. 5. FIELD TRIAL IN THE INS MODEL SYSTEM After confirming the fundamental ~chnologies 
in the laboratory experimenta~ system , the SSC field trial system, illustrated in Fig.9, is goiqg to 
be implemented. As the first development stage, this system is connected to the DDX circuit switched 
network. It provides message handling services to the data terminals, including teletex terminals and 
digital facsimile terminals accommodated in the DDX network. Considering cost effectiveness, the SSC 
facilities are controlled by the central processor in the switching system, where the SSC service control 
programs, such as message box services, are added. Interface control equipment interfaces various networks 
and communicates to various terminals supporting each terminal protocol. Therefore, this equipment is 
modularized according to the handling protocol. The equipment extracts the object messages from received 
information and sends them to the magnetic disk storage. If necessary, conversion facilities are used. 
One of the most effective conversion facilities in the field trial system is media conversion from teletex 
codes to facsimile image. Conversion  110 6. CONCLUSION Data terminal (teletex) To other circuit switches 
To other existing networks Line Switch concentrator / t Interfacecontrol equipment I l Main H memory 
Central processor ~ I" Conversion facilities ' Maintenance facilities DDXcircuit ~_ Facilities for switching 
system T sole SSC use Fig. 9 SSC Field Trial System Configuration  facilities are also modularized according 
to the conversion categories, such as code conversion and media conversion. When new technologies will 
make new conversion category economically possible, they will be added as conversion modules. This field 
trial system will be shown to the people as one of the new telecommunications service facilities in the 
INS Model System, which is going to be constructed in the Musashino and Mitaka area in Tokyo. The SSC 
will start experimental operation in the middle of 1984. Then, the communicable terminal range will be 
gradually expanded, connecting to the DDX packet switched network, telephone network and telex network, 
and expanding convertible terminal attributes. This paper describes a message handling system SSC, which 
is installed in the public networks. The SSC provides profitable communication processing services using 
store and convenient technologles. The prime objectives of the communication processing services include 
communicable terminal range increase and offering convenient mailbox services, such as multi-address 
delivery and delayed delivery. These purposes were accomplished in the SSC. Over all SSC services are 
summarized in the mailbox services, introducing the Message Boxes as personal storage. In the service 
requesting procedures, necessary conversions are automatically executed. The owner's supervision for 
each message box, such as creating it, erasing it and locking it by passwords, will also facilitate personal 
communications. The SSC matches the Message Handling Systems being studied in CCITT. In the field trial 
scheduled in 1984, the SSC will start to provide these services to the teletex terminals and digital 
facsimile terminals in the DDX circuit switched network. Then, the communicable terminal range will be 
gradually expanded, connecting to the DDX packet switched network, telephone network and telex network, 
and expanding convertible terminal attributes. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  The authors wish to express their gratitude 
for guidance and encouragement received from Dr. M.Kato, Dr. K. Tsukada, Mr. M. Itoh and Mr. R.Mohri. 
They also wish to express their thanks to the SSC experiment group members. REFERENCES  <RefA>(I) Y.Kitahara: 
Information Network System .... Infrastructure for an Advanced Information Society ...... , Japan Telecommunications 
Review, April 1982, pp96-I03  (2) K. Tsukada, Y.Yoshida, K.Yukimatsu and H.Ohnishi: Integrated Services 
Data Switching Network, Proc. of 6th DCS, pp159-165, 1979  (3) S.Matsushita, K.Haruta, T.Kambayashi 
and T.Okada: Message Handling Facilities for Public Use in DDX, Proc. of 5th ICCC, pp127-132, 1980  
(4) T.Morisawa, H.Miyabe and M.Ohyama: Voice Storage Communication Facility for the Information Network 
System, GLOBECOM'82, C3.2, 1982  (5) T.Kamae: Development of a Public Facsimile Communication System 
Using Storage and Conversion Techniques, NTC'80, 19.4, 1980</RefA>   
			
