
 A Model to Assess the Benefit Value of Knowledge Management in an IT Service Provider Environment Surendren 
S. Govender Dalenca Pottas NMMU NMMU PO Box 77000 PO Box 77000 6031 6031 +27 11 549-4116 +27 41 504-9100 
Suren_Govender@dell.com dalenca@nmmu.ac.za  ABSTRACT In recent years, intensive debate has raged over 
the significance of knowledge management within the business context. The adoption of knowledge management 
as a business imperative has relied heavily on its ability to deliver tangible value to businesses in 
the newly established knowledge economy. As with any other value-based initiative, it is necessary to 
measure knowledge management using explicit valuation methods. This requirement is particularly necessary 
within the IT service industry, where considerable opportunity exists for the use of knowledge resources. 
Wide-ranging studies by subject matter experts have been conducted into valuing knowledge management 
over the last two decades. In most cases, the research addressed the practical business challenges in 
relation to valuing knowledge. To realise the full impact of knowledge management requires expanding 
its value domains to encompass business relationships, human competence and organisational structure. 
The purpose of this research is to assess widely recognised methods and propose a consolidated methodology 
to measure the benefit value of knowledge management in an IT service provider environment. The resulting 
integrated knowledge benefit value model allows IT service organisations to select the aspects of measurement 
that are most appropriate and provides a planning and management tool for them to improve on their handling 
of knowledge resources. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.1.1 [Models and Principles]: Systems and 
Information Theory value of information. K.6.0 [Management Of Computing And Information Systems]: General. 
General Terms Management, Measurement. Keywords Knowledge Management, Intellectual Capital, IT Service 
Providers, Knowledge Management Value Metrics. 1. INTRODUCTION  Over the ages, knowledge has held mysticism 
for humankind, and the quest for knowledge has been the basis of many notable events in history. The 
great and powerful have been the most knowledgeable, or have surrounded themselves by those most learned. 
Francis Bacon, the English philosopher and lawyer wrote in 1597, Knowledge is power . This statement 
foretold of the power that the most knowledgeable nations would eventually seize. The ever-inquisitive 
human mind has always motivated humankind to know more. Now that previously protected knowledge is in 
the hands of all who wish to have it, the focus is no longer on the power that one can wield with knowledge, 
but rather, on the opportunities for increased knowledge to provide a competitive edge. Ever since the 
human race began synthesising and capturing knowledge, the rate of technological advancement has increased 
exponentially this trend is true for our current times as well. The need to know actually governs humankind 
s survival since it is instrumental in decision-making. Whether people make the right or wrong decision, 
do they have the benefit of adequate and appropriate knowledge? Answering this question is the driving 
force behind knowledge studies. As the stratification of the knowledge area has increased, so too has 
the number of methodologies applied to study the field of knowledge. From an organisational perspective, 
it is important to establish knowledge requirements and the relevance of knowledge that is utilised for 
business intelligence, operational efficiencies and product development. The realisation of knowledge 
as a business resource is not a new concept. However, its elevation to the status of a strategic business 
resource spawned the knowledge management revolution of the 1990 s. On closer inspection, one realises 
that knowledge management is not very new either; it has existed in some form or the other ever since 
the spoken word. It is essentially through the IT enablement of knowledge management that it has been 
brought to the fore. Therein lies the primary role of IT enablement. The pervasive nature of IT and 
technology in the modern business environment has resulted in knowledge management being perceived as 
an IT concept. It is actually a business concept that is most effectively enabled by IT. This distinction 
is fundamental in appreciating knowledge management s true value as a business resource, as opposed to 
it being simply an extension of the proliferation of services provided by the IT industry. The key focus 
of this paper is to establish a knowledge management value model and relating this to the IT service 
provider industry. In particular, the IT service industry shall be analysed as the platform for evaluation. 
The adage you never know what you had until you lose it holds true for the IT service industry. The industry 
promotes the intellectual development of highly skilled individuals to ensure an adequate advantage over 
competitors. On the other end of the scale, in order to remain competitive, IT service providers are 
hard-pressed to sense and proactively respond to the needs of their customers this may only be achieved 
with some strategic Business Intelligence or knowledge. To give knowledge management significance as 
a true strategic resource, an organisation must be able to evaluate the cost and resultant benefit of 
knowledge management implementation and its sustained development. This begs the question Can knowledge 
management be valued? Herein lies the challenge, since knowledge is fundamentally a tacit commodity - 
it somewhat evades the ability to place a tangible value on it. The core of this paper will address this 
question through the analysis of related models and interpretations thereof. 2. KNOWLEDGE, KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT, INTELLECTUAL CAPITAL AND ITS VALUATION  This section will begin with providing a brief 
overview of the concepts of knowledge, knowledge management and intellectual capital to establish the 
context of the paper, as well as the relatedness of the valuation of knowledge management and intellectual 
capital. The term knowledge is sometimes used interchangeably with the term information . From models 
like the DIKAR model [17] and other views held by some in the knowledge management field, knowledge holds 
an elevated status compared to information. A view could be taken that, establishing the value of knowledge 
is a case of determining the Return-On-Information (ROI). This ROI establishes the value-adding role 
that the transformation of information to knowledge brings. The determination of the value of knowledge 
relies, in part, on the related field of intellectual capital, which focuses on human capital, organisational 
capital and customer capital competencies. Intellectual capital also defines the competency enhancing 
processes for each of these distinct areas. By virtue of intellectual capital being viewed as knowledge 
objects, it can be closely linked to the field of knowledge management. The intellectual capital field, 
therefore, provides a basis for valuation of knowledge management. The key distinction between the two 
areas is that knowledge management gives more insight into the creation of knowledge as a strategic business 
resource. This is achieved by the systematic process of finding, selecting, organising, distilling and 
presenting information in a way that improves comprehension in a specific area of interest. It relates 
to the creation of intangible asset value in an organisation. Intellectual capital relates to the knowledge 
that is of value to an organisation and it is comprised by three categories [12]: Human Capital describes 
the proficiencies and competencies of the human resources of the organisation.  Relational (customer) 
Capital describes how an organisation relates to its customers and suppliers. Key factors that influence 
these relationships are retention measures, quality of service and market perception.  Structural (organisational) 
Capital describes the organisation itself with regard to its processes, core competencies, management, 
policy and culture.  It becomes evident that intellectual capital leans more towards the tangible valuation 
of knowledge in an organisation, while knowledge management relates to the creation of knowledge resources 
(intangible) in an organisation. However, the study of intellectual capital can add appreciably to an 
understanding of knowledge management and its valuation. The next section further establishes the context 
of this paper, by examining the case for the implementation and valuation of knowledge management in 
the IT service industry. 3. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND THE IT SERVICE INDUSTRY  Most of the research 
in the area of valuing knowledge and knowledge management has dealt with generic organisational types. 
The IT service industry falls within a particular profile that is often not given separate attention. 
The factors that define the IT service industry are: high technology competencies, business focused, 
yet casual direct management style, knowledge-worker culture and a noticeable emphasis on knowledge relationships 
within the industry. There is generally a culture of knowledge sharing within the IT service industry 
to inspire innovation and creativity. This industry also holds a strong (and realistic) view that knowledge 
is power. Therefore, the need to value knowledge at the organisational level is key, so that the industry 
does not continuously reinvent the wheel. The manner in which the IT service industry has changed, explicates 
its natural emphasis on knowledge and knowledge management. As with other industries, this industry has 
also experienced an evolution that has had to keep pace with developments in technology. At the beginning 
of the information era, highly trained scientists and engineers built and ran behemoth machines. Although 
the complexity was low relative to the machines that people have at their disposal today, skills were 
scarce and expensive. Today, the situation is somewhat similar in that the skills are still specialised 
and the costs are still medium to high. However, the expectation is that IT services deliver significantly 
more business value. At present most organisations in all business sectors are heavily dependent on their 
information systems. Rockart [18] concluded, Information technology has become inextricably linked with 
business . To this end, technology in general and more specifically, IT, has attained a crucial focus 
in the overall business domain. Therefore, leading IT service providers take a more business-orientated 
approach. No longer satisfied with simply delivering a service to contracted terms and conditions, they 
are now focusing on improving the quality of the services that contribute significantly to their client 
s business success. This is a sound business strategy, since the more successful the client, the more 
successful the service provider becomes. As business depends more and more on IT, the service provider 
is now in a position to influence revenue significantly. Consequently, understanding service as it contributes 
to business success becomes critical and deserving of increased attention. In order to function effectively 
in this changed milieu, the demand for knowledge management in the IT service industry is high. Boshyk 
[3] refers to several studies that demonstrate that 20 to 30 percent of company resources are wasted 
due to reinventing the wheel over and over again. So, purely from an efficiency perspective, there is 
an opportunity for knowledge management in the IT service industry to provide value. However, the key 
motivation to exploit knowledge management in the IT service industry would be to extract value for the 
organisation. The type of value created could be any combination of the instances listed below [2, 16]: 
 Decrease costs this is fundamentally the consequence of not having to reinvent the wheel. Savings are 
derived from reusing information.  Improve quality through more efficient processes, focus can be 
given to the improvement of quality.  Improve staff morale by improving the search and access times 
to information, more time is available for innovation, higher quality work and more accurate decision-making. 
There is further a reduction in staff turnover or an increased attraction of high calibre recruits. 
 Customer satisfaction this is the ability to respond to customer needs quickly as well as to interpret 
their requirements by leveraging the knowledge at hand.  Mitigate risks reduce the risks of operational 
or catastrophic failure through intelligent planning.  New initiatives these can emerge as new revenue 
sources and different opportunities from what the business is traditionally engaged in.  Another example 
is IT process efficiency.  Competitive advantage this means understanding and responding to competitive 
threats more quickly and effectively by taking advantage of the knowledge available.  Productivity 
improvement by sharing of best practice, optimal performance is delivered at all levels of the organisation. 
  Mieritz describes these value drivers as being fundamental to any value-driven initiative in other 
words, an organisation would look for the same sort of value, out of any new significant initiative. 
In particular, knowledge management allows a sense-and-respond approach as opposed to a make-and-sell 
approach, when tackling the new business landscape. A more proactive value-added approach to business 
develops [8]. The fundamental elements of a knowledge-based IT service provider can be accepted as being, 
a clear set of knowledge enabled system resources, knowledge-aware human talent and processes and metrics 
that support the organisation in its delivery model. To this end, Kontzer [11] asserts that: companies 
are focussing less on technology to gather lots of data and more on processes for reusing information 
and on tools to locate and connect people with information and experts. At the heart of the IT service 
industry lies human talent. It is essentially the people and the know-how that they contribute, which 
distinguish the knowledge aspects of the industry, from the mechanistic system related features. Even 
before Drucker s creation of the term knowledge-worker more than 30 years ago [4], organisations have 
come to the realisation that employees at all levels can positively contribute to the organisation s 
success by sharing, nourishing and using knowledge. People in the IT service industry may be considered 
to be the embodiment of value creation. While technology may provide the solutions for capturing, storing, 
filtering, transporting, accessing and displaying information, effective leveraging of the information 
at their disposal is still up to the people within the organisation. It therefore follows that the IT 
service industry is heavily reliant on knowledge-workers for its continued existence. By its very nature, 
the industry is prone to high workforce turnover rates, so at a basic level, knowledge retention becomes 
a key issue. In addition to this, surveys have revealed the need for knowledge-based businesses to increase 
profitability through the better use of inherent knowledge within organisations [6, 9]. Section 1 emphasised 
the need for effective metrics to determine whether knowledge management initiatives are indeed returning 
the anticipated value. This is a pragmatic viewpoint, since it would undeniably be difficult to ascertain 
the degree of value creation without some mechanism against which to measure it. This motivates the purpose 
of the following section to analyse a range of models that address aspects of knowledge management measurement. 
True and related benefit valuation models are identified and analysed with a view to their contribution 
to the development of an integrated knowledge benefit value model. 4. MODEL ANALYSIS  After a systematic 
review of literature, the following key models that address the measurement of knowledge assets were 
chosen for relevance and application: Skandia s Navigator [20];  Sveiby s Intangible Assets monitor 
[21];  Intellectual Capital Index [19]; and  Balanced Scorecard [10].  The subsequent sections 
briefly describe each model, with particular reference to the models specific value measurement-related 
aspects. 4.1 Skandia s Navigator  The Skandia Navigator is widely regarded as one of the best-developed 
measures for knowledge management. It distinguishes itself from other models by attempting to capture 
the flows and transformations of intellectual capital, rather than measuring intellectual capital in 
its static form. The Skandia Navigator is a collection of intangible measurement methods, which allow 
a comprehensive view of performance from five perspectives. The perspectives are human focus, process 
focus, renewal and development focus, customer focus and financial focus. This is portrayed graphically 
in Figure 1. The model divides a firm s assets into Financial Capital and Intellectual Capital. The financial 
focus captures the financial outcome of activities and is largely a focus on the traditional financial 
measures employed in organisations. It enables the establishment of the long-term goals and a large part 
of the overall conditions for the other perspectives. This could include profitability and growth as 
expected by shareholders. The rest of the model concentrates on the intellectual capital aspect, which 
is further divided into Human Capital and Structural Capital. Human Capital encompasses the organisation 
s people and their skills. It specifically measures people s competence, their attitudes and their intellectual 
agility. Structural Capital relates to all the intangible elements created by the organisation s people. 
This makes up the customer focus, process focus and renewal and development focus. These may be patents, 
proprietary processes, procedures, databases and organisational relationships. 4.2 Sveiby s Intangible 
Assets monitor  In the Intangible Assets monitor as developed by Sveiby, management selects indicators, 
based on the strategic objectives of the firm, to measure four aspects of creating value from three classes 
of intangible assets labeled: competence of people, internal structure, and external structure. The value 
creation nodes are indicators of growth, indicators of renewal, indicators of utilisation/efficiency 
and indicators of risk reduction/stability. The determination of the appropriate measurement indicators 
is achieved by using up to 50 questions that form part of the model. ndicators, based on the strategic 
objectives of the firm, to measure four aspects of creating value from three classes of intangible assets 
labeled: competence of people, internal structure, and external structure. The value creation nodes are 
indicators of growth, indicators of renewal, indicators of utilisation/efficiency and indicators of risk 
reduction/stability. The determination of the appropriate measurement indicators is achieved by using 
up to 50 questions that form part of the model.     The intangible assets of an organisation make 
up part of its market value. When added to the shareholder s equity (tangible net book value), one has 
the total market value of the organisation. These are the basic elements of the Intangible Assets Monitor 
[21]. The intangible assets of an organisation make up part of its market value. When added to the shareholder 
s equity (tangible net book value), one has the total market value of the organisation. These are the 
basic elements of the Intangible Assets Monitor [21]. 4.3 Intellectual Capital Index 4.3 Intellectual 
Capital Index  The Intellectual Capital Index model is described by the Intellectual Capital dimension 
tree (Figure 3). It divides intellectual capital into human capital and structural capital. There is 
an additional division of human capital into competence, attitude, and intellectual property. Structural 
capital comprises relationship capital, organisational capital, and the renewal and development value. 
The model s similarity with the measures employed by the Skandia Navigator is not coincidental these 
were used as the foundation of the Intellectual Capital Index. The Intellectual Capital Index model is 
described by the Intellectual Capital dimension tree (Figure 3). It divides intellectual capital into 
human capital and structural capital. There is an additional division of human capital into competence, 
attitude, and intellectual property. Structural capital comprises relationship capital, organisational 
capital, and the renewal and development value. The model s similarity with the measures employed by 
the Skandia Navigator is not coincidental these were used as the foundation of the Intellectual Capital 
Index.       The Intellectual Capital Index model provides a dynamic view of how these intellectual 
stocks can change over time. The model works by simplifying the categories into indices, which then allow 
the model to compare the inter-company relationship between intellectual capital and financial capital, 
thereby providing an ability to predict returns as investment strategies shift. The Intellectual Capital 
Index model provides a dynamic view of how these intellectual stocks can change over time. The model 
works by simplifying the categories into indices, which then allow the model to compare the inter-company 
relationship between intellectual capital and financial capital, thereby providing an ability to predict 
returns as investment strategies shift. 4.4 The Balanced Scorecard 4.4 The Balanced Scorecard  The 
Balanced Scorecard was first described by Kaplan and Norton in an influential Harvard Business Review 
article in 1992. Unlike the three models discussed prior to this, the Balanced Scorecard was not developed 
specifically for purposes of knowledge management. Prior to their model, business measurement methods 
relied almost completely on financial measures. The deficiency with this approach is that it presents 
a historical view (using previous financial performance as a measure), and the overall valuation of the 
business does not have regard for the other aspects of the business. The Balanced Scorecard attempts 
to address the imbalance that previously existed in setting the strategic direction and evaluation of 
organisations. The model is akin to a matrix that shows the relationship between the required measures. 
In addition to financial measures, the Balanced Scorecard deals with the perspectives of customers, internal 
business process and innovation and learning (subsequently referred to as learning and growth). The essentials 
of these perspectives are [10]: The Balanced Scorecard was first described by Kaplan and Norton in an 
influential Harvard Business Review article in 1992. Unlike the three models discussed prior to this, 
the Balanced Scorecard was not developed specifically for purposes of knowledge management. Prior to 
their model, business measurement methods relied almost completely on financial measures. The deficiency 
with this approach is that it presents a historical view (using previous financial performance as a measure), 
and the overall valuation of the business does not have regard for the other aspects of the business. 
The Balanced Scorecard attempts to address the imbalance that previously existed in setting the strategic 
direction and evaluation of organisations. The model is akin to a matrix that shows the relationship 
between the required measures. In addition to financial measures, the Balanced Scorecard deals with the 
perspectives of customers, internal business process and innovation and learning (subsequently referred 
to as learning and growth). The essentials of these perspectives are [10]: customer dealing with the 
customer s needs, whether customers are satisfied and the value that customers attach to an organisation; 
 customer dealing with the customer s needs, whether customers are satisfied and the value that customers 
attach to an organisation;  internal process these critical processes are responsible for day-to-day 
functioning of the business; this perspective also portrays the processes at which the organisation must 
excel to achieve superior value; internal process these critical processes are responsible for day-to-day 
functioning of the business; this perspective also portrays the processes at which the organisation must 
excel to achieve superior value;  learning and growth this orientates the organisation to attaining 
future success; it should also guide the organisation in continuously adding value; and  financial 
 the overall results of running the business well; it should also be an indicator of how the organisation 
creates value for shareholders.  Figure 1. The Skandia Navigator [5]. Relationships Figure 2. The 
Intangible Assets Monitor [21]. Customers, Suppliers, Allies, Shareholders Figure 3. The Intellectual 
Capital Dimension Tree [19]. Total Value Figure 4. The Balanced Scorecard [10]. Intangible Assets 
External Organisation Structure (ES) Databases, Process Manuals, Culture, Management Styles Internal 
Renewal &#38; Development Structure (IS) Investments in training employees, Reengineering and restructuring, 
R&#38;D Competence of People CoP) Competence  Kaplan and Norton [10] have said: The Balanced Scorecard 
helps organisations move from being financially driven to mission driven. The Balanced Scorecard also 
allows the entire organisation to focus on the key aspects of the business, thereby creating opportunities 
for integration of business performance improvement. Figure 4 portrays the afore-mentioned four perspectives, 
together with some of the measures that may be used.      For each of the perspectives, scoring 
takes place in four dimensions: objectives: major objectives to be achieved;  measures: the observable 
metrics used toward reaching the objectives;  targets: the specific values for the measures; and  
 initiatives: projects or programmes initiated in order to meet the objective.  These scoring areas 
permit effective application of the methodology and make the overall implementation tangible to the organisation. 
Considerable independence in the selection of the objectives, measures, targets and initiatives is allowed. 
However, this feature of the model is restrictive towards its ability to conduct inter-organisational 
comparisons. 4.5 Model Assessment: Common Themes  The models studied in this section facilitated the 
choice of the factors that ultimately influenced the development of the integrated knowledge benefit 
value model. The models that were chosen are acknowledged to be the foremost tools for knowledge management 
and intellectual capital measurement. The study of these models made possible the extraction of the most 
appropriate elements from each model. These contributed to the integrated model that is discussed in 
Section 5. From the preceding discussion of the models, the key groupings that feature can be noted as: 
 Human Capital, as it relates to development, intellectual property, competency and productivity;  
Relational Capital, as it relates to customers, suppliers, partners and shareholders; and  Structural 
Capital, as it relates to resources, renewal and growth, and corporate intellectual property.  It is 
certainly no coincidence that these groupings are linked with the intellectual capital descriptions as 
referenced in Section 2. This further illustrates the strong correlation between knowledge management 
and intellectual capital. In order to espouse a standard method of referencing, the grouping titles of 
Human, Relational and Structural Capital were adopted. Table 1 shows the relationship between the elements 
of the groupings and the model from which they originated, to illustrate clearly how these groupings 
were arrived at. Marr et al. [14] suggested that there has been a general convergence towards a three-pronged 
overall framework consisting of human capital, organisation (or structural) capital, and relational capital 
[15]. This convergence applies in particular to the concept of strategic resources, which is also the 
perspective of the balanced scorecard [14]. Human capital relates to the skill-sets, aptitudes and attitudes 
of the organisation s relationships with all its key stakeholders (it started as customer capital, but 
quickly expanded to encompass a broader set of stakeholders). However, structural/organisational capital 
is the most complex its original idea was to segregate the knowledge that went home every night (human 
capital) from the knowledge that was retained and owned by the organisation [5]; but, while it makes 
a point, this notion is oversimplified and not particularly helpful towards classification of diverse 
elements. More recently, several commentators have suggested alternative ways in which to dissect it 
into subcomponents, such as culture, innovation and process, while others choose to add further dimensions, 
such as intellectual property, and the organisation s routine and practices [13]. In order not to deviate 
too far from the material chosen for the analysis, it was decided to adopt the assertion by Marr et al. 
[14] selectively in conjunction with the four models discussed. Taking into account the discussion so 
far, the most acceptable application would be that knowledge measurement should be based on the common 
components as follows: Human capital comprises:  o formalised knowledge and experience embodied in 
people in the form of patents, copyrights, brands;  o tacit knowledge and experience embodied in people 
in the form of competencies of individuals; and  o specialised knowledge in the form of expert staff. 
  Relational capital relates to:  o business relationships, such as those with customers, suppliers 
and strategic partners or stakeholders;  o reputation, image and customer loyalty; and  o depth (penetration), 
width (coverage) and profitability of the organisation s relationships.   Structural capital relates 
to:  o process as employed through organisational systems, such as internal processes, procedures, administrative 
systems and quality;  o organisational intellectual property incorporated into organisational values, 
culture and support staff; and    Table 1. Consolidated Knowledge Management Value Metrics [5, 10, 
19, 21]. Value element Measure Indicator Model  Skandia Sveiby IC Index BSC Human Capital Competence 
Skills X X X X  Training investment X X  Expertise X X X X Experience X X X X Education X X X X 
 Intellectual Property Patents X X X  Trademarks X X  Copyrights X X  Industrial designs X X  
Expert Staff Expert ratio X  Staff satisfaction X  Expert staff tenure X  Expert staff turnover 
 X  Staff Attributes Attitudes X X  Innovation X X  Intellectual Agility X   Relational Capital 
Customers Growth X X X  Profitability X X  Customer Satisfaction X X X Retention X X X Suppliers 
Relationship  X  Partners Relationship X X  Shareholders Relationship  X  Structural Capital Support 
Staff Support staff turnover X   Revenue per head X  Support staff ratio X  Staff tenure X 
  Staff satisfaction X  Resources Process  X  Databases  X  Renewal &#38; Growth R&#38;D X X 
X X Productivity X X X Quality X  X Corporate Intellectual Property Values X X  Culture  X  
  o innovation and technology resources, R&#38;D expenditure, staff involved in innovation and product 
development.  In order to remain focused on the direction which the research has taken, it is resolved 
to refine the data presented in Table 1 with the foregoing summary. This will ensure consistent handling 
of the core components of knowledge value as well as providing a robust basis for the measures that will 
be used. The common threads of human, relational and structural capital between the four models studied, 
are evidently key to providing an effective foundation on which to put forward the integrated model. 
5. INTEGRATED KNOWLEDGE BENEFIT VALUE MODEL  The discussion up to this point has combined the various 
principles of the experts in the field. It has also allowed the crystallisation and adoption of the core 
elements, human, relational and structural capital. This section will present the integrated model with 
the incorporated deductions discussed thus far. It is currently organised in tabular form (as seen in 
Table 2). This allows for quick navigation and orientation. The hierarchy of the model starts with the 
three core elements, which are called the value elements . They comprise human capital, relational capital 
and structural capital. The next level of hierarchy is the measures . Some consolidation of measures 
from the four models studied has been achieved, by focusing on the most relevant ones. The indicators 
level presents a descriptive and practical sub-element of the measures. The types of indicators have 
been chosen to be as generic as possible in order to ensure inclusivity and breadth of application. There 
is a technology bias as the model is primarily intentioned for the IT service industry. An important 
addition to the model is the metrics column. This allows quantifiable metrics to be applied instantly 
to the value elements. This distinguishes the knowledge benefit value model in that it allows relatively 
simple comparative assessment for various scenarios, or comparison between organisations. An effort has 
been made to maintain symmetry in the model in order to make comparative studies uncomplicated. The intention 
is that value is assessed by completing all the indicators for a specific organisation. The resultant 
index can then be utilised to conduct comparative studies between the chosen organisation and other similar 
organisations. The index can also be used to investigate the effect of different combinations of indicators. 
Some enhancements to the model are discussed in the next section. Table 2. Integrated Knowledge Benefit 
Value Model. Value element Measure Indicator Metric Human Capital Competence Skill level Skills matrix 
 Training spend Training $ per employee Education level Highest education level Innovation # innovations 
per employee Intellectual Property Patents $ value Trademarks $ value Copyrights $ value Industrial 
designs $ value Expert staff Expert ratio Expert staff : total staff Staff satisfaction % satisfaction 
 Expert staff tenure # months at organisation Expert staff turnover % staff exits Relational Capital 
Relationship Customers market share  Suppliers length of relationship Partners length of relationship 
 Profitability Customer profitability $ value Supplier costs $ value Partner costs/profitability $ 
value Loyalty Customer retention % customer satisfaction Supplier pricing &#38; innovation supplier 
value added Partner strategic contribution partner value added Structural Capital Process and structure 
Process cycle time  Quality processes without error Technology infrastructure network elements / employee 
 Innovation Technology dependency % technology adoption R&#38;D % business from new products Productivity 
operating expenses / total revenue Corporate Intellectual Property Values &#38; culture % satisfaction 
 Strategy time spent explaining strategy Support staff attributes:  Revenue per head $ per employee 
 Turnover % staff exits Tenure # months at organisation Staff satisfaction % satisfaction   The 
challenge in constructing a model of this nature is to ensure that it delivers a tangible valuation result. 
This result needs to be repeatable, comparable and real world in nature. There is also an expectation 
that the result can be used within an organisation to establish the actual financial value of all of 
the intangible elements that make up the knowledge organisation. Therefore, the ideal unit of measure 
is in financial terms. From the chosen metrics in the model in Table 2, it is evident that this is not 
possible in all instances. It is important for the resultant value to be expressed in financial terms. 
A mechanism to convert and balance the metrics is provided in the next section. 6. INTERPRETIVE ENHANCEMENT 
OF THE INTEGRATED MODEL  The objective of this section is to introduce an enhancement to the model 
that allows a feasible and tangible result once data is entered into the model. As stated previously, 
the enhancement will provide a conversion and balancing tool for the model. A practical method to deal 
with the tool is to break it down at the level of the measures. This will ensure that at the very least, 
the handling of the measures is limited to their associated metrics. This supports any imbalance created 
by the conversion and balancing of unlike metrics, and creates nine similar measures. The same conversion 
and balancing principles would then be applied at the value element level, resulting in three similar 
value elements. The final conversion and balancing consolidation results in a single value in a financial 
format. Figure 5 illustrates the approach.          The rules that will be applied towards 
the conversion and balancing (the results of which are shown in Table 3), are set out in the following 
steps. 1. Multiplying percentage metrics that have increasing properties (positive effect).  2. Dividing 
by percentage metrics that have decreasing properties (negative effect). For example, the percentage 
level of staff satisfaction for expert staff has an overall increasing effect for larger percentages, 
while staff turnover of expert staff has an overall decreasing effect for larger percentages.  3. Dollar 
values are always added.  4. Numbers are multiplied by dollars and percentages, with the same percentage 
rule being applied as in steps 1 and 2.  Table 3. Result of Applying Conversion Rules. Value element 
Calculation Human Capital ($ (competence) + $ (Intellectual property)) x # (expert staff) = $ Relational 
Capital $ (relationship) x % (profitability) x % (loyalty) = $ Structural Capital ((% (innovation) x 
$ (corporate intellectual property)) x % (process and structure) = $   The dollar values that result 
from Table 3 are rather disparate in terms of their factors compared to each other, so appropriate scaling 
by dividing the relevant value by a factor of the total employee headcount, will ensure that they are 
within the same order of magnitude. This balancing is expressed in the revised calculations shown in 
Table 4. Table 4. Balancing Measures. Value element Calculation Human Capital (($ (competence) + $ (Intellectual 
property)) x # (expert staff)) / # (headcount) = $ Relational Capital $ (relationship) x % (profitability) 
x % (loyalty) x # (headcount) / 20 = $ Structural Capital % (process and structure) x % (innovation) 
x $ (corporate intellectual property) / # (headcount) x 1000) = $   Application of the balancing measures 
results in a total dollar value for knowledge management as expressed in the calculation that follows: 
$ (Knowledge Management) = $ (Human Capital) + $ (Relational Capital) + $ (Structural Capital) The model 
has been applied to a few sets of practical values to test its robustness, and has been found to stand 
up to typical values for the various metrics. The augmentation to the model presented in this section 
ensures that the model can be functional in a real world setting. To this end, the final outcome of the 
metric calculations conveys the result in financial terms that permit comparative studies and the opportunity 
to quantify the knowledge value of a firm relative to that of others. Caution needs to be exercised in 
assuming that the actual dollar value that results from the calculation can be directly used in the market 
valuation of an organisation. This is not the intention. The primary objective is to provide a mechanism 
to evaluate the extent of an organisation s knowledge value relative to that of its peers. Figure 5. 
Conversion and Balancing  7. Applications of the Integrated Model  This section recommends likely 
applications for the model with relevance to the IT service industry. The focus is on applications that 
can resolve organisational advancement challenges as well as more particular business competitiveness 
issues. The areas in which an organisation could extract value from the exploitation and enhancement 
of organisational knowledge are: profitability, quality, morale, customer satisfaction, risk mitigation, 
innovation, efficiency, competitiveness and productivity. This also supports the guidelines that were 
set out in Section 3 [2, 16]. An organisation only has to choose the areas in which it requires improvement 
and then apply these to the model to understand the concrete actions that it needs to take for the realisation 
of knowledge-based value. Andriessen [1] has conducted an extensive study into the purposes for which 
knowledge valuation can be used to enhance an organisation. He creates three groupings that address the 
overall problem definitions within an organisation: improving internal management, improving external 
reporting and statutory and transactional motives. Although not exhaustive in the context of this research, 
there is an acceptable match. From his references to all four of the models discussed in Section 4, there 
is sufficient affirmation that the integrated knowledge benefit value model proposed will succeed in 
addressing the problem statements put forward by Andriessen. Adriessen does, however, qualify the applicability 
of his hypothesis: There can be many ways to optimise a company s performance. Valuation or measurement 
may or may not be the right solution. To check whether a valuation or measurement method is the right 
tool for the job the method should include a diagnosis phase. As a result there is a clear danger that 
the methods could turn out to be solutions in search of a cause [1]. The table below (Table 5) provides 
an example of application of the integrated model for structural capital measures only. It utilises the 
observable characteristics of the metrics contained within the model and what they actually mean to an 
organisation that is attempting to focus its development energy on a particular area. Further application 
could take the form of a comparative study within the organisation over time (trending), or by comparing 
the scoring with that of a similar organisation. This allows for the creation of a benchmark, against 
which future knowledge iterations can be evaluated.  Table 5. Application for Structural Capital measures. 
Value element Measure Indicator Application approach Structural Capital Process and structure Process 
An organisation's reputation in the market comes from its approach to structuring, quality and maturity. 
While these traits come at a huge price, they are strongly recommended for competitiveness in the market. 
Improve internal management / Improve external reporting  Quality Technology infrastructure Innovation 
Technology dependency The rapid rate of change in the market dictates that organisations invest prudently 
in the areas on which their business relies. This may even be as simple as ensuring that they offer build-to-order 
solutions that eliminate waste and directly address customer requirements. Improve internal management 
/ Improve external reporting R&#38;D Productivity Corporate Intellectual Property Values &#38; culture 
The importance of an organisation's positioning to its staff cannot be over-emphasised. This is largely 
influenced by attitudes of the management structures as well as the constructive sharing of strategic 
and directional information. Although not as critical as expert staff at the individual level, support 
staff as a grouping are critical to the organisation's makeup due to their contribution to the organisation's 
survival. Improve internal management / Improve external reporting / Statutory and transactional motives 
   As a final commentary on the subject of relevant application of the integrated model, it should 
be understood that the model cannot be used as a stand-alone tool without due regard for its limitations. 
These are summarised in Section 8 as suggestions for further research. Secondly, the management of an 
organisation must acknowledge the benefits that knowledge value will yield. Thereafter, the organisational 
strategy should mirror the intent to align business directional with management s stance on knowledge 
value. It is only through this recognition, that complete organisational acceptance will follow. 8. Conclusion 
  No claims have been made that this research is all-encompassing and conclusive in its findings. Therefore, 
the opportunity for additional research does exist. Through the extensive study conducted, the focus 
remained on two key goals; establishing a knowledge value model, and relating this to the IT service 
provider industry. Notably the implementation stage of the integrated solution was applied with limited 
regard for the state of the organisation s knowledge resources. This is an acceptable exclusion, as it 
falls outside the scope of this work. However, in order to draw more accurate conclusions, or even to 
develop a more robust model, consideration must be given to a method of performing calibration and diagnosis 
of the state of an organisation s knowledge infrastructure. This is certainly an opportunity for further 
research, building on the work completed here. An additional opportunity for subsequent research is to 
refine the formulae used by the calculations with an advanced mathematical approach. This would result 
in greater computational robustness and would afford wider acceptance of the model. In its current state, 
the key limitation is that the model is most effective in comparative studies and will not yield appropriate 
results for inclusion in an organisation s financial statements. Bill Gates [7], widely considered to 
be one of the architects of the current knowledge economy, offers an appropriate testimony to the impact 
that knowledge has had on the business world: It's hard to say exactly when it happened, but at some 
point in the last 20 years the word knowledge became an adjective. As intellectual property became increasingly 
important to businesses, and personal computers started appearing on every desktop, employees morphed 
into knowledge workers, companies began to focus on knowledge management and key information was stored 
in knowledge bases connected in theory via knowledge networks. The result was the knowledge economy, 
a phenomenon that has transformed the business of business and helped entire emerging economies to compete 
globally [7]. This statement places the magnitude and future influence of the knowledge taxonomy into 
perspective, and confidently contends that it cannot be ignored as a major stimulus in the future of 
the business landscape. It is anticipated that the knowledge economy will attain higher prominence in 
the business framework of the future. Therefore, the case for knowledge management is exceptionally convincing. 
However, due regard must be given to the need to be able to deliver the anticipated results. It is hoped 
that the model presented in this paper will contribute to the understanding and constructive exploitation 
of knowledge resources in the future. 9. References  <RefA>[1] Andriessen D., 2004. IC valuation and measurement: 
classifying the state of the art. Journal of Intellectual Capital, 5(2) 230-242.  [2] Bawden D. and 
Yates-Mercer P., 2002. Managing the paradox: the valuation of knowledge and knowledge management. Journal 
of Information Science, 28 (1) 19-29.  [3] Boshyk Y., 2000. Beyond knowledge management: how companies 
mobilise experience. In: Marchand D.A. and Davenport T.H. and Dickson T., eds. Mastering Information 
Management. England: Prentice Hall, 2000, 51-58.  [4] Brigham A., 2000. Drucker on managing today s 
employee, the knowledge-worker. The New Corporate University Review, 4-7.  [5] Edvinsson L. and Malone 
M.S., 1997. Intellectual Capital: Realizing Your Company's True Value by Finding Its Hidden Brainpower. 
New York: HarperBusiness.  [6] Evans B., 1997. Knowledge management fuel for innovation. Available 
from http://www.informationweek.com. Accessed on 2 November 2004.  [7] Gates W. H., 2005. The New Road 
Ahead. Newsweek. 28 November 2005.  [8] Henderson J.C. and Venkatraman N., 2000. Business platforms 
for the 21st century. In: Marchand D.A. and Davenport T.H. and Dickson T., eds. Mastering Information 
Management. England: Prentice Hall, 2000, 283-289.  [9] Hibbard, J. 1997. Knowledge management: Knowing 
what we know. Available from http://www.informationweek.com. Accessed on 2 November 2004.  [10] Kaplan 
R.S. and Norton D.P., 1992. Balanced Scorecard Measures that drive performance. Harvard Business Review, 
Jan-Feb, 71-80.  [11] Kontzer T., 2003. The need to know. Informationweek.com. August 2003, 34-44. 
 [12] Lynn B.E., 2000. Intellectual Capital: Unearthing hidden value by managing intellectual assets. 
Ivey Business Journal, Jan/Feb2000, 64 (3), 48-52.  [13] Marr B. and Schiuma G., 2002. Measuring and 
managing intellectual capital and knowledge assets in new economy organisations. In:, Bourne M. (ed.), 
Handbook of Performance Measurement. London: Gee.  [14] Marr B. and Spender J.C., 2004. Measuring knowledge 
assets implications of the knowledge economy for performance measurement. Measuring Business Excellence. 
8(1) 18-27.  [15] MERITUM Guidelines, 2002. Guidelines for Managing and Reporting on Intangibles. Madrid: 
MERITUM.  [16] Mieritz L., 2004. Communicating the Business Value of IT - A Challenge Whose Time Has 
Come In: Proceedings of Gartner Symposium/ITxpo Africa 2004, Cape Town 2-4 August 2004.  [17] Peppard 
J. and Ward J., 2002. Strategic planning for Information Systems. 3rd ed. England: John Wiley and Sons. 
 [18] Rockart J., 1988. The line takes leadership IS management in a wired society. Sloan Management 
Review, Summer 1988, 57-64.  [19] Roos G., Roos J., 1997. Measuring Your Company s Intellectual Performance. 
Journal of Long Range Planning. 30(3).  [20] Skandia, 1994. Visualising Intellectual Capital in Skandia. 
Supplement to Annual Report 1994.  [21] Sveiby K.E, 1997. The Intangible Assets Monitor. Journal of 
Human Resources Costing and Accounting, 2(1) Spring, 25-36.</RefA>  
			
