
 A Multimedia Sewer for Remote Training: SllM. P.Camps , M, JacotY P, Bazex , and C. buysse~ 0Univ.P.Schatier, 
31062TOULOUSECedex, FRANCE. Email: cc]mps@cix.cict.fr +Univet9tt3P,Sabatiir, 3 1062TOULOUSECedex, FRANCE. 
 Abstract Inthispaper, we present the evolution of Distano2 Educationinaaxdance withtechnol~,espcxially 
with the advent of multimedia. We believe that multimedia msoumes can have high pedagogical content As 
part of a Distance Education project, we decided to formalize aTeletrainingInteractive Mul­timedia System 
called S.T.I.M. We try to use muhi­media to palliate the main difficulties of Remote Training distance 
and teacher s absence.We give a description of our system which is testd in our University itisbasedondistanceself-trainin&#38; 
video use and teacher contact. Finally, we speak about perspectives integrating Artificial Intelligence 
tech­nology and digital treatment of pedagogical cort­tents. Introduction Multimedia computing can be 
defined as the use of individual or networked personal computers or workstations tocreate,develop, view 
oruseapplica- Permission to copy without fee all or part of this makaial is granted provided that thecopiesarenot 
madeordistributed for directcommeraal advantage, theACMcopyright noticeandthe title of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice fs given that mpyingis bypermisaion of theAeaociation fcx Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. @1993 ACM 0-89791 -630-l/93/CNl10/0057 
$1~1 tions employing a combimtion of different data formats. A document containing at least two monomedia 
is multimedia. While most distance education stiU remains primar­ily print based, mom and more institutions 
am m@titieuofel@ofict-olo@m [BAT,901. Nowadays, multimedia isinvestingdistancwxhxa­tion. But, in spite 
of the increase of computer means and mmmunication systems,it still remains difficult to make a choice 
and to find a compromise between efficiency and costs. D~tance Educutii and Mufiimedii Foralongtime,distanceeducation 
hasusedpaperas acoursemedium and postal servicesasacommuni­cation system these two constitute a correspond­ence 
course. The student receives his course and periodically submits knowledge tests to a teacher who returns 
them corrected. This system is used for example for nwisions during the summer holidays. A step forward 
was made with the use of radio and television(video confemnce).l%esesysterns allowed the transmission 
of large amounts of information to a great number of students. But this technology is expensive and the 
level of interactivity between student and teacher is low. In recent years, the advent of new technologies 
has transformed distance education systems. With the use of all present telecommunication resources (fa- 
P.Camps, M. Jacob, P.BcQex,and C. Bouysset cilitated by the growth of digital networks like NUMERIS in 
France), it is now possible to establish and maintain an interactive tiationship between the student 
and his teacher in spite of distance. This relationship is a vital component in tminin&#38; and in the 
transmission of knowledge. Monmver, there is a slow but steady growth of multimedia use in education, 
suchasthepmduction and utilization of data suppts usingeithercompu­ter technology (coumeware for example), 
audio­visual resources (video cassette),ora combimtionof both (videodisk driven by computer, etc...). 
This approach which offers a wide range of sup­ports, bringsanewdimensionto thefieldofpersonal trainin&#38; 
an always delicate learnin g phase. The student is the focus of the learning process and he manages his 
own training [LAG,93]. this ap­proach is called Open-Learning , The sketchbelow explains the present 
evolution and our field of research with regard to distance educa­tion. In distance education, the teacher 
s position is struc­tured around the following triangle: Our msmmh scope concerns levels II and III. 
At the second level, local resources consist of ana­logical data (pictures + sounds). The material interactivity 
is made by distance driving of these msmrces whileinformation transmission takesplace through public 
networks like the telephone system. Atthethirdlevel,teacherand studentinteractthrough sophisticated electronic 
mail. The communication system is a computer coupled with do@czd or digital pedagogical resources in 
a broadly defined network environment (public, private or local n@­work interconnection). This permits 
interactivity between all users with text, sound or picture ob~ (all digital), whether or not in real 
time.  S.T.LM.~SCli@kXl As part of a distance education project, we dwidd to define a Teletraining Interactive 
Multimedia SyS tern called S.T.I.M. It is a teleassistance system for learners in distance personal learning 
situation. Our system consists in a pedagogical server and several workstations connected to it. Students 
and teachers Studerit-Teacher Private murse AIv Computer + Digital Database Public and private networks 
 Minitel [text) t iocai resources Student Usual Distance Education Teacher A Multimedia Se&#38;er for 
Remote Training STIM. can connect to the servm. students in pemonal train­ing, teachers providing a pedagogical 
support through the network [BAZ,93].The system amhite ture is as follows o DQTV Monitor TV MOilitOY 
Teacher 5 Student s workstation -- Works tat ion .- Cowultation PictureComultation StationStation ;~ 
Network L................................ ? The next board sums up the different possible com-In order 
to build this system, our principal preoccu­binations pations were -cost control: Consultation stations 
aremicmcomputers, or minitels. We have deliberately kept two Network scnxms, pending normalization of 
pictwv Videodisc Ethernet with Pc Player or digitization. We only usenetworksforcou= down loading and 
for distance pedagogical support. Videodisc NOVELL Compatible ~e~order Player or -an open system to palliate 
teacher absence, Ethernet with Pc where students can always get help when LAN MANAGER Compatible ~c~order 
theyamindifficulty, therefoni?implyingrnin.i­ mum changes to teachers and students ex-Vidcotex videodisc 
Minitel perience. Playernetwork P.Camps, M.Jacob, P.Buzex,and C.Baysset Functbnalities Intheserverphase,S.TIM. 
enablesastudent toget distance self-instructionby taking video courses. As a matter of fact, researches 
on memorization or on information retention show different results accord­ing to the activity and student 
behaviouc for one message, the message percentage remembmd b the student is only listening 20% only observance 
30% listening + Obserwmm 50% listening + observance+ interaction 70% Theseempincal observationscanbes 
ummarizedby the Chinese proverb [GUE,93]: I listen and I forget. I watch and I remember. I do and I 
understand. If we agree with these observations, we are obliged to admit that multimedia trainingisan 
ideal training system. In this training pattern, we not only try to associate text, sound, picture and 
video, but also to givemaximalinteractivitybetween learnerandcom­puter. The learner is able to converse 
with the com­puter, to train in different situations, accordingtohis wishes and needs The system offers 
two levels of interactivity -material intenxtivity which allows the stu­dent to pilothispicturedatabase. 
He@nview several times vidm sequemes he did not undemtand, make pauses and pass video sequences the contents 
of which he already knows. -tutorial interactivity which allows the stu­dent tocontacta teacher through 
thecommu­nicationnetwork. In this manner, they will be able to converse through a mailbox . Ex­changes 
may concern student problems, or comments (nxnarks) on the course. At the beginning of a muse session, 
the student connects to the server from his consultation station and identifies himself, entering his 
name and his password. He then has to choose a course (in the list he is registered and in accordance 
with his pictwv database), and a chapter. Achapterisavideo sequence(withafirstpictureand a last picture). 
After selection of the chapter, the server, via the consultation station, puts the picture database on 
the first picture. From this moment on, the student can haveremotecontrd functionsonthe picture database 
(play; still, fast forward, fast re wind, ...k this is material interactivity. Below is a sketch of a 
course and its chapterx Picture Database o  o / Chap 1 Chap 3 Chap2 J 1 1000 5000 20000 30000 II 
7000 18000 al s/GDoc 93 A MulWnedii Server for Remote Training STIM. . Video represents about 90 % of 
the pedagogical contents (this percentage is lower during system exploitation by several students: seefurther). 
If the student does not understand video contents, he can ask for two different helps -a static help 
one or several items of text information am associated to the chapter. In our example, if he asks at 
picture 1600, text information will appear on his consultation station (at picture X(X3 nothing happens). 
This information come5 from the knowledge bankof theserver.Thisbankand thedifferent chapter references 
are built byateacherbe­fore server utilization (during coursedesign). Below is the sketch of a chaptw 
CHAPTER 1 - ----- Start limit Help 1 M F1 Knowledge Database . a dynamic help he can contact a teacher 
connected to the Server (on the same coursd. If a teacher is effectively connected, the stu­dent may 
have the answer irnmediately;oth­erwise, his call is recorded in the Server. The dialoguebetween studentand 
teacherismade byQuestion/AnswerusingamuMmediaelec­tronic mailbox. All student context is sent to the 
teachcm when he asks for the question content, his picture database is driven on the picture where the 
student wrote hisquestion,. If the teacher judges that the student s (remark) question isinterestin&#38;he 
hasthepossibility to make it visible to all others students in a zone called forum . Using theSystemprogressively, 
theforum will fill up and students will be able to consult it beforecontactingtheteacher.Accordingto 
[DER,91], distancetraining systernshavetooffer communica­tion facilities the student will be able to 
contact ii tutor, a teacher (courses supported by a computed, but also other students . Our system doesn 
t allow students contact other than by the forum a direct contact should reduce tutor function. Answering 
students questions and managing the forum W IE?dUCe to @ % the video percentage in pedagogical contents 
and increase to 40 % the help percentage. Momovm, ifthesameremarksare made by several students on a same 
course section, the teacher can modify the associated static help or create anew one a course may always 
be modified and so enriched. In the local network version, it isakio possible to pin one or several multiple 
choice questions at a precise chapter spot: whenthevideocomes to sucha spot,it stops and the question 
is pmwnted to the student. However, there is no answer management the stu­dent controls his training. 
A prototype is tested in our University with two freshmen groups and their teach­ ers. Students End limit 
--choose can several courses in physics sciences (electronics, thermodynamics, ...). The consultation 
station is a PC Compatible. The picture bank is a video tape recorder. We keep two screens (the TV monitor 
and the Consultation Sta­tion) for this first experiment, but we could use a single semen with an overlay 
card. The network is Ethernet with Novell (it maybe the telephone network). Students workstations are 
in the University library. Each teacher has a workstation in his office. Thevideocassettes arepmduced 
by several teachers in our Univemity. They use a small shooting studio with two cameras and a digital 
production mixer. Thedifferent courseslastamaximum of15minutes (like a c~pter duration). The fimt camera 
films the teacher; the second films diagrams presented by him. Teachexsuse colour codes to build the 
diagram contents. P.Camps, M. Jamb, P.Bazex and C. Bouysset Perspectives Our objective is to use all 
resources of multimedia in combination with Artificial Intelligence technology. Multimedia gives us the 
possibility of managing text, sound and pictures digitally;it permits elimina­ tionof thepicturedatabaseand 
IV rnonitorfmmthe workstation. We oxiiy keep the computer connected to a communication network. Artificial 
Intelligence allows new system develop­ ments; learnem will have more control upon these systernsand 
their interaction isdrivenbytheirneeds [MIC,91]. Associated with a hypernwiia system, Artificial Intelligence 
will allow the user to mntrol his training. However, we want to give him the possibility of direct contact 
with a teacher (as a last resort ?} it is one of the network functions, the other being to allow multimedia 
data access(they me not always stored on the sameworkstation). We work in a distribute architecture. 
 Some pmblemswill occur dunngthegeneral devel­opment of our system. Until now, we have privi­leged easeof 
accessin the design phase (authoring program) as well as in the utilization phase (coursewam). In the 
first phase, the teacher who builds the course only defines the index and edits multimedia help pages 
he uses tools. In the utilizat­ion phase, student and teacher are simply interfam users. using Artificial 
Intelligent technology, the teach­er smlernaybeup allsystemknowledge mustbe formalizd, espwially the 
definition of coursewam partsdependingon theapplication field. These parts include theactuatpedagogialmaterial 
and the teach­ing strategy [REG$8]. Our will is to limit this up heavalbyorgmizingthesepartsclearlyfor 
theteacher author. Modifications brought about by digital treatment of pwlagogtcal contents and Artificial 
Intelligence con­tribution will not appear overnight. We shall try to keep prinaples used for S.T.LM. 
creation distance self-trainin~ student s control of his trainin~ maxim­al use of picture (video), cost 
control and teacher contact.  concAskxl The S.T.I.M. prototype tested in P. Sabatier Univer­sity enables 
the students to self-train in accodince with their own aptitudes (pwrequisite, learning speed, ...) but 
they can always contact a teacher to obtain help. Our system evolution will integrate Artificial Intelligence 
and digital treatment of muM­media databases it will become an artificial tutor. According to [NIC$8], 
the system should have a complementary function not that of a substitute; its place is where the teacher 
cannot meet the mquin+ rnents of a large number of calls. Bibliography <RefA>[BAT,90] A.W. BATES, Application 
of new technologies in distance education. Peqxxtives on distance edu­cation. Vancouver, 2-6 April 1990. 
[BAZ,93] P. BAZEX, P. BILLAST, C BOUYSSET, P. CAMPS, Un systi2me interactif pour l autoformation multimtiia 
utilisant lesn%eauxlocauxet ksn$seaux publics. , XII&#38; Congr&#38;sdeEAOetet du Multim&#38;iia, Paris, 
12-14Janvier 1993. [DER,91] A. DERYCKE, R6seauxetappnmtissagecoop6ratiE vershnkersit40uvertede3k@@ration. 
Colloque SYNAPSE 91, La Grande Motte, 30-31 Mai 1991. [GUE,931 L. GUEN, Trobk%natique de la formation 
et de I utilisation des nouvelles technologies 4ducatives. CahiersduC.REN., VoLl,C.R.D.P. PaysdelaLoire, 
1993. [LAG,93] L. LAGIE~E.VERDOIRE, M&#38;hodesp6dagogiques d apprentissage &#38; distance. Colloque 
E.S.I.M. 93, Marseille, 18Juin 1993. A MuHirnedii Server for Remote Tmining STIM. [MIC,91] A. MICARELLI,F.MUNGO, 
FS.NUCCI, integrat­ing Artificial Intelligence and Hypermedia for Tu­toringsysterns. ExIJERsYs91,1%ris, 
10-11October 1991. [NIc?ml J.F.NICAUD, M. VIVET, Lea tuteurs intelligent n%lisationset tendances de rechedw. 
,S.I.,Volol. 7,No 1,1988.  [REGt881 J.P.REGOURD, GAMETllunsyst&#38;neauteurpour l EIAO. TS.I., Vol. 
7, N 1,1988. P.Camps, M. Jacob, P.Bazex, and C. Bouysset </RefA>
			
