
 A New Method for Improving Communications Between User Groups and Systems Specialists and Its Impact 
on Systems Development I:fforts Shirley E. Coverdale -Coverdale Associates, Inc. IMPORTANCE OF EFFECTIVE 
USER/ANALYST INTERACTION The user/analyst (u/a) interface is a critical variable in determining the 
successful development of computer based information systems (CBIS) efforts. A historical communications 
gap at the u/a interface continues to impact most CBIS definition efforts despite attempts to solve the 
problem. Solutions to date have emphasized either organizational or technical dimensions of the problem. 
As William Cotterman suggests, "The adequacy of the final design will be... a function of the ana- lyst's 
understanding of the situation" (Cotterman,1974). John Austin, of the Harvard Business School, sheds 
light on yet another aspect of the u/a interface: "The most critical of these obstacles is the lack 
of a commonly understood language...with which executives and information systems man- agers can discuss 
data processing activities in order to arrive at a common understanding of the impact of information 
systems on the way the organization operates" (Austin, 1975). These comments emphasize the fact that 
u/a interaction is complex in nature. Solutions which would enhance the effectiveness of this interaction 
must adequately con- sider the analytical and linguistic dimensions of the problem as well as its organizational 
and technical as- pects. This paper examines the nature of u/a interac- tion, evaluates conventional 
solutions in light of the initial discussion, and offers for the reader's consider- ation, an alternative 
method for establishing an effec- tive u/a interface. EXAMINING THE NATURE OF USER/ANALYST INTERACTION 
 There is a distinct difference in orientation between the systems specialist and the user. The systems 
specialist serves a staff function. The user, with whom he must communicate is a line manager (non accounting 
functions). The orientation of the systems specialist tends to be long-range. His job is cognitive and 
re- flective. His style is analytic. He must keep abreast of a continually changing technology and much 
of his time and interest are devoted to the mastery of new approaches 8O to problem solving. His allegiance 
is more professional than organizational. The user's orientation, on the other hand, is short-term; his 
job requires him to oper- ate in real-time, taking decisive action on ever chang- ing problems. His style 
is more intuitive and action oriented. With direct profit responsibility, the line manager's critical 
task is to maintain control over his operation. His performance and rewards are measured by his ability 
to meet organizational profit and cost ob- jectives. Thus his allegiance is more organizational than 
professional. Despite such fundamental differences, extensive u/a interaction is almost universally 
felt to be necessary to effective CBIS development. When we encourage active user participation in CBIS 
development, however, we are forcing the line manage~ to take time from his busy schedule to explain 
to someone who does not understand his language, what his information needs are. Arnold Kneitel feels 
that the user is incapable of doing this effectively: "There are few managers who will take the time 
or can precisely define their near-term, let alone long-term needs with any degree of precision" (Kneitel, 
1975). In keeping with this perception of the user's capacity for precision, many systems people tend 
to avoid exten- sive user involvement in CBIS development. The feeling seems to be that user input at 
various stages of CBIS development may severely hamper the abiltiy to meet dead- lines. This perception 
is perhaps an over-simplifica- tion of reality. Nonetheless, in the absence of short cuts to understanding, 
time pressures heavily influence the nature of u/a interaction. U/A communication is also heavily influenced 
by the loss of self-esteeem which tends to be attached to lack of understanding. As Eric Knutsen says, 
"Since people often do not like to appear ill-informed or 'stupid', a de- fensive posture can easily 
develop, which inhibits the free exchange of information and ideas" (McFarlan and Nolan, 1975). This 
social disease permeates many organ- izations. In a real sense, training programs which place heavy emphasis 
on mastery of technical expertise and associated jargon, and less emphasis on interpersonal skills must 
be faulted for this too familiar malady: "...communication flows in only one direction; the user nods 
his head in acquiescence without understanding any of the points under dis- cussion" (Lucas, 1973). 
There are inherent distinctions between the job func- tions of users and systems specialists. These have 
fos- tered the development of function related professional styles, perspectives, priorities, attitudes 
and idioms which complicate u/a interaction. Many authors are arguing that more systems-orlented users 
or more business oriented systems professionals will correct these prob- lems. Although some cross-fertilization 
is undoubtedly healthy, observations lead this author to believe that differentiation must be preserved 
to a great extent, Specialization within these groups allows for differen- ces in perspectives. Although 
these differences may complicate communication between systems specialists and users, they also contribute 
to a more thorough analysis of problems. Moreover, preservation of differ- entiation is not mutually 
exclusive with improving the quality of these groups' interactions. EVALUATING CONVENTIONAL SOLUTIONS 
 While developing a new method for upgrading the u/a interface, the author surveyed a number of solutions 
to u/a communications problems, encountering an extremely wide range of proposals and methodologies. 
For the sake of simplicity, these have been separated into two broad categories: (i) primarily organization 
oriented and (2) primarily tool oriented. Proposals which are prim- arily oriented toward organizational 
relationships em- phasize the value of steering committees, information systems managers visible to 
top management, and report- ing relationships between the EDP function, other func- tional areas, and 
top management. These organizational forms are indeed effective in fa- cilitating greater organizational 
integration and the fixing of responsibility relationships required for the effective utilization of 
the EDP function. However, none of these forms directly addresses the resolution of the problems which 
were described earlier. First, organ- izational solutions merely alter the pattern of possible communication 
flow, not necessarily its medium or its basic content. Second, structural changes do not address the 
nature of business problem analysis and solution, except for the fact that different individuals interact 
 in the process. Third, shifts in responsibility centers merely alter where the problems are solved and 
where accountabiltiy for the implementation of these solutions resides; the methodologies employed will 
only differ to the degree that individuals alter their approaches as they adapt to new organizational 
arrangements. Fourth, and most serious, is that reliance on organization as a primary facilitating mechanism 
bears the risk of severe disruption under personnel turnover; organizational form is only a shell which 
is filled hopefully by people who can breathe life into it. Communication flow based sole- ly on interpersonal 
or hierarchical relationships is subject to all the risks that tend to alter the form or substance of 
those relationships. Lastly, each of the several parties involved in systems development exercises some 
leverage in that process. To date, the deck has been stacked mostly in favor of systems specialists, 
and organizational forms that affect that balance of power can be successful only if non-technical users 
can ade- quately grasp and act on concepts and tradeoffs which are second nature to systems people. 
The second class of proposals, that of specific tools, can be broken down into two types: (i) those which 
are primarily managerial and (2) those which are primarily technical. The managerial class includes planning 
and control procedures, such as those espoused by F. Warren McFarlan in his article "Problems In Planning 
The Infor- mation System" (McFarlan and Nolan, 1975). Also in- cluded in this category are formal project 
control pro- cedures, such as those adopted by Chase Manhattan Bank, Formal planning is effective in 
constraining the set of systems undertaken to fit more closely within the over- all strategic plans 
of the firm. Several examples cited by McFarlan illustrate this point. Like the organiza- tional solutions 
discussed above, however, planning schemes do not directly affect communications difficul- ties outlined 
earlier. In fact, I would argue that the abundance of detail generally found in adequate planning documents 
would tend to make these documents an inap- propriate basis for specific problem definition discus- 
 sions. In contrast to the planning scheme, the formal project control procedures, such as the Project 
Life Cycle system used by Chase Manhattan(Gilbertson, 1975), emphasize the day to day administration 
of CBIS development efforts. Projects are segmented into distinct phases. At the end of a phase, a formal 
review and approval cycle is initi- ated. Subsequent project phases cannot begin until these check procedures 
have been accomplished. The major con- tribution which this type of procedure offers is the es- tablishment 
of accountabiltiy for the approval process. Nonetheless, in practice this approval may be based on an 
unclear understanding of accomplishments, particularly in time pressured situations. Thus this method, 
like the others, does not directly affect the fundamental charac- ter of analysis and information exchange 
at the u/a interface. All of the solutions discussed thus far en- courage the flow of information between 
users and ana- lysts, but they all fail to impact the nature and quality of information exchanged. 
In contrast to methods described above, technical solu- tions, such as those described in J. Daniel 
Couger's Systems Analysis Techniques, are concerned almost exclu- sively with the architecture of the 
CBIS under develop- ment. In modeling the system, as opposed to the operation, these methodologies exclude 
adequate consideration of the business problems they purport to solve. Even more damaging, they are typically 
technical in nature and difficult for the untrained to understand. This focus fails to encourage user 
involvement. The principal bene- fit provided by such tools, and the reason they are men- tioned here, 
is that they do provide the analyst with implements for fully describing a CBIS. CISDL -AN ALTERNATIVE 
APPROACH In the Fall of 1975, the development of Coverdale Infor- mation Systems Design Language (CISDL) 
was undertaken as an alternative to the type of solutions discussed above. In addition to providing a 
new starting point for u/a interaction, the fundamental distinction between CISDL and other solutions 
is the use of a non-technical common grammar, graphic in nature, for problem description. Presently, 
CISDL consists of the following: i. an inverted approach to the traditional process of system definition 
as it proceeds from problem perception Traditional CISDL a. define system a. define Informa- objectives 
tion/Decision structure b. set measurement b. set measurement criteria based on above criteria based 
on above c. describe Information/ c. define system Decision structure objectives 2. a simple formalism 
which offers: a. a consistent syntax for describing problems and identifying information needs.  b. 
a tool capable of depicting clearly and quickly the major relationships between process steps,  information 
flows, and decision-making in an operational unit. The syntactic elements of CISDL were purposefully 
chosen to parallel the type of process flow charts with which production and operations personnel are 
acquainted. Unlike usual process flow chart representations, CISDL includes syntactic elements which 
are used to specify both information flows and judgmental decisions. Using this representation, the analyst 
and user to~ether can develop a working knowledge of precisely where in the overall operation CBIS support 
will affect the flow of information, the formulation of managerial decisions, and the management of 
the physical process. Only with a mechanism similar to CISDL to serve as a basi~ for communication and 
problem definition, can the user adequately communicate the nature of the process to the analyst. Moreover, 
the analyst will be able to develop a system design which will match accurately, the problem areas facing 
the user. The syntax of CISDL is graphic in nature. It is similar to the basic structure of several 
known conventions, notably those of Jay Forrester of M.I.T., yet in a much simpler form. It is this simplicity 
and clarity which encourage confident user participation in the critical definitional phase of CBIS development. 
 Each element of the operation under study is represented by a labeled box. The label indicates the nature 
or type of the element. There may be any number of different element types, although in general a few 
simple types should be sufficient for most purposes. Each element carries a descriptive identifying 
name which distin- guishes it from other parts of the operation. Elements, for example, may include 
Files, Processes, Decisions and Inventories. Elements are shown in relationship to other elements. 
These relationships are depicted by directed arrows; an arrow generally bears an identifyinglabel. Relationships 
may describe the consumption, storage, or production of information or physical product. Elements may 
be subject to control relationships as well. In almost all cases of interest these controls will result 
from some sort of decision making within the. operation. Such controls may govern the manner in which 
process elements proceed or they may influence decision elements. A final relation- ship is that of feedback 
loops. These describe points at which elements can affect their own behavior. Feedback control loops 
occur when processes affect the manner in which decision elements control them. Inputs to elements are 
generally indicated by incoming arrows and outputs by outgoing arrows. Controls exerted over elements 
are represented by arrows entering the top most edge of the element box. A simplified illustration of 
a CISDL model which incorporates most of these elements and relation- ships follows: ITEM A d DECISION 
I ITEM B l ~PRODUCTION~ CONTROL ~J MATERIAL X PROCESS PRODUCT Y [ z MATERIAL W ITEM C In the above 
figure, Item A is used by the decision ele- ment Production Control to create Item B. Item B then governs 
the manner in which Process Z proceeds as it uses Material X to produce its output Product Y. The manner 
in which this control is generated is left unspecified, as well as the manner in which the process is 
actually governed by the control. In fact the decision element may be quite complex, and it may produce 
Item B in a constant repetitive fashion, or in a sporadic intermit- tent fashion as the situation demands. 
Item B may in- fluence the manner in which the process consumes its in- put, or the manner in which it 
produces its output, or both. Material W is a feedback loop. Process Z pro- duces Material W, which it 
can then consume just as it consumes Material X. Item C is a feedback control loop affecting the manner 
in which the Decision element Pro- duction Control influences Process Z. The simplicity of the CISDL 
syntax directly addresses the shortcomings of technical tools discussed earlier. First, because the syntax 
is simple, it can easily be understood and utilized by non-technical personnel. Second, in modeling the 
operation, the methodology facilitates busi- ness problem analysis. Moreover, these factors tend to minimize 
the user's reluctance to participate: they enable him to gain additional information which will help 
him exert control over the operation. Furthermore, CISDL allows the analyst to quickly grasp critical 
operational relationships. Thus CISDL provides users and analysts with a simple and common basis for 
understanding the impact of CBIS's on the way the organization operates. CISDL also addresses the shortcomings 
of organizational and managerial solutions analyzed previously. CISDL is independent of organizational 
structure. It can be used by users and analysts regardless of the degree of organ- izational integration 
in the firm. Similarly, CISDL does not rely on planning or control procedures for its effectiveness. 
It can be used effectively in conjunc- tion with these or in their absence. Most important, CISDL affects 
the quality of information exchanged at the u/ a interface, since it structures the nature of in- formation 
discussed. CISDL -A TEST CASE In the previous section, CISDL was discussed without practical examples. 
This section describes an actual CBIS development effort where CISDL was used to analyze information 
needs. The test client was a large multi- divisional petro-chemical corporation. Upon learning about 
CISDL, EDP management invited a con- sulting team of three, headed by myself, to analyze in- formation 
needs and identify profit improvement opportu- nities in one of the divisional plants. Of particular 
relevance to this discussion, is the fact that the client company had implemented, in one form or another, 
most of the previously discussed solutions. That is to say, there was an active central planning of CBIS; 
the organizational structure of the company was such that EDP had top management visibiltiy; there was 
active use of steering committees; moreover, a formal project initiation, management and review system 
had been operative for some time. In addition, the systems analysts in the company had been strategically 
located in close proximity to the particualr users which they served. Thus every effort had been made 
to plan and control CBIS development in such a way that communica- tion between users and analysts would 
be effected and top management would formally review corporate CBIS development plans. Despite the 
existence of these pro- cedures, the CISDL methodology was able to significantly impact an on-going 
CBIS development effort. Two trips were made to the company plant under study. These visits were used 
to gather data and to discuss initial findings with both plant management and EDP per- sonnel. In some 
senses, the consulting team mirrored the user/analyst team within the company, as it was corn- posed 
of individuals with EDP expertise as well as those with non-technical manufacturing experience. The 
purpose of the first trip was to define the relation- ships between process tasks, decision-making and 
infor- mation (what CISDL terms the Information/Decision struc- ture) specific to the operation under 
study. This def- inition evolved through extensive interviewing of EDP and plant management as well 
as a plant tour and review of corporate annual reports and organization charts. These data served as 
the basis for constructing a CISDL model which enabled us to focus on the critical opera- tions which 
plant management could control. First, given the organizational structure of the company, it was ap- 
parent that the plant could not control product pricing decisions or even the amount of product to be 
produced. These decisions were largely controlled by a marketing group external to the plant. Secondly, 
it was apparent that although the plant was viewed as a profit center, it was in fact a large cost center 
responsible for con- trolling production costs and product quality. Thus effective production planning 
and control, and maximiza- tion of first quality output were the only areas where plant management could 
affect its profit performance. Once these relationships were understood, the consultant team had a basis 
for focusing its study on production control and quality control systems. This led to a study of a data 
collection system which was being developed to monitor the plant's production performance. Plant per- 
sonnel and systems specialists had been working on this system for approximately eight months before 
our study took place, and portions of the system were in produc- tion. As the system was developed at 
that time, it was a historical data collection system which produced re- ports showing aggregate conversion 
of raw material into so much first quality output, so much second quality and so on. The system performed 
no trend analysis which could enable management to alter this performance. Further analysis and construction 
of a second CISDL model showed us that there were two categories of quality prob- lems, one which could 
be affected by the introduction of an altered data collection information system. The first type of 
problem was an abrupt degradation of product quality. Typically, this would result from catastrophic 
machine failure. Such occurences appeared to be unpredictable. Moreover, when they happened, such failures 
would be verbally communicated to shop floor management and trouble-shooting would begin before any 
 data had been entered into the data collection system. Thus speeding up information flow in this instance 
would have no impact on plant management's abiltiy to correct the problem. The second type of quality 
problem, on the other hand, was the result of a steady and subtle degradation of quality over some period 
of time. This kind of problem could be the result of slow machine wear, for example. The point is that 
if the data collection system, which was already capturing statistics on product quality, could be altered 
to track this kind of a trend, trouble- shooting could be initiated before product was produced which 
was outside the range of saleable first quality material. As the following figure shows, slight in- 
creases in the amount of first quality product produced or slight decreases in the amount of waste material 
pro- duced, could have significant impact on the plant's annual contribution to company sales. The figure 
uses disguised but reasonable data. Quality Categories % of Total Revenue/unit 1st quality 80 $1.00 
2nd quality 15 .88 waste: saleable 2 .50 recoverable 2 .55 non-recoverable 1 °00 NOTE: Net revenue for 
recoverable waste is $.55 per unit since although it is reprocessed and sold as 1st quality, an additional 
labor and overhead cost is incurred($.45). Revenue lost by producing non-first quality material: Category 
% x total output x revenue = annual $ _ loss/unit impact 2nd 15 250 million $.12 $4,500,000 saleable 
2 units per .50 2,500,000 recov'ble 2 year .45 2,250,000 non-recov. 1 1.00 2~500~000 Total annual revenue 
loss Ii,750,000 NOTE: Does not take into account waste on repro- cessed material because number is quite 
small. Thus the use of CISDL as an analysis tool demonstrated to plant management that the data collection 
system, as it was then conceived, was influencing only a subset of the plant's decision-making. The 
system in short, was not capturing all important measurable variables. It was suggested to plant management 
and EDP personnel that specific changes be incorporated into the next phase of the data collection 
system development to cor- rect these problems. These suggestions were adopted. CISDL thus demonstrated 
that an altered analytical ap- proach and a simple language could facilitate a better understanding of 
the precise impact of information on decision-making and could enhance user~ control over operating performance. 
 CONCLUSION The user/analyst interface is complex in nature. Organ.-izational structures and tools which 
merely assure that interaction occurs between these groups, only address part of the problem. I have 
tried to show how a re~ ordered approach to analysis, coupled with a simple graphic language, can enhance 
the user's ability to control operating performance, as well as give the ana-lyst a better understanding 
of the situation. When such a tool is used in the initial stages of CBIS definition, the user/analyst 
interface is much improved and the impact on subsequent CBIS development phases can be significant. 9o 
 REFERENCES <RefA>i. Anthony, Robert M. Planning and Control Systems: A Framework for Analysis. Boston, MA: 
Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Adminis- tration, Harvard University, 1965. 2. Austin, 
John E. "Educating Management in the Use of Information Systems." S.A.M. Advanced Manage- ment Journal, 
New York, NY: Spring 1975  3. Bowers, Dan M., Tech. ed. "Revolution, Not Evo- lution." Modern Data, 
February 1975.  4. Braun, Roy J. "Balancing People and Systems." Infosystems, September 1974.  5. Braun, 
Roy J. "People Problems and Systems Survival." Infosystems, October 1974.  6. Chacko, George K. Computer-Aided 
Decision-Making. New York, NY: American Elsevier Publishing Co., Inc., 1972.  7. Cotterman, William 
W. Computers in Perspective. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1974.  8. Couger, J. Daniel and 
Robert Knapp, editors. Systems Analysis Techniques. New York, N.Y.: Wiley Publishers, 1974.  9. Dearden, 
John. "How to Organize Information Sys- tems." Harvard Business Review, March-April 1965.  i0. Fink, 
Stuart S. and Barbara J. Burian. Business Data Processing. New York, N.Y.: Appleton- Cevoury-Crofts-Meredith 
Corp., 1974. ii. Gibson, Cyrus F. and Richard L. Nolan. "Managing the Four Stages of EDP Growth." Harvard 
Business Review, January-February 1974. 12. Gilbertson, Robert. Harvard Business School, Boston, MA: 
Unpublished ease data -Chase Manhattan Bank, 1975.  13. Greenwood, Frank. Managing the Systems Analysis 
Function. American Management Association, Inc. New York, NY: 1968  14. Intercollegiate Case Clearing 
House. Boston, MA.: 1969, Case No. 9-114-040-046, Worcester Controls  (A-G) 15. Keller, Arnold E. "More 
Power to the User." Infosystems, August 1975.  16. Kneitel, Arnold M. "Operating Management -the 'Real 
Users' of MIS." Infosystems, October 1975.  17. LaPierre, Louis. "A Systematic Approach to Project Implementation." 
Infosystems, June 1975.  iS. Larson, Harry T. "EDP: A 20 Year Ripoff!" Infosystems, November 1974. 
 19. Larson, Harry T. "How To Be an EDP Hero." Infosystems, June 1975.  20. Lawrence, Paul R. and Jay 
W. Lorsch. Developing Organizations: Diagnosis and Action. Reading, MA.: Wesley Publishing Co., 1969. 
 21. Long, Maurice I., Jr. and Roy J. Brown. "MIS- implications for Top Management". Infosystems, October 
1974.  22. Lucas, Henry C., Jr. Computer Based Information Systems in Organizations. Chicago, IL: Science 
Research Association, 1973.  23. McFarlan, Nolan, Norton. Information Systems Administration. Holt, 
Rinehart &#38; Winston, Inc. NY: 1973  24. McFarlan, F. Warren and Richard L. Nolan, eds. The Information 
Systems. In Organizations. Chicago, IL: Science Research Associates, 1973.  25. McFarlan, F. Warren 
and Richard L. Nolan, eds. The Information Systems Handbook. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, Inc., 1975. 
 26. Meder, Chris and Robert Hagin. Information Systems; Technology, Economics, Application. Chicago, 
IL: Science Research Associates, Inc., 1974.  27. Morrison, Ralph J. "Needed: Business-Oriented Systems 
Analysts." Infosystems, September 1975.  28. Murdick, Robert G. and Joel E. Ross. Information Systems 
for Modern Management, 2nd Edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1975.  29. Nolan, Richard 
L. Managing the Data Resource Function. St. Paul, MINN: West Publishing Co., 1974.  30. Nolan, Richard 
L. ,,Systems Analysis for Computer Based Information Systems DesignT Boston, MA: Intercollegiate Case 
Clearing House, reprinted from Data Base. No. 9-173-084, 1970.  31. Radford, K. J. Information Systems 
in Management. Reston Publishing Company, Inc., NY: 1973  32. Render, Barry and Ralph M. Fair, Jr. "Future 
Managers Need DP Training." Infosystems, October 1975.  33. Ruth, Marvin S. "In Defense of EDP Management." 
Infosystems, February 1975.  34. Sanders, Donald H. Computers in Society. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 
1973.  35. Sass, C. Joseph. "MIS -Are You MISsing the Plane?" Infosystems, March 1975.  36. Schussel, 
George. "Scoring DP Performance." Infosystems, September 1974.  37. Scott, Bruce R. "The Industrial 
State: Old Myths and New Realities." Harvard Business Review, March-April 1973.  38. Thurston, Philip 
H. "Who Should Control Infor- mation Systems." Harvard Business Review, November-December 1962.  39. 
Zani, William M. "Blueprint for MIS." Harvard Business Review, November-December 1970</RefA>.    
			
