
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. AN INTRODUCTION TO USING PROSIM FOR BUSINESS PROCESS SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS Perakath 
C. Benjamin Dursun Delen Madhav Erraguntla Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI) College Station, TX 
77840, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT This paper introduces PROSIM, a knowledge-based system for modeling processes, 
analyzing them using simulation and project management tools, and designing improved processes. Domain 
experts who are familiar with the various aspects of the system may be interviewed and process models 
can be developed based on the evidence collected using PROSIM. The tutorial focuses on the built­in simulation 
design support environment of PROSIM that enables building simulation models automatically from process 
models. The later part of the tutorial briefly covers extensions to PROSIM which permit information captured 
in PROSIM models to be leveraged for other analysis project planning in a project management tool such 
as Microsoft® Project . A purchase order processing system example is described to demonstrate the utility 
of PROSIM. INTRODUCTION PROSIM (KBSI 97a) can be used to support the analysis and design of manufacturing 
systems, business systems, logistics systems, command, control, communication, and intelligence systems, 
service systems, and information systems. It is a critical tool for realizing the monetary benefits of 
business process re-engineering and activity based costing. Originally developed under a research contract 
from the National Science Foundation (NSF) (KBSI 92a), PROSIM pioneered the concept of process model 
simulation. PROSIM has since evolved into a process engineering workcenter providing assistance during 
all phases in the lifecycle of process management: 1. Modeling descriptions of existing process are captured; 
 2. Analysis performance metrics are estimated using simulation or static analysis;  3. Design new to-be 
processes are developed, including integration of existing processes for formation of Virtual Enterprises. 
As a complete process-engineering environment, PROSIM empowers the domain expert and reduces their dependence 
on highly trained analysts. Additionally, it permits the domain expert to focus on describing or improving 
the process instead of abstracting the process into a simulation model. 2 GENERATING PROCESS MODELS 
USING PROSIM PROSIM enables a modeler to capture processes or situations as an ordered sequence of events 
or activities. It is designed to capture process descriptions of the precedence and causality relations 
between events/situations in a form that is natural to domain experts in an environment. One of the primary 
goals of the tool is to provide mechanisms for expressing domain expert s knowledge about how a particular 
process works. PROSIM uses scenarios as the basic organizing structure for establishing the focus and 
boundary conditions for the process description. This feature is motivated by the tendency of humans 
to describe what they know in terms of an ordered sequence of observed activities within the context 
of a given situation. The basic syntactic unit of PROSIM graphical process descriptions within the context 
of a scenario, is the Unit Of Behavior (UOB) represented by a rectangular box. Each UOB represents a 
specific view of the world in terms of a perceived state of affairs or state of change relative to the 
given scenario. Stated simply a UOB may represent an event, activity or process in the system of interest. 
UOBs are connected to one another via junctions and links. Junctions provide the semantic facilities 
for expressing synchronous and asynchronous behavior among a network of UOBs. Links represent temporal 
precedence, object flow, and relations between UOBs. Each UOB can have associated with it both descriptions 
in terms of other UOBs (a decomposition of a parent UOB) and a set of participating objects and their 
relations (an elaboration). Let us consider a situation of an analyst interviewing a purchase department 
manager to capture main activities involved in generating purchase orders at the company. The purchase 
department manager is mainly responsible for the processing of purchase request forms, finding existing 
suppliers for the part, inviting bids from potential suppliers, receiving bids, evaluating bids, placing 
purchase orders, and acquiring the material. First, the initiating department (typically design or process 
planning) formally requests the needed material. If the requested material has existing suppliers, a 
purchase order can be placed immediately. On the other hand, if the requested material is new, or the 
existing supplier no longer produces the part, then the purchase department has to invite bids from potential 
suppliers, receive the bids, evaluate the bids, and place a purchase order to the selected supplier. 
The process flow diagram that depicts the sequence of activities involved in the purchase order generation 
process can be captured using PROSIM and is shown in Figure 1.  3 GENERATING SIMULATION MODELS USING 
PROSIM The intelligent support provided by PROSIM reduces the expertise required to design effective 
simulation models and perform simulation experiments. It provides an environment in which users can develop 
designs for discrete event simulation models from process descriptions and supports the conceptual modeling 
activities at various stages of the model design process. PROSIM can be used to support the analysis 
and design of manufacturing systems, business systems, logistics systems, command, control, communication, 
and intelligence systems, concurrent engineering systems, service systems, and information systems. It 
is a critical tool for realizing the monetary benefits of business process re-engineering and activity 
based costing. PROSIM has a built-in simulation model design support environment. In other words, it 
has an expert system programmed to provide expertise at a level comparable to that of a simulation-modeling 
expert. Process flow diagram constructs, UOBs, objects, and junctions, are required to be detailed within 
PROSIM in order to generate a simulation model. Consider the request for bids UOB in  Figure 1: A Process 
Flow Diagram of the Purchase Order Process the example process flow diagram in Figure 1. The real world 
objects that participate in the process of requesting bids are Technical Package, Purchase Department 
Manager, Potential Supplier List, Bid Package, and Building 1. A technical package contains the technical 
data of the part to be ordered. The technical data of the part may include engineering specifications, 
tolerances, material to be used, special tools and jigs required to manufacture the part. A Purchase 
Department Manager requests a bid by sending a technical package along with the bid package to potential 
suppliers. The Potential Supplier List consists of details of all the potential manager are categorized 
as resources in PROSIM. Resource objects, as well as other objects, can be shared between different UOBs 
in a PROSIM model. 3.2 Entity Detailing Entities flow between UOBs in a scenario. The inter­arrival 
time distribution is an item of information required to simulate the behavior of entities in a system. 
Figure 3 displays how the details of New Material Request Form are recorded in a PROSIM model. Observe 
that the inter­arrival time for this entity is a negative exponential random variable with a mean of 
10.0 time units. The arrival point is the first process visited by the entity as it flows through the 
scenario. suppliers such as supplier code, supplier name, supplier address, supplier manufacturing 
capabilities. The Bid Package consists of information about the requirements of the bid responses, financial 
details, and other contractual details. This activity is performed in the location Building 1. In PROSIM, 
a dedicated resource is categorized as either a location or a queue. The location label is provided whenever 
a non-waiting activity is represented by the UOB. If the UOB is used to represent a waiting activity, 
the dedicated resource is associated as a queue. Flow objects that participate in UOBs are called entities. 
3.1 UOB Detailing The dialog box shown in Figure 2 is used to record the process times for the Request 
Bids UOB. Process times are recorded for the entities that participate in the process. The names of the 
entity objects that participate in this UOB are New Material Request Form (labeled New Order ), Bid Package, 
and Technical Package. The process time for New Order is a constant of 0.5 days. The process time for 
Bid Package is a normal random variable with a mean of 5 days and a standard deviation of 1 day. The 
process time for Technical Package is a normal random variable with a mean of 12 days and a standard 
deviation of 2 days. The Objects such as computers, personnel Figure 3: Entity Detailing  3.3 Decision 
Logic Specification Junctions in PROSIM provide a mechanism to specify the logic of process branching. 
Different junction types are supported in PROSIM to aid in capturing the semantics of branching in real-world 
processes (Figure 4). Junctions support the description of 1) a process that splits into two or more 
process paths, or 2) two or more process paths converge into a single process. Junctions are classified 
in three different ways. First, they are classified according to the logical semantics involved: AND 
(&#38;), OR (O), and exclusive OR (X). Junctions are further classified as either fan-in or fan-out, 
based on whether they represent a convergence or a divergence in the logic of the process description. 
They are also classified based on the coordination of the timing of the associated UOBs as either synchronous 
or asynchronous (KBSI 1992b). An exclusive OR (X) junction is used to model decision logic. In our purchase 
order processing example, an exclusive OR junction is used to represent the logic that activity request 
material is followed exactly by one of the following two activities: 1) order from an existing supplier 
, or 2) request bids from new suppliers with probabilities of 0.8 and 0.2, respectively (Figure 5). 
  Figure 5: Junction Detailing  3.4 Performance Metric Specification The goal in designing a simulation 
model is to generate data to answer a set of questions. Examples of questions include, What is the total 
process time? , What is the resource utilization? . PROSIM provides support for designing instrumentation 
to help answer these questions. In other words, PROSIM helps you select appropriate performance metrics 
that will automate the generation of output data to answer the questions. For example, the performance 
metric used to answer the first question is Process Time for the UOBs preparation of bid package, preparation 
of technical package, filling in new material request form, and filling in the repeat material request 
form. The PROSIM dialog boxes used to specify these performance metrics are shown in Figures 6 and 7. 
Figure 7: Metrics to Compute Process Time 3.5 Model Verification In the context of PROSIM, model verification 
is defined as the process of ensuring that the minimum amount of information required to generate a WITNESS 
simulation model exists in the process model. Model verification is performed using the Model Verification 
option in the Diagram menu in PROSIM. A more detailed description is given in the PROSIM User s Manual 
and Reference Guide (1997).  3.6 Simulation Model Generation PROSIM simulation model design specifications 
are now transformed to an equivalent representation in the WITNESS Command Language. This is done by 
using the Build Simulation Model option in the PROSIM File menu. After the model has been generated, 
the next step is to open the application and load the model using the Read Commands option in the Model 
menu (see Lanner Group 1997). After the WITNESS model has been loaded, the user can run the model and 
generate the desired performance metrics. WITNESS provides state-of-the-art capabilities for simulation-based 
analysis and experimentation. An analyst knowledgeable in the WITNESS language may customize the PROSIM-generated 
model if necessary. A unique feature of PROSIM is the ability to generate multiple simulation models 
from one process model. The value of this capability is immediately obvious when one realizes that there 
is no such thing as the simulation model; each model is built to answer specific questions. PROSIM not 
only permits a hierarchical process description but also allows simulation model to be generated at different 
levels of abstraction. In other words the user can specify whether to include activities contained in 
the decomposition of a high level activity (UOB) in the simulation model. For an initial analysis the 
process may be simulated at a high level and finer level of granularity may be specified for a more robust 
simulation later on. In addition to simulating a process at different levels of abstraction, PROSIM allows 
the user to generate two different types of simulation models: Location-constrained, and Activity-centered. 
In the former, PROSIM Locations, e.g., desk, department, machine, etc., are the focus of the simulation 
and an Entity may visit the Location several times to participate in the different Processes that occur 
at that Location. In the later approach, there is a one-to-one relationship between Processes, i.e., 
UOB, and Machine in WITNESS. A unique conceptual Location is created and assigned to each Process to 
build a process-centered simulation. During simulation, an Entity makes multiple visits to a Machine 
only if it participates in the same process more than once. Physical locations, such as desk, department, 
and machine, are modeled as Resources if they are a constraining factor. The Location quantity should 
reflect the number of parallel activations of the Process. In the case of unlimited parallel activations, 
the Location quantity should be at least equal to the maximum number of Resource available for performing 
that Process. This latter approach is useful in activity-centered analysis, which requires answering 
questions such as Which activity (or process step) is the bottleneck in the purchasing process?   MANAGING 
PROJECS USING PROSIM AND PROJECTLINK PROJECTLINK (KBSI 1997b), an add-on module to PROSIM, enables information 
in a PROSIM process model to be leveraged for analysis using a project management tool, e.g., MS-Project. 
PROJECTLINK facilitates an alternative approach to process analysis since a detailed simulation-based 
analysis is often unnecessary in order to obtain an estimate of metrics such as resource utilization. 
Static analysis using the resource leveling function in project management tools may be adequate for 
identifying resource contention problems resulting from the process design. Additionally, Critical Path 
analysis may help identify process steps that need to be performed in parallel with other activities 
so that the overall cycle-time is reduced. A link between process modeling and project planning is also 
useful during the implementation of large, perhaps infrequently occurring processes such as a shuttle­launch 
at NASA. Since PROJECTLINK is a two-way bridge between process modeling and project planning, it gives 
rise to other useful and interesting possibilities. Project planning analysis can identify limitations 
and mandate changes to the project plan. The resulting changes can then be brought back to the process 
model in PROSIM. Alternatively, an existing project plan can be imported into PROSIM for performing dynamic 
analysis using the PROSIM-generated WITNESS simulation model. The implementation of PROJECTLINK makes 
the exchange of information between a process model and project plan (in either direction) transparent 
to the user. In most cases, only one piece of additional information is needed to go from a process model 
to a project plan: the user selects one path from the options available at each OR or XOR junction. The 
process model is then exported using the Export menu item in the File menu. PROJECTLINK is then activated 
from the Launch Application menu item. A file containing the project plan is generated in the Microsoft 
Project Export format (.MPX file) and the project management tool is launched using this file. Figure 
8 shows the PROJECTLINK-generated project plan for the Purchase Order process model described earlier. 
 Figure 8: A Project Plan of the Purchase Order Process Converting a project plan into a PROSIM process 
model is just as easy to do. The file is saved in the .MPX format and PROJECTLINK is launched by selecting 
the Launch ProjectLink menu item (appended to the Tools menu in MS-Project during installation.) When 
bringing in a project plan into an existing process model the user has the option of merging the changes 
with the older process model, or creating a new process model. IMPROVING PROCESSES USING PROCESS  DESIGN 
ASSISTANT The most recent extension to PROSIM is the Process Design Assistant (PDA): a knowledge-based 
design assistant that facilitates process design by analyzing process models for consistency, completeness, 
and potential improvement opportunities (KBSI 97b). A process designer can use the PDA to diagnose possible 
errors in the model and identify areas for improvement. Given a process model, PDA will check whether 
the information is complete and consistent with respect to the process design intent. It performs different 
kinds of qualitative and quantitative analysis and produces a variety of metrics that are useful for 
process improvement and re-design. PDA consists of a repository of rules that can be executed on selected 
process models. Each of the rules checks for some desired feature of a complete, comprehensive and valid 
process model. PDA was developed in a manner to facilitate addition of new rules and customization of 
how the rules are organized. The screen below provides a means to organize, manipulate, select and execute 
rules. The rules in PDA are organized into two classification schemes: based on Rule Class and based 
on Rule Domain. Rule Domain refers to the domain of application such as BPR, CPI, lean logistics, concurrent 
engineering, CALS/EDI, etc. Rule Class refers to the basic rule types such as completeness, consistency, 
cycle-time improvement, quality improvement, coordination, metrics, etc. These two classification schemes 
are used to help browse through the rules and select the most appropriate rules for execution. The PDA 
rules may be customized for different domains by indicating which rules classes are relevant. During 
execution the user simply selects the process model to be analyzed and selects the set of rules to be 
executed as shown in Figure 9. PDA executes all selected rules sequentially on the selected process models 
and identifies the problems or potential improvement opportunities with the selected model. The analysis 
results are displayed as shown in Figure 10. PDA also contains an Agenda Manager, which can be used to 
keep track of the tasks to be performed to fix problems with different process models. PDA analysis results 
can be automatically updated as action items in the Agenda Manager for the selected process model. Figure 
9: Rule Selection in PDA  5 POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF USING PROSIM PROSIM provides an integrated approach 
to enterprise process engineering through the integration of: 1) modeling methods with performance analysis 
methods, and 2) qualitative and quantitative techniques. As a simulation model generator, PROSIM has 
the following potential benefits: 1) it enables novice simulation modelers to develop and use complex 
simulation models, 2) it encourages and promotes the use of simulation as a decision support tool among 
a wide group of users from a variety of application domains, 3) it substantially reduces time and effort 
needed to develop simulation models, and 4) it facilitates the capture and retention of simulation model 
design rationale.  SUMMARY This paper described salient features of PROSIM, a knowledge-based tool for 
process engineering. An example of purchase order processing system is provided to demonstrate the procedure 
of building process models from domain experts descriptions and then generating a simulation model from 
this process model. The paper also described extensions to PROSIM including PROJECTLINK a two-way bridge 
between process modeling and project management tools, and a Process Design Assistant to facilitate improved 
process design. REFERENCES <RefA>Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1992a. IDEF3 method report. Prepared 
for the U.S. Air Force Human Resources Laboratory, Contract No. F33615-C-90­0012. Knowledge Based Systems, 
Inc. (KBSI). 1992b. Issues in knowledge-based assistance for simulation model design from IDEF3 descriptions. 
Technical Report for NSF SBIR Phase II Grant No. III-9123380. Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1997a. 
PROSIM user s manual and reference guide, Version 2.2.1, College Station, TX. Knowledge Based Systems, 
Inc. (KBSI). 1997b. PROJECTLINK user s manual and reference guide, Version 1.1, College Station, TX. 
Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1997c. Virtual Enterprise Engineering Environment (VE3). Technical 
Report for DARPA Contact No. F33615-96-C-5601. Lanner Group Inc. 1997. WITNESS user manual, Release 8, 
Cleveland, OH. </RefA>AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES PERAKATH C. BENJAMIN received his Master of Science degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering in 1983. He received his 
Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&#38;M University in May 1991. As Vice President (Innovation 
and Engineering) at Knowledge Based Systems, Inc., Dr. Benjamin manages and directs research KBSI s research 
and development projects. Dr. Benjamin s is the principal architect of PROSIM and is responsible for 
its continued evolution. DURSUN DELEN received his Bachelor of Science degree in Industrial Engineering 
from the Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1986; his Master's degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the Yildiz University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1988; and his Ph.D. degree in Industrial 
Engineering and Management from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, in 1997. He has more 
than five years of industrial experience in information systems analysis and design. His research interests 
include systems modeling, discrete event simulation, object-oriented modeling, knowledge representation 
and artificial intelligence. MADHAV ERRAGUNTLA received his M.S. in Industrial Engineering from the National 
Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering in 1989 and Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from Texas 
A&#38;M University in 1996. Dr. Erraguntla conducted research and developed applications in planning, 
simulation, costing, knowledge based systems, optimization, neural networks and fuzzy logic. He has numerous 
journal publications and conference proceedings. He designed and developed PROJECTLINK and process design 
assistant (PDA) presented in this paper. Currently, Dr. Erraguntla is working as a Research Scientist 
at KBSI. 
			
