
 for Topical Document Clustering Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou Luis Gravano Ankineedu Maganti Department 
of Computer Science Columbia Unwersity 1214 Amsterdam Avenue New York, NY 10027, USA {vh, gravano, amaganti}@cs, 
columbia, edu  Abstract We investigate four hierarchical clustering methods (single-link, complete-link, 
groupwlse-average, and single-pass) and two linguistically motivated text features (noun phrase heads 
and proper names) in the context of document clustering. A sta- tistical model for combining similarity 
information from mul- tiple sources is described and applied to DARPA's Topic De- tection and Tracking 
phase 2 (TDT2) data. This model, based on log-linear regression, alleviates the need for extenswe search 
m order to determine optimal weights for combining input fea- tures. Through an extensive series of experiments 
with more than 40,000 documents from multiple news sources and modal- ities, we establish that both the 
choice of clustering algorithm and the introduction of the additional features have an impact on clustenng 
performance. We apply our optamal combination of features to the TDT2 test data, obtaining partitaons 
of the docu- ments that compare favorably with the results obtained by par- tlcipants m the officml TDT2 
competition. Introduction Clustering plays a crucial role in organizing large document col- lections. 
As a notable example, clustenng can be used to struc- ture query results, hence providing users with 
an overview of the results that is eas~er to understand and process than a flat list of documents (see, 
e.g., [7]). It can also form the basis for further processing of the documents once they have been organized 
in topical groups, such as summarization [11 ]. Clustering is also a key component of DARPA's ongoing 
Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) initiative, which completed its second phase (TDT2) in early 1999.1 
The goal of the TDT initiative is to provide benchmarks for companng systems that ISee http: //www. itl 
.nist. gov/iaul/894. Ol/tdt98/ tdt98.htm. Permission to make digital or hard copies of ell or pert of 
this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee prowded that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advan-tage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on sen,era or to redmtnbule to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. SIGIR 2000 7/00 Athens, Greece &#38;#169; 2000 ACM 1-58113-226-3/00/0007... 
$5,00 address three specific tasks relating to manipulating and orga- nizing broadcast news and newswire 
stories. Given a stream of incoming news articles, topic detection is the task of grouping together the 
articles that correspond to the same topic, where a topic is defined as "a seminal event or activity, 
along with all di- rectly related events and activities." [4, p. 19]. Topic detection as then a clustering 
task, where we group documents on the same "topic" together. In this paper, we study document clustering 
applied to the TDT2 topic detecUon problem. For this, we investigate alter- natives for the two crucial 
components of a clustenng strategy, namely the clustering algorithm itself and the document features 
that are used to guide the clustering. More specifically, we study the performance of the four most popular 
hierarchical cluster- Ing algorithms, single-link, complete-link, groupwise-average, and single-pass 
clustering. (We do not consider m our eval- uation more expensive, non-hierarchical clustering techniques 
because of efficiency concerns.) Single-pass clustering makes irrevocable clustering assignments for 
a document as soon as the document is first inspected. Among the four techniques that we considered, 
single-pass is then the best suited for the TDT2 topic detection task, which requires systems to make 
clustering assignments "on-line" as soon as a new document is received. To investigate the limitations 
of such an on-line algorithm, we experimentally compare the performance of single-pass with the other 
three clustering algorithms mentioned above. The other component of a clustering strategy that we explore 
in this paper is the document features that guide the cluster- ing. Typically, document clustering techniques 
use the words that appear in the documents to define the "distance" function that determines the final 
clustering. But additional, more lin- guistically informed sets of features can be used m an attempt 
to limit the input features to the most important ones, facilitating the task of the learning (i.e., 
clustering) algorithm. In this paper we investigate two such sets of automatically identified features: 
matched noun phrase heads, where additional premodifiers are excluded, and proper names (single nouns 
and phrases), catego- rized as people, place, or organizations' names. We conduct a large-scale experimental 
evaluation involving over 40,000 real documents from the TDT2 initiative 1998 data set. Our results show 
that, as expected, groupwise average out- performs the other hierarchical clustering algorithms, but 
(for a limited range of clustering thresholds) its performance is sur- prisingly close to that of the 
computatlonally cheaper, on-line 224 single-pass method. We also establish that the linguistically motivated 
features increase the overall clustering performance when used in conjuncuon with the full word vectors 
tradition- ally employed m clustering. Our results compare favorably with those obtained by the official 
participants in the TDT2 competi- tion. In the remainder of the paper, we first review the four clus- 
tering algorithms and linguistic features we experimented with (Sections 2 and 3, respectively). Since 
combining the features is an important step that is usually approached with approximate and computationally 
expensive exhaustive search methods, we present in Section 4 a statistical model for this combination 
task based on a trainable log-linear model. Section 5 contains a de- tailed presentation of our experimental 
results, along with a dis- cussion of their significance. Clustering Algorithms Part of the goal of 
the experiments reported m this paper is to explore the effect that the chosen clustering algorithm has 
on the quality of document clustering (i.e., clustering with text fea- tures). To this end, we implemented 
the four major hierarchi- cal clustering technique discussed m the literature. These tech- niques (or 
their variants) are used by most IR systems that per- form clustering of thousands of documents. We briefly 
review the four algorithms below, and discuss their strengths and weak- nesses. (See [5] for a more complete 
discussion of hierarchical clustering techniques.) Given a set of documents S = {D1, D2,..., D,~} and 
a sim- ilarity function f : S × S --+ ~, the goal of all four methods is to output a "reasonable" partitmn 
of S into a collection of clus- ters C'1, C'~,..., C'm as a function of a pre-selected threshold T. The 
first three techniques (single-link clustering, complete-link clustering, and g roupwise-average clustering) 
share the same al- gorithmic steps but differ m the criterion they apply to determine when two clusters 
should be merged. The general procedure first places each document D, in a separate cluster G', (i.e., 
initially m = n); then it iteratwely examines pairs of clusters, merges a pair of clusters that satisfy 
the method's test for merging, and repeats this cycle until no mergeable clusters can be found, re- ducing 
m by one at each iteration. The merging criterion is what distxnguishes each of these three methods: 
 For single-link clustering, two clusters G', and G' a can be merged xf there is a pair of documents 
x E C, and y E Ca such that f(x, y) > r.  For complete-link clustering, two clusters C~ and Ca can be 
merged ff all pairs x E C, andy E Ca satisfy f(x,y) > r.  Groupwlse average adopts a middle position 
between these two extremes. Two clusters C, and C a are mergeable if the average similarity f(x, y) across 
all pairs with x E C, and y E Ca Is equal to or greater than the threshold r.  The produced clustering 
also depends on which pair of clus- ters is actually merged at each iteration, whenever there are mul- 
tiple candidates. Single-link clustering is actually unaffected by this selectmn, since if C, and C a 
are mergeable at some point, they will continue to be mergeable even if additional elements are included 
in one or both of these clusters. For complete hnk and groupwise average, we chose (as most other systems 
do) to select for merging the pair of clusters with the largest minimum or average similarity, respectively. 
The fourth technique we experimented with, single-pass clus- tering, is unique in that it makes (irrevocable) 
clustering assign- ments as soon as it sees each element. 2 This makes single-pass clustering especially 
suitable for very large collectaons of docu- ments, and also for sittuatUons where new documents arrive 
con- tinually, in different points in time (e.g., as is the case with an online news source). The algorithm 
proceeds by maintaining an imtially empty but ever increasing set of clusters. As each new document arrives, 
its average similarity wlth all the members of each cresting cluster is calculated. If a cluster for 
which this average exceeds or matches the threshold r is found, we assign the document to that cluster. 
Otherwise, a new cluster contain- ing only the just arrived document is formed. Again, we choose among 
multiple clusters that satisfy the simalanty criterion by selecting the one that has maximum average 
similarity with the document under consideration. Among these four methods, single- and complete-link 
reduce the numerical similarity information to the minimum or maxi- mum of a set. Therefore, these methods 
are expected to perform less well (and mn faster) than the groupwlse-average techmque, which takes into 
account information across all pa~rs in the clus- ters it assesses for merging. In comparison, single-pass 
cluster- ing operates with less information at each step, since each doc- ument must be placed in its 
final cluster as it amves. Hence, we anticipate that single-pass clustenng will underperform group- wise 
average. All these methods adopt a greedy approach to clustering, which is justified for very large data 
sets. An alternative class of algorithms, collectively referred to as non-hierarchical clus-tenng methods, 
spend much more time per clustered element in order to improve the quality of the partitioning. They 
do so by defining a merit function for the entire pamtion, which is then iteratavely optmuzed; unlike 
the four hierarchical tech- niques discussed above, they can rewse prior decisions, moving elements out 
of the cluster they had originally been assigned. This is the reason for both the increased performance 
and the in- creased computational complexity of these techniques. See [8] for a comprehensive discussion 
of non-hierarchical techniques, including the k-means, k-medians, exchange, and simulated an- nealing 
methods. Since in the experiments reported in this paper we worked with tens of thousands of documents, 
collectmns that even hierarchical methods take hours to cluster, we did not in- clude optimization methods 
in our comparative analysis. 3 Linguistic Features Document clustering is a task that has received considerable 
at- tention in the IR community, and the recent and ongoing Topic Detection and Tracking effort has highlighted 
the msues in-volved when very large collections of documents are partitioned. Many techniques for improving 
the basic algorithms described in the previous section have been considered, including multiple clustering 
stages with varying thresholds [22] and probabilistic 2Delaying these decisions for a fixed number of 
elements is possible, but we did not include such a delay m our implementaUon. mixture models of word 
vector distributions [10]. Yet, any learn- ing method depends on the selection of the most informative 
in- put features for producing high quality output. In the TDT effort, and m most other clustering work 
for information indexing and retrieval purposes, the words in the document have dominated as the sole 
features on which the clustering is based. A good case can be made for the suitability of the full collec- 
tion of words as the basra for determining document similarity and eventually clusters. After all, the 
unfiltered words contain all the inforrnanon that humans have when they perform the same task. Keeping 
all those words, appropriately weighed with a scheme such as ef. idf [15], makes all thxs information 
avail- able to the clustering algorithm, and avoids hard choices such as limiting the similarity features 
to specific words or classes of words. However, for many tasks, an informed selection of fea- tures can 
prove beneficialby rejecting external, llngumtlC knowl- edge about what kinds of words are most important 
for the clas- sification, thus enabling the leammg algorithm to zoom in to the most significant input 
features. For example, in work clas- sifying images on the basis of their captions, Sable and Hatzl- 
vassiloglou [14] have established that keeping only the first sen- tence of image captions and only specific 
parts of speech signifi- cantly improves classification accuracy. Other types of linguistic knowledge 
have also been found useful for information retrieval tasks (e.g., normnal compounds [6], syntactm constraints 
[16], and collocations [18]). In thin paper, we explore two linguistically motivated restric- tions on 
the set of words used for clustering: noun phrase heads and proper names. While it is not possible to 
predetermine with complete accuracy which word classes make a document be- long to a specific topical 
class, noun phrases and proper nouns carry most of the reformation about the protagomsts in each document, 
and (indirectly) about the location and time frame of any events discussed therein. This assumption is 
more jus- tified for news articles, where 80-85% of documents describe one or more specific events, as 
opposed to generic discussions of a topic [9]. By limiting the Input features to those grammat- ical 
categories, we construct additional feature vectors that can be used either in place of or in addition 
to the traditional word vectors during clustering. We use two external tools to extract these features 
automat- really from text. For identifying noun phrase heads, we use Linklt [19], a tool developed at 
Columbm University for the purpose of identifying significant topics in documents and in- dexing text 
collections. Linklt uses part-of-speech information (also automatmally assigned using the Alembic toolkit 
devel- oped at MITRE [1]) and a sample finite-state grammar to locate maximal non-recursive noun phrases 
in the text. Then it col- lates those phrases that have the same head (final noun in the sequence). In 
this manner, the phrases "Bill Chnton", "Presi- dent Clinton", and "Clinton" will all be mapped to Clinton, 
pro-vIdlng a means for addressing the hard problem of definite co- reference. Unfortunately, so will 
"Hillary Clinton", demonstrat- ing that the approach will also introduce some reference errors. Our experiments 
measure whether the positive contribution of collapsing related terms to a canomcal form with Linklt's 
basic implementanon outweighs these errors. The second tool we use, Nominator [20], was developed at 
IBM. It uses capatalization and punctuation information together with a contextual model and a large 
knowledge base to iden- tify proper nouns in context. Not only are proper names recog- razed, but they 
are also classified into categories such as PER- SON, PLACE, and ORG (the latter standing for "organization"). 
This allows us to experiment with different versions of proper name vectors for each document, by including 
different cate- gories in our definition of what really is a proper name. We considered three such versions: 
3 Our first version (hereafter referred to as NominatorAll) sim-ply takes all the words or phrases labeled 
as proper names by Nominator.  For the second version (NominatorPPOU), we exclude all words and phrases 
labeled as OTHER or UTERM (unknown term). These are words or phrases that Nominator is either unable 
to confidently characterize as proper names, or identi- fies as fixed terms, respectively; in both cases 
the probability of their being a proper name is lower. Examples of words tagged as OTHER in the TDT2 
corpus include "Internet" and "Chapter 7", while examples of UTERM are "private school" and "recent study". 
 Finally, we only consider words and phrases marked as PER- SON, PLACE, or ORG (version NominatorPPO). 
These are the classes most likely to include information about the par- ticipants and location of an 
event, which we consider central to a document's placement in an appropriate cluster.  4 Combining 
Features The previous section presented ways to calculate vectors of lin- guistically motivated features, 
which can complement the basic vector contmning all words that appear in a document. Having extracted 
those vectors, we can then calculate the similarity be- tween documents by first applying a tf. idf normalization 
on each vector and then taking the cosine between the two vectors that correspond to the two documents. 
In this manner, we obtain different sumlanty matrices (or functions), depending on which set of input 
features is chosen. These similarity matrices can then be used individually to drive the clustering algorithm 
and produce a partition of the document set. Nevertheless, it is in- teresting to also consider combinations 
of the similarity values assigned to a pair of documents by the different feature models. How to combine 
such similarity values is a hard problem that involves two steps: first, deciding the form that the combining 
function should have, and second, assigning values to the pa- rameters in that form. Frequently, the 
chosen form is a linear weighted sum, and the weights are estimated via a search regime that calculates 
the final similarity for a given set of weights, clusters the documents, and evaluates the produced clustering, 
repeating the process iteratively for different sets of weights. The complexity of this approach is exponential 
in the number of weights, and consequently it cannot be used with more than a few such parameters. Even 
then, the exhaustive search is lirmted in the range and resolution of the weights considered, and often 
has to be approximated by either gradient-descent or decompo- smon techniques. 3In all three versions, 
we distinguish between occurrences of the same word that are assigned different labels in different contexts, 
e.g., Ford~PERSON and FordlORG. To avoid these problems, we consider a mathematical model for selecting 
optimal values for the weights in a slightly mod- ified formulation of the weighted sum approach. Given 
vec- tors of similarity values Va, Vz,..., Vk, one for each feature (Words, Linklt, NominatorPPO, etc.) 
and with each value V,j corresponding to the j-th pair of documents, we assume that the combining function 
should best approximate the values of a vec- tor R (again ranging over the same pairs of documents), 
where 1 af the documents in the j-th pair shouldbe R a : in the same cluster 0 otherwise The values 
Rj can be obtained from a training set of documents for which optimal cluster assignments are available 
(this is the case in the TDT2 training data used in our experiments). Then, we fit a log-linear regression 
model [17] in which the V,'s are the predictors and R the response. Such a model calculates first a linear 
internal predictor, ~, which is a wexghted sum of the gi 's, k r I = Zw,.V, and then relates ~/to the 
final response via the logistic transfor- mation e~3 Ra -1 + cO3 Note that the log-linear model is qmte 
similar to linear regres- sion, which has been used successfully for combining features for text classification 
before [21 ]. The log-linear extension guar- antees that the final response wall lie in the interval 
(0, 1), with each of the endpoints associated with one of the outcomes. It is also more appropriate than 
a straightforward weighted sum because of technical reasons relating to the statistical assump- tions 
inherent in such modeling (the fact that the variance in the binomial distributmn, which appropriately 
models each R 3, is dependent on the mean and not constant as assumed by the lin- ear regression model; 
see [17]). Given very modest assumptions about the distribution of the V~'s, the optimal set of weights 
wl can be calculated efficiently using the iterative reweighted non- linear least squares algorithm [2]. 
This approach alms to optimize the final similarity function, rather than the evaluataon metrics over 
the clustering that this function leads to. Hence, it is possible that a different set of weights would 
lead to higher overall scores, when the effects from the particular clustering algorithm are factored 
in. How-ever, in our experimental analysis (Section 5) we found that the wmghts assigned by this procedure 
were in all but one case bet- ter than those produced by (limited) exhaustive search; and in the one 
exceptmnal case, the difference in final performance was negligthle. At the same time, the log-linear 
model greatly sim- plifies the task of combining the similarity values in a principled manner, and allows 
us to experiment with more models (e.g., Words plus Linklt data alone, Words plus each of the versions 
of Nominator data alone, etc.) than would otherwise be practical.  Experimental Evaluation In the previous 
sections we described the possible choices of clustering algorithms and of text features that we can 
use to pro- duce document clusters. We now evaluate the clustering and feature selection choices experimentally 
(Section 5.2), using text corpora and evaluation metrics developed in the context of the TDT2 initiative 
(Section 5.1). In addition to reporting results for the single-pass algorithm, which satisfies TDT2's 
online re- quirement, we also present results for the other three clustering algorithms of Section 2, 
even though these three algorithms do not fit strictly in the TDT2 setting, since they respect the docu- 
ments repeatedly during clustering. 5.1 TDT2: Corpora and Metrics The TDT2 corpus that we use for our 
experiments consists of newswire articles from 1998, from Associated Press, The New York Times, the Voice 
of America, Public Radio International, CNN, and ABC. Our training corpus consisted of the 20,228 ar- 
txcles in the TDT2 training corpus, while our evaluation test cor- pus consisted of the 22,410 documents 
in the TDT2 evaluation test corpus for topac detection. 4 The TDT2 metric for evaluating the performance 
of topic de- tection systems as the cost of detection, cdet:, which combines miss (PM) and false alarm 
(PEA) errors into a single number, cdet= CM " PM " PT "+ CFA " PFA " (1 --.PT) where CM and CFA are the 
costs of a miss and a false alarm, re- spectively (equal to 1 in the TDT2 evaluation), and PT is a train- 
mg set specific a priori target probability of a story discussing a topic (equal to 0.02 for the TDT2 
evaluation of topic detectmn). Note that PM and PFA are related to the more traditional met- tics of 
recall and precision, respectively; more specifically, PM is equal to 1 minus recall, and PEA is the 
same as fallout (which generally is low when precision is high), cdet offers one way to combine these 
usually competing factors into one number, so that rankings of different systems, or different versions 
of the same system with different input features, can be made. The results that we report next use the 
cdet metric above, and were computed with evaluation software produced by NIST for TDT2. Using the same 
training and test corpora 5 and the same evaluation metric enables us to directly compare results with 
those obtained by the TDT2 participants in a large-scale evaluation. [12] discusses further details of 
the TDT2 evalua- tion methodology, including the way that system-produced clus- ters are aligned wnh 
the clusters m the reference model. In both TDT2 and our experiments presented here, evaluation scores 
are reported separately after micro-averaging (i.e., scores are cal- culated per document and averaged 
across all documents) and macro-averaging (i.e., scores are calculated per cluster in the reference model 
and averaged across those clusters), or, in TDT terminology, as story-weighted and topic-weighted, respectively. 
 5.2 Results over the Training Corpus Tf VS.tf. idf weights: As a first experiment, we studied the performance 
of the t£ and t:£. 2df weighting schemes over the TDT2 training cor- 4The TDT2 data included 21,950 additional 
documents in a develop-ment set that participants were free to use during training. We did not use these 
documents for the experiments reported in this paper. 5Actnally, a subset of the training eorpus available 
to TDT2 partici- pants; see footnote 4. 0o~ ........................................................................................................................................................................................................... 
 -4"-Slngletink ~-CompleteLink ~ GroupwaseAvg ~ SlnglePass] [-.~-SiroleLirf,~ ,.l.. Com~eteLink ---A- 
Gtoup~aseAv~ -)+- SinglePass] -\ o.m ,... f 0~ ~2 03 01 0S os e7 oe 09 T (a) Figure 1: Topic- (a) and 
story-weighted (b) cdet . /It / ///    IL / / o ol 02 0~3 04 ae 06 0.7 0a 0.9 T (a) "~ 0015 0o0~ 
 o o.i 02 oa o,t os T o8 (h) as a function of the threshold r (Words with tf. oo21......................................................~ 
-~ &#38; 01 O2 o.a o.4 as o:s T (b) o.;, oe a~ idf weights). .................................................................... 
 o ~, oe 09 Figure 2: Topic-(a)and story-weighted (b) cdet as a function of the threshold r (t f. idf 
weights; groupwise-average clustering). pus discussed above. Not surpnsingly, using t f. idf weights 
results m slightly better (i.e., lower) values of both the story- and the topic-weighted cdet metric. 
Hence, in the rest of our experimental evaluation we use tf. idf weights. Also, in all subsequent experiments 
we adopted a standard cosine metric to calculate the similarity between two feature vectors. Choice of 
clustering algorithm: Figure l compares the performance of the clustering algorithms that we discussed 
m Section 2, for the Words representarmn of the documents using tf. idf weights. As it was expected on 
theoretical grounds, groupwlse-average performs significantly better than both complete-link and single-link, 
and better than single-pass clustering. These results are consistent across the other feature representations 
of the documents that we tried (Sect,on 3). Consequently, we mostly focus on groupwise-average clustenng 
in the rest of the paper. However, we also report results for single-pass clustering. In effect, although 
the latter technique performs slightly worse than groupwise-average clustenng over our training data, 
it has the important advan- tage of being an on-line techmque (Section 2), comparable to the methods 
used in TDT2. Furthermore, Figure 1 reveals that for an appropriate range of thresholds r, single-pass 
performs almost as well as groupwxse-average clustenng. This surprismg fact justifies the use of single-pass 
clustering if accurate estima- tion of a suitable value of r can be performed from the training data, 
and may offer an explanation for the relatively small im- provement obtained by TDT2 systems that delayed 
clustering decisions for 10 or 100 documents. Analysis of individual document features: As &#38;scussed 
in Section 3, we have a chmce of features that we can use to represent the documents in our collection. 
Flgurre 2 shows the cdet values that we obtain when we use each of these choices in isolation for clustering. 
As we can see, the Words representation performs the best, with sigmficantly lower values of both topic- 
and story-weighted cdet than those for the Linklt and NominatorAll representations. Thts result may indicate 
that discarding non-nouns results in significant loss of information, or may be due to limitations of 
the specific tools (Linklt and Nominator) we used. For example, many cases of shghtly different forms 
of proper names (e.g., "Microsoft" and "Microsoft, Inc?') are not matched by our cur- rent techniques; 
methods that perform such matching [3] have been shown to be useful in information retrieval. In any 
case, the failure of the additional hnguistic features to improve per- Feature combination Intercept 
Words LinkIT Nominator Words + LinkIt -3.2850 25.9389 -1.1403 N/A Words + NominatorAll -3.2402 22.4196 
N/A 5.8726 Words + NominatorPPOU -3.2440 22.4787 N/A 4.6294 Words + NominatorPPO -3.2479 22.4412 N/A 
4.1257 Words + Linklt + NominatorAll -3.2476 23.5958 -1.3459 5.8944 Words + LinkIt + NommatorPPOU -3.2519 
23.7355 -1.4445 i 4.6586 Words + LinkIt + NominatorPPO -3.2560 23.7206 -1.4692 i 4.1479 Table 1: Combinations 
of features and wexghts estimated for the corresponding log-linear model. O.OlS .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 
 ['- -WO~S ,-Words.r~Linl,dl ~tr-Words~.dNominalorAII ~Word,,Lir~JtondNomi~AU I -*- Words ..m.. Words 
8rid km~l -~-Words and Nomin~oeALL --~.- Words. LiN~t. and Nominator~J~ 1 "8 o.~ i o.oc~  o 1 o 2 o 
3 o.4 o.s o.s o.; oe 09 ol o2 ~3 o4 os os 0.7 os o9 T T (a) (b) Figure 3: Topic- (a) and story-weighted 
(b) cdet as a function of the threshold ~- (t f. idf weights; groupwise-average clustering; optimal log-linear 
combination of Words with other features). formance when used alone does not mean that they cannot con- 
tribute to better clustenngs when used together with the original word vectors, as we show m the next 
paragraph. Choice of document feature combinations: To combine the similarity values obtained by the 
above methods, we apphed the log-linear model of Section 4. We selected 1,358 documents from the training 
part of the TDT2 corpus for which their topic assignment was known (i.e., manually annotated by the Linguistic 
Data Consortium). Among the (13258) = 921,403 pairs of these documents, we randomly selected 100,000 
pairs for training models that included different combinations of input features. These combinations 
and the weights assigned to each similarity vector are shown in Table 1. We note several interesting 
observations from Table 1. First, and in line with the empirical results of the preceding paragraph, 
the weights for words are invariably larger than either of the other two features, and the weights for 
Nominator are larger (in absolute values) than those assigned to Linklt. This indi- cates that, with 
our current extraction techniques, words remain the most important feature 6, and that the information 
provided by Nominator is more useful than the simple noun phrase head matching performed by LinkIt. Second, 
the Linklt vector is as- signed negative weights; this does not mean that noun heads are not useful as 
a matching feature, but rather indicates that given the information from words and proper nouns, additional 
6This was confirmed with a separate analysis of variance study. matches of noun phrases are evidence 
for document dissimilar-ity. This surprising result can form the basis of a more detailed analysis of 
matching noun phrases in the future. Finally, the negative intercept confirms that, in the absence of 
other refor- mation and given the low expected similanty between any two documents 7, it is far more 
likely for two documents to belong in different clusters than the same cluster. Note that the automatic 
modeling procedure has explored a range of weights usually not covered by other techniques, which would 
have been unable to detect the negative correlation of the LinkIt-based similarities with the overall 
document similarity. Figure 3 contrasts the performance of the best single feature (Words) with models 
involving additional linguistically moti- vated features; as Figure 3 shows, the combined features slightly 
outperform the Words feature alone, and extend the range of threshold values for which the cdet curve 
remains low (which is important when the method xs apphed to unseen data, where a different optimal ~- 
may apply). 5.3 Comparisons with TDT2 results Having explored different clustering algorithms and assessedthe 
contributions of features and feature combinations on (part of) the TDT2 training set, we selected the 
best feature combination 7The average similarity was 0.039 for Words, 0 030 for Linklt, and 0.012 for 
NominatorAE, accordingly, our model combining these three features predicts that two documents will be 
in the same cluster 9.14% of the time. 229 Story-Weighted Topic-Weighted Story-Weighted Topic-Weighted 
cdet cdet cdet cdet Groupwise-Average Training 0.0068 0.0034 0.0083 0.0032 Clustering Test 0.0043 0.0042 
0.0046 0.0034 Single-Pass Training 0.0078 0.0043 0.0087 0.0034 Clustering Test 0.0072 0.0046 0.0079 0.0036 
 Table 2: Training and test detection costs for groupwise-average and single-pass clustering (tf. idf 
weights; optimal log-linear combination of Words, LinkIt, and NominatorAll). Optimized for Story-Weighted 
Optimized for Topic-Weighted Story-Weighted Topic-Weighted Story-Weighted Topic-Weighted cdet cdet cdet 
cdet Groupwise-Average Training 0.0071 0.0033 0.0071 0.0033 Clustering Test 0.0052 0.0037 0.0052 0.0037 
Single-Pass Traimng 0.0077 0.0047 0.0090 0.0032 Clustering Test 0.0074 0.0049 0.0084 0.0039 Table 3: 
Training and test detection costs for groupwlse-average and single-pass clustering (tf. idf weights; 
Wordsas the single feature used). Story- Topic- Organization Weighted Weighted Average cdet cdet BBN 
0.0040 0.0047 0.00435 IBM 0.0046 0.0042 0.00440 Dragon 0.0045 0.0048 0.00465 UMass 0.0040 0.0064 0.00520 
UPenn 0.0071 0.0063 0.00670 CMU 0.0077 0.0057 0.00670 CIDR 0.0096 0.0084 0.00900 Ulowa 0.0130 0.0095 
0.01125 Our system (a) 0.0072 0.0046 0.00590 Our system (b) 0.0079 0.0036 0.00575 Table 4: The cdet 
values over the test corpus for the TDT2 participants and for our system. The last two rows show the 
test results that we obtained by using single-pass clustering and the best parameters learned during 
training for (a) lowest story- weighted cdet, and (b) lowest topic-weighted cdet. (Words plus Linklt 
plus NominatorAll) and fixed the threshold parameter r, both on the basis of the training set. Then we 
ap- plied both the groupwise-average and single-pass methods on the TDT2 test set. The results, shown 
m Table 2, reveal that our system not only is stable when applied to a different set of unseen documents 
but also generally improves the cost of detection on the test set (Le., has a lower cost for the test 
set than for the training set). Note that Table 2 has separate entries for the threshold values that 
minimized on the training set the story-weighted (micro-averaged) cdee and the topic-weighted (macro-averaged) 
cdet. Table 3 shows how the original feature, Words, fares com- pared to the combination of all three 
features for which cdet scores were given in Table 2. We observe that the combina- uon of the three features 
continues to slightly outperform words alone in the test set, as was the case for the training set. Overall, 
in 11 of the 16 cases presented in Tables 2 and 3 the combined features approach performs better than 
just using words. Finally, we compare the performance of our system (with all three features and using 
the single-pass technique to en- sure a fair comparison) on the test set with the performance of the 
TDT2 participants on the same set of documents (Ta- ble 4). Our system places in the middle range of 
the participants in terms of micro-averaged detection cost (whether optimized for micro- or macro-averages), 
but performs especially well in terms of macro-averaged detection cost: it places second when optimized 
for micro-averaging, and first when it is also opti- mized for macro-averaging. 6 Conclusions Our analysis 
has established that both the chosen clustering algorithm and the input features make a difference in 
the performance of a system that separates documents in topical groups. We confirmed that groupwise-average 
performs best m the TDT2 setting, and discovered that single-pass can offer a cheaper but close second 
if the clustenng threshold Is carefully selected. In addition, we found that using information about 
matching noun phrase heads and proper nouns can help improve overall clustering quality. We addressed 
the hard problem of combining sirmlafity values from multiple input features (or dif- ferent similarity 
functions) by proposing a theoretically justified statistical model, whach was shown in practice to perform 
as well as or better than exhaustive search. Of course, the improvement offered by the linguistic features 
was relatively small, a fact that we believe is due in part to er- rors made by the extraction tools 
and in part to the generality of the classes considered. Our motivation for including the noun phrase 
head and proper name vectors in the first place was to fo- cus the input features on the protagonists 
m the documents. Tak- ing all noun phrase heads or all person and organization names is only an approximation, 
and in future work we will explore additional techniques so that only a few proper names or nouns are 
selected as the major participants for each event described in a document. Similarly, we plan to refine 
our techmque for identifying the locatmn of an event, and incorporate time infor- mation, which has already 
been used with some success by other systems [13, 22]. Acknowledgments We would like to thank Stefan 
Negrila and Kazi Zaman, who participated in earlier work that formed the precursor of the experiments 
reported in this paper. Kathy McKeown, Shi-Fu Chang, and the other members of the STIM-1 research group 
at Columbia University provided valuable feedback during the de- sign of the reported experiments. The 
work reported here was funded in part by a National Science Foundation STIMULATE grant, IRI-96-19124. 
Any opinions, findings, or recommenda- tions are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the NSE References <RefA>[1] J. Aberdeen, J. Burger, D. Day, L. Hirschman, P. Robinson, and M. 
Vilain. MITRE: Description of the Alembic system as used for MUC-6. In Proceedings of the Sixth Message 
Understanding Conference (MUC-6), 1995. [2] D. M. Bates and D. G. Watts. NonlinearRegressionAnal-ysis 
and its Applications. Wiley, New York, 1988. [3] W. W. Cohen. Integration of heterogeneous databases 
without common domains using queries based on textual similarity. In Proceedings of the 1998 A CM International 
Conference on Management of Data (SlGMOD'98), June 1998. [4] J. Fiscus, G. Doddington, J. Garofolo, and 
A. Martin. NIST's 1998 Topic Detection and Tracking evaluation (TDT2). In Proceedings of the 1999 DARPA 
Broad- cast News Workshop, pages 19-24, Hemdon, Virginia, February-March 1999. [5] W. B. Frakes and R. 
Baeza-Yates, editors. Information Re- trieval: Data Structures and Algorithms. Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey, 1992. [6] L. S. Gay and W. B. Croft. Interpreting nominal com- pounds for information 
retrieval. Information Processing and Management, 26(1):21-38, 1990. [7] Marti A. Hearst and Jan O. Pedersen. 
Reexamining the cluster hypothesis: Scatter/Gather on retrieval results. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual 
International ACM Con- ference on Research and Development in Information Re- trieval (SIGIR-96), August 
1996. [8] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw. Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster Analysis. 
Wiley, New York, 1990. [9] Mark Llberman. Topic Detection and Tracking Principal Investigators meeting, 
1998. [10] Stephen A. Lowe. The beta-bmomml mixture model and its application to TDT tracking and detection. 
In Proceed-ings of the 1999 DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, pages 127-131, Hemdon, Virginia, February-March 
1999. [11] K. McKeown, J. Klavans, V. Hatzivassiloglou, R. Barzi- lay, and E. Eskin. Towards multidocument 
summarization by reformulation: Progress and prospects. In Proceedings of the 17th National Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-99), pages 453-460, Orlando, Florida, July 1999. [12] National Institute 
of Standards and Technology. The Topic Detection and Tracking Phase 2 (TDT2) evaluation plan, 1998. Version 
3.7, August 3rd, 1998. Available from http://www.itl .nist.gov/iaui/894. Ol/ tdt98/doc/tdt2, eval .plan. 
98 .v3.7 .pdf. [13] Ron Papka, James Allan, and Victor Lavrenko. UMass ap- proaches to detection and 
tracking at TDT2. In Proceed-ings of the 1999 DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, pages 111-116, Hemdon, Virginia, 
February-March 1999. [14] C. Sable and V. Hatzlvassiloglou. Text-based approaches for the categorization 
of images. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Research and Advanced Technol- ogy for Digital 
Libraries (ECDL-99), Paris, France, 1999. [15] G. Salton and C. Buckley. Term weighting approaches in 
automatic text retrieval. Information Processing and Man- agement, 24(5):513-523, 1988. [16] G. Salton 
and M. Smith. On the application of syntac- tic methodologies in automatic text analysis. In Proceed-ings 
of the Twelfth Annual International ACM SIGIR Con- ference on Research and Development in Information 
Re- trieval (SIGIR-89), 1989. [17] T. J. Santner and D. E. Duffy. The Statistical Analysis of Discrete 
Data. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989. [18] Alan E Smeaton. Progress in the application of natural language 
processing to information retrieval tasks. The Computer Journal, 35(3):268-278, 1992. [19] N. Wacholder. 
Simplex NPs clustered by head: A method for identifying significant topics in a document. In Pro-ceedings 
of the COLING/ACL Workshop on the Compu- tational Treatment of Nominals, pages 70-79, Montreal, Canada, 
October 1998. [20] N. Wacholder, Y. Ravin, and M. Choi. Dlsambiguation of proper names in text. In Proceedings 
of the 5th ACL Con- ference on Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP- 97), pages 202-208, Washington, 
D.C., April 1997. [21] Y. Yang and X. Liu. A re-examination of text categoriza- tion methods. In Proceedings 
of the 22nd ACM Interna- tional Conference on Research and Development in Infor- mation Retrieval (SIGIR-99), 
pages 42-49, Berkeley, Cal- ifornia, 1999. [22] Y. Yang, T. Pierce, and J. Carbonell. A study on retro- 
spective and on-line event detection. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIG1R Conference 
on Re- search and Development in Information Retrieval (S1GIR- 98), pages 28-36, Melbourne, Australia, 
August 1998. </RefA>
			
