
 Proceedings of the 1994 winier Szmulatzon Conference ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, and 
A. F. Seila AN OBJECT ORIENTED SIMULATION MODEL FOR DETERMINING LABOR REQUIREMENTS AT TACO BELL Mark 
Godward Operations Engineering Taco Bell Corporation 17901 Von Karman Irvine, California 92714, U.S.A. 
 ABSTRACT In early 1990, Taco Bell launched a major study to develop a comprehensive and integrated Labor 
Management System in order to manage and optimize a payroll that exceeds $500 million per year. The core 
of this system is an object oriented simulation model that determines the amount and deployment of labor 
required in a restaurant in order to meet a given level of sales while delivering quality, service, cleanliness 
and value to its customers. A year has elapsed since its full implementation in company restaurants and 
it has realized a demonstrable bottom line impact of $7.6 million per year while increasing quality, 
service, cleanliness and value to the customer. The Taco Bell development and implementation teams were 
awarded the President s award in recognition for their contribution. This paper describes the application 
with particular attention to the object oriented simulation model. Keywords: Object oriented simulation, 
model specifications and development, general application, manufacturing applications (food manufacturing). 
1 INTRODUCTION This study describes a major strategic thrust by Taco Bell Corporation to increase its 
competitiveness in the Fast Food Industry through improved labor management. Taco Bell is the largest 
fast food company oriented to Mexican food. It has more than 4,000 stores (the indust~ term for restaurants) 
located throughout the world, although predominantly located in the U. S., Canada, and Puerto Rico. Sales 
from company owned stores (e.g. not franchisee owned or operated) exceed $2 billion per year. Labor costs 
alone exceed 25 ?4.of sales, or $500 million per year. Consequently, labor costs are critical to the 
success of Taco Bell, not only because of the amounts involved, but because it is the largest controllable 
cost. William Swart Newark College of Engineering New Jersey Institute of Technology University Heights 
Newark, New Jersey 07102-1982, U.S.A. In early 1990, Taco Bell launched a major study to develop a comprehensive 
and integrated Labor Management System (LMS). This decision was motivated by: -A continuing concern over 
labor costs; -The potential opportunities for labor savings; -A general consensus by management that 
the business had changed; and, -An opportunity to utilize state-of-the-art labor tools. The last two 
reasons proved to be the most significant. Taco Bell was one of the industry leaders in introducing the 
concept of value meals . Through aggressive pricing and marketing, customer demand had changed not only 
in volume, but also in type of product that was ordered. In order to continue to provide a high level 
of service, it was clear that labor would have to be reallocated in a new manner to reflect the changing 
nature of the business. Past experiences did not apply directly to the new environment. Management had 
understood the need to have better and more timely information to manage this new business environment. 
To provide this, a commitment had been made to introduce IBM compatible personal computers in every Taco 
Bell store linked to a centralized mainframe system at the corporate headquarters. This system, together 
with a number of software modules to automate management paperwork, collect and transmit transactional 
data to the mainframes for financial control, and control aspects of store operations was referred to 
as TACO ( Total Automation of Gompany Operations). It included an automated version of Taco Bell s traditional 
labor management system, called FAST. The focus of FAST was to determine the minimum amount of labor 
required to achieve excellence in service levels. There are three predominant types of labor in a restaurant: 
fixed labor, variable food preparation labor, and variable customer service labor. Fixed and variable 
food preparation labor were determined using work measurement techniques which were then input into the 
systcm. Customer service labor was then calculated by applying an adjustment algorithm to the measured 
work 1067 1068 Godward involved in direct service of the customer. The approach was empirical and required 
adjustments and calibrations to its assumptions for appropriate sensitivity in response to changing customer 
service goals, ordering patterns, and sales volume patterns. Furthermore, calibration based on a given 
set of restaurants would often result in relatively unpredictable labor allocations in others. Whenever 
a basic assumption at the restaurants level was changed, the system had to be recalibrated, mostly with 
unpredictable results. This happened whenever any critical procedure was changed, or when new products 
were introduced. It became virtually impossible to institutionalize changes in labor allocations that 
represented less than one percent of labor costs. In other words, any change in procedure or of equipment 
that had the potential of decreasing labor cost by $5 milliordyear (one percent of labor cost) or less 
could not be translated into actual savings due to FAST s shortcomings. These shortcomings also included 
the system s inability to help in actual labor scheduling. This represented an unacceptable loss of opportunity 
in one of the most competitive of all industries. As a result, the key labor requirements that needed 
to be included in Taco Bell s new LMS system were: -Accurate labor hours required to support corporate 
hospitality, quality, service, and cleanliness standards; -Restaurant specific labor management capability; 
-Ability to manage Taco Bell s financial targets; -Maximize productivity and return on labor dollafs 
invested; -Provide a user friendly scheduling tool for restaurant managers; -Provide timely feedback 
of actual labors used vs. allocated; and, -Flexibility to evolve as Taco Bell evolves. The responsibility 
to develop the system was given to Taco Bell s Operations Engineering Group. The group reported to a 
steering committee consisting of management representatives from all major divisions. The role of the 
steering committee was to provide input and guidance regarding labor issues and concerns, to provide 
access to internal resources, and to review and evaluate results. In addition, the group was allocated 
the resources necessary to accomplish the task, including access to required external consultants and 
facilities. Today, the new LMS has replaced the FAST module of TACO in each of the 2,800 company stores 
and is meeting or exceeding all requirements. The team that developed and implemented the system was 
awarded Taco Bell s Presidential Award for significant contributions to the Corporation in April, 1994, 
and Swart 2 OVERVIEW OF THE LABOR MANAGEMENT SYSTEM In order to address Taco Bell s requirements for 
the new LMS, it was necessary to develop procedures that helped to determine the number of employees 
and the types of skills required to provide customer service. However, improvements in service level 
achieved by hiring more people can only be obtained at the expense of increased labor cost. Consequently, 
it was necessary to make trade-off s between labor cost and customer service level to arrive at an acceptable 
level of profit. Once the right amount of labor required was determined, it was necessary to schedule 
the labor to meet the demand. Such a schedule had to meet a number of requirements including State Laws 
mandating the minimum shifi length for each employee including part time employees. Similarly, there 
are reasons to set a maximum shift length for employees. In addition, most stores have a limited number 
of employees on the payroll and hence a limit has to be placed on the number of employees that are scheduled 
for work. In order to provide answers to the above, it was necessag to develop a fully integrated series 
of quantitative models, the results of one model becoming input to the next. These models included a 
forecasting model to project the number of customers that could be expected at the store anytime during 
the day, a simulation model to determine the minimum number of employees needed and their deployment 
in the store to provide appropriate levels of service, and optimization models to schedule employees 
for each shift. The remainder of this paper will describe the role of simulation modeling and analysis 
in answering the key question of how much labor is required and how it should be deployed in the restaurant 
in order to meet corporate operational standards while minimizing labor costs. 3 CATEGORIZATION OF LABOR 
The type of labor used in a restaurant can be categorized into three basic types: Fixed, Food Preparation 
or Other Variable, and Customer Service. The categories are based on the degree in which the amount of 
labor required to complete a given task depends on the level of sales in the restaurant. Fixed labor 
involves the labor responsible for performing tasks that are independent of sales volume, For example, 
most cleaning activities prior to opening or after closing of the restaurant fall into this catego~. 
For this kind of labor, the procedures are well established including when it must be performed. Consequently, 
standard work measurement techniques are adequate to Labor Requirements at Taco Bell determine the person-hours 
required to accomplish tasks included in this category. Food preparation labor refers to that labor required 
to prepare the ingredients for the menu items that are served to the customer. Chopping lettuce or tomatoes, 
filling condiment containers, and filling napkin holders are examples of this category. Although the 
amount of labor required to perform these activities is related to the sales volume of the restaurant. 
it can be performed at time periods prior to or after the rush periods. As such, the amount of labor 
required is predicable and the scheduling of that labor is flexible. Consequently, standard work measurement 
techniques are also adequate to determine the person-hours required to accomplish tasks included in this 
category. Customer service labor accounts for most of the labor required in a restaurant. It is labor 
that is used to satis~ the orders of customers. Examples of this type of labor include assembling a taco, 
pouring a drink, take an order, and make change. Since customer arrivals at a restaurant and what they 
will order are random processes, the demand for this type of labor is also random. In traditional industries, 
inventories are used as shock absorbers between the fluctuations of customer demand and the need for 
labor. In other words, when demand is low, labor is used to replenish inventories while when demand is 
high, orders are filled from the inventory accumulated during the low demand periods. This strategy has 
limited effectiveness in fast food operations because the amount of time that a finished product can 
be held before becoming unacceptable to the customer is typically measured in minutes. As a consequence, 
the demand for this type of labor may vary by as much as an order of magnitude from one time period to 
the next--for example, the half hour just before and just after the beginning of the lunch period. 4 
THE NEED FOR SIMULATION As previously mentioned, fixed labor requirements and food preparation labor 
requirements can be determined through traditional time study requirements. This is not the case for 
customer service labor requirements because of the following: -Customer arrivals are random; -Customers 
arrive at the counter and at the drive thru independently; -What customers order is random; -Time required 
to place an order, make change, and deliver the order is random; -Time required to assemble or make the 
product is random; -Completed orders must be delivered to either the drive thru or counter depending 
on where the order was placed; -The amount of labor demanded is a function of the service level to be 
provided to the customer (e.g. the appropriate balance between labor cost and customer service needs 
to be assured). Although the above is not an exhaustive list of reasons why traditional work measurement 
techniques are inadequate to determine customer service labor requirements, it illustrates the complexity 
of the problem. It also points to simulation as a solution strategy. Simulation is not a new strategy 
to address the issue of determining labor requirements in a fast food environment [4]. What is new is 
the object oriented simulation paradigm to address these issues. This paradigm is particularly appropriate 
for Taco Bell because of its corporate strategy to be the value leader in the fast food business and 
its aggressive pursuit of new and innovative points of access (kiosks, malls, convenience stores). These 
strategies have made the notion of a typical or standard store configuration or menu a thing of the past. 
Yet, because labor costs are one of the most important determinants of whether new concepts will be financially 
feasible, the requirement to develop new simulation models to analyze new concepts is very strong. At 
the same time, the time frame to respond and provide labor cost inputs in these decisions is a matter 
of a few weeks. Through the development of an object oriented model, the actual coding needs associated 
with representing new concepts have been virtually eliminated. 5 SIMTAC: AN OBJECT-ORIENTED COMPUTER 
SIMULATION MODEL Taco Bell made the decision to use an object-oriented computer simulation language to 
accommodate the changing needs of the business. It was assumed, and this proved to be the case, that 
if a basic, flexible framework could be developed initially, future modeling exercises would entail combining 
the basic building blocks differently. The simulation language used for this application was MOD SIM 
from CACI, Inc. A shell of Super Objects called ADME provides the underlying functionality. Specific 
Objects were then developed for the particular Taco Bell applications. These Objects are the basis of 
SIMTAC (Taco Bell Simulator) which in effect has developed into a generic user-friendly fast-food restaurant 
simulator. MODSIM 11 is described as being a modular, object oriented, strongly typed, block -structured 
simulation language by CACI Products Company [2]. Furthermore, an Object is described summarily as a 
combination of a 1070 Godward data record, that describes the status of the Object, and a list of proccdurcs, 
or Methods, that describe the behavior of the Object. Objects arc instantiation of Object Types or classes 
of objects. As new Object Types arc defrncd, they can inherit the functionality of existing Object Types 
and specialize the functionality further in the new Object Type. Objects can also be polymorphous as 
objects with common ancestry and therefore common Methods can implement these inherited Methods differently. 
The SIMTAC implementation makes strong usc of the inheritance capabilities as depicted graphically in 
Figure 1 Concmtual Rotwosontation of SIMTAC and its Relationshira to ADME, SIMGRAPHICS, and MODSIM  
 ilMTAC Components ~ ttt t ADME by ;ERTEKwith &#38; and Generic O~ioct components t1 &#38; tt SIMGRAPHiCS 
by CAC1 Other MODdlM Objects tI tt MODSIM II Object-Oriented Languago by CACI Figure 1: SIMTAC Inheritance 
Capabilities The arrows show the inheritance from the lower level of the MODSIM 11 language all the way 
to the SIMTAC implementation. All Objects are implemented using MODSIM II which is provided with a library 
of base objects that can be used at higher levels for defining identical or modified Object Types. SIMGRAPHICS 
[3] consists of a number of Graphical Objects implemented with MODSIM. ADME [1], which was developed 
by Pertek Industries, defines a number of flexible generic objects which inherit behaviors from SIMGRAPHICS 
and MODSIM II Objects types. Finally, the SIMTAC level Object Types inherit ftmctionality predominantly 
from ADME and all Io\vcr Icvels. Within StMTAC, several lCVCIS of Objects can exist lvhich inhcri( functionality 
of Object Types ~vithin SIMTAC as well as lCVCISbelow it. To illustrate this with a spccitic example, 
consider two Object Types such as Worker and Customer Object Types. Both Workers and Customers arc 
a sub-class of the Human class of Object Types wi~hi n SIMTAC. The class of Humans inhcri{s the Method 
Dcscribc from ADME, and the capability or being rcndcrcd graphically and Swart from SIMGRAPHICS. Figure 
2 illustrates the class hierarchy for ADME and the MODSIM and SIMGRAPHICS classes on which it depends. 
 MODSIM SIMGRAPHICS II G~­ c-w -&#38;w Omukq -rim t Figure 2: SIMTAC Class Hierarchies Figures 3 and 
4 show the different menus generated when prompting a Worker and Customer, showing common choices as 
well as those spe~ifiing each object type. The Scale selection will invoke a method inherited from SIMGRAPHICS 
objects, the Show References selection will invoke a method implemented at the ADME level, the Describe 
selection will invoke a method that shows polymorphism (as it behaves differently for workers and customers), 
and the Add/Edit Task selection will invoke a method only available to the Worker Object Type. _-.. 
Llcsctib. Validalc Ocstmy i] 1 II.. .. show flelef.mces - SIIOWUnasslgncd Tosks II la SCI Human s Icon 
Ii IISctSladTlmc W Stoo Time -----. SC! Wwkc,ts Will I.wd :1 &#38;M/Edil Task tmovc Task 1 lMd Machine 
Figure 3: Result of prompting a <Worker Object Labor Requirements 1 nrcummct ~muilraWEmiWTalfl ?: I 
allbfc ICWI IidYhI L oesdlc F-=-- ---- s. . { Vnlld&#38;lc Decuoy rlanslcr $ f, SIWWn.ftt,~cs 1 show 
Unassl~ncd lasts $ Set Human , k.. S.1 S7mi Tlmc W slop Tlmc r, Send Th.m 1. S.1 Odcr Makcf Chc,WIclnicr14rivdOc 
lay Change Delay Ixlerc Cxtmg Change Oclay dtct p.ylng ordci i Chongc Dclayt. stad moving I. 1[.. ~ M 
Enliy Pohll S.1 Exit Point ., Set Enhv Unc . Figure 4: Result of prompting a Custonler Object The approach 
described above has some veV positive implications for the developer. Independently of the initial cost 
of developing a first model of a given problem, new models can be derived at a relatively low cost because 
of the high re-usability of available modules. At the highest levels, the existing object types can be 
enhanced or differentiated further in their functionality. Currently, the SIMTAC model is limited to 
one type of Custonler which enters the system, waits in line to place orders, places orders, pays, waits 
in line to receive the order, receives the order, and leaves. SIMTAC only models the production areas 
so walk-up customers are not modeled as going to tables, and behave identically to customers that take 
out their food. If in the near fiture it were necessary to model the cat-in customer, a new Object Type 
could be derived from the existing Customer Object Type. The new eat-in customer would have new Methods 
such as Walk to the table , Eat at (hc table , and Leave the table while selectively keeping all [he 
pcr(incnt clcmcnts of (IIC customer Objcc( Type. A( Io\vcr ICVCIS, any change made lvould affect all 
descendant object types, thus multiplying the productivity of the dcvclopcr. [f for some reason, it were 
ncccss~ry to neutralize the cffcc(s of chan~cs in a subsc( of the dcsccndants, this could bc done sclcc(ivcly 
at the appropriate Icvcl. Object-oriented modcllng is similar (o Branch-and-Bound ( problcll] SOIVIII~ 
II) [Ii;l[ ;I feasible Branch can at Taco Bell 1071 be pursued as a solution to a rnodcling problem until 
it is necessary to return to an appropriate level of ascendancy to explore new Branches . Beyond objective 
and measurable modeling productivity, the development experience for the SIMTAC system has shown that 
the object oriented modeling paradigm places little if any restrictions on creativity while yielding 
superior system models to the end user. In the next section, SIMTAC S capabilities, from the point of 
view of (he user, are summarized in more detail.  5.1 Model Functionality from a User s Perspective 
Restaurant simulation models based on SIMTAC can be built or modified without any programming. Actions 
are performed by selecting from pulldown menus, and data is input at prompts provided by selections from 
the pull­down menus. Objects required for a simulation modeling study can be incorporated and related 
to each other as required. As described above, Objects are defined by the functions or the Methods that 
they a~e able to perform. Some of the Methods are evident to Ihe user in pull­down menu selections, but 
the vast majority are not. For example Human Objects will move with a Move Method to the location of 
the next action that they need to execute such as, Exit Restaurant Method without intervention from the 
user. The location and time of the action however, is defined by the user as a Set Exit Spot Method and 
Set Exit Time Method in a pull-down menu. All objects possess certain common methods that are executed 
in an identical fashion by each and every one of them. Examples of these are the Zoon~ to , Scale , Rotate 
, Save to File , Show References and Load to Layout methods. Certain objects possess some common methods 
with executions that are specific to the type of object. An example of this is the Describe method which 
in a Worker object lists entry and exit times, efllciency and tasks assigned; while for a Food object 
the Describe method will list ingredients, recipe, shelf life and price. As objects become more specific 
they are assigned methods spccitlc to the functionality of the object. For example, a Cash Register object 
possesses a Set Order Delay method Jvhich is not available to any other object. 5.1.1 Types of Ol)jccts 
SIMTAC S basic objects were classified as static, dynamic, and group objects. Godward and Swart 5.1.2 
Static Objects Static objects include equipment, logical, human holding, and inanimate objects. Equipment 
objects describe where tasks are performed. Each has a physical equivalent in the restaurant. Examples 
of these are food­assembly lines, fryers, drink m,akers, grills, toasters, generic workstations, drive-through 
windows and food holding bins. Tasks , such as assembly of products or placing fries in a frier, require 
the presence of Workers , while Processes , such as cooking fries or burgers, do not. Monitors and Cash 
Registers are special cases of equipment objects as they play a significant role in defining the logical 
relationships between different equipment objects and the flow of customers, orders and food items. Logical 
objects predominantly define logical relationships between customers, orders, food items and workers. 
Some logical objects define certain tasks that need to be executed to complete customer orders. These 
objects do not have a physical equivalent in the restaurant. Examples of these are the Consolidator and 
Router objects. The Consolidator object defines how orders are assembled from finished products into 
bags and trays, the Router object defines routing priorities when more than one equipment is available 
for transforming a given product. Human holding objects define where humans stand while they perform 
tasks or wait to perform tasks. One Human can stand at each Spot object while between 1 and 20 Humans 
can stand at each Line object. Inanimate Objects represent those that are physically present in the restaurant 
and act as an obstacle to the circulation of Humans . Examples of inanimate objects are walls and counters. 
A special inanimate object is the CAD object which is used for importing DXF-formatted two-dimensional 
layout plans. 5.1.3 Dynamic Objects This category of objects includes food objects, human objects, and 
food grouping objects. Food objects represent the individual products that are manufactured or assembled 
at the restaurant. Drawing an equivalence to manufacturing, a bill of materials becomes a list of ingredients, 
a process plan is a recipe, and storage is a holder. The first ingredient of a food object can also be 
another fd object which is equivalent to a sub­assembly in manufacturing. Assembly and process delays 
are typically detincd in the food object. Human Objects are the customers and workers. Customers perform 
a defined list of tasks: arrive, order, pay, get food and leave and the user needs to define where they 
are performed. Workers perform tasks at locations defined by equipment objects and some logical objects. 
The user defines which tasks and priorities the worker will perform as well as the inter-arrival delays 
for customers and etllciencies for workers. The human Objects are designed to follow paths that are defined 
by a Pathmaker function in SIMTAC in such a way that static objects are avoided. This obstacle avoidance 
capability is automatically optimized with every change in the location of any static object. This capability 
has proven usefhl in the analysis of different restaurant layout alternatives. Food Grouping Objects 
are used to combine several food items into one entity to facilitate handling. Some of these objects, 
spatulas and fry baskets, are used in food production; while others, bags and trays, are used to deliver 
finished products to customers. 5.1.4 Group Objects These objects are used to combine dynamic and static 
objects to facilitate model building and editing. 6 SIGNIFICANCE OF WORK The significance of this study 
is both tactical and strategic. The SIMTAC model is the heart of an integrated Labor Management System 
which allows the productivity of labor and the return on dollars invested in labor to be maximized. The 
documented labor savings are one hour per day in each Taco Bell store. In a system with more than 4,000 
stores open an average of 363 days a year, the realized bottom line impact is approximately $2.7 million 
per year per 1000 stores (assuming an hourly total labor cost of $7.50). However, there are other perhaps 
even more significant benefits. As a result of this study, there is now an entirely new, flexible, and 
adaptable methodolo~ in place to determine how much labor is actually needed at each store and how that 
labor should be deployed in the store. Before, with the FAST system, the manager was told how many hours 
of labor were allocated to the store. It was then his or her responsibility to decide how to most effectively 
deploy this labor. This resulted in variability in the level of service, hospitality, quality, and cleanliness 
at different stores. Such variability is one of the most significant sources of customer dissatisfaction 
in the fast food industry. The elimination of variability will increase customer satisfaction which will 
lead to a greater frequency of visitation and, hence, higher sales. The driver of the new LMS is the 
level of customer semice that management wishes to provide. Given a specified level of service, typically 
stated as average customer waiting time, the LMS system can project sales, use SIMTAC to determine staffing 
levels, and use Labor Requirements optimization to schedule crews. This information is then translated 
into labor cost using prevailing labor rates. This capability provides management with the capability 
to manage to Taco Bell s financial targets. EtTcctive total management is achieved when this information 
is balanced with other marketing and strategic studies which indicate the impact on short and long term 
customer behavior as a result of changes in service level. The new LMS is a planning and scheduling system 
as well as a control system. It provides store management with recommendations regarding the amount of 
labor it should use as well as specific inputs on how it should be scheduled and deployed. It is the 
store manager s responsibility to translate these recommendations into action. It is higher management 
s responsibilities to insure that store managers are executing their responsibilities as expected. The 
new LMS system provides management with a timely feedback on how many labor hours were used in a particular 
restaurant (obtained from payroll information) and the amount of labor that was recommended (obtained 
from the LMS). This information is used not only to monitor store manager s performance, but also as 
a control on the performance of the new LMS system. All problems that are perceived with the new LMS 
system are documented and investigated. As such, the LMS system is in a state of continuous improvement 
to better help Taco Bell manage its labor resources.  7 CONCLUSION This study has taken place over a 
period of four years. It now has been filly deployed as an integrated system in the entire Taco Bell 
system of company owned stores. Almost a year has elapsed since initial implementation, during which 
time the performance of the system was scrutinized and evaluated by virtually everybody, from store manager 
to vice-presidents of operations and the CEO. Even though the developers and implementers of the system 
received Taco Bell s highest recognition for their contribution, it must be remembered that a system 
like this is a living entity. Everybody in the corporation has a stake in it and has suggestions, criticisms, 
praises, and questions. All of these must continually be addressed and appropriate responses made. In 
doing so, the system is continually improved and increases its contributions to Taco Bell. What is emerging 
is the realization that there is another strategy for success, that of information and technology, which 
can take its place next to the traditional strategies of finance, marketing, and operations to achieve 
success in this moit competitive of industries. at Taco Bell 1073 REFERENCES <RefA>ADME User s Guide. 1991. 
Version 1.0. San Diego, Ca.: Pertek Industries, Inc. MODSIM II. 1992. The language for object-oriented 
programming reference manual. CACI Products Company. SIMGRAPHICS II Reference Manual. 1992. CACI Products 
Company. Swart, W. and L. Donno. 1981. Volume 11. Simulation modeling improves operations planning, and 
productivity of fast food restaurants, Interfaces.</RefA> AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MARK GODWARD is Manager of Operations 
Engineering at Taco Bell Corporation. He received his MS in Industrial Engineering from North Carolina 
State University in 1989. His other industrial experiences include Ford Motors of Argentina, General 
Tire and Rubber Company, and Tompkins and Associates. The work presented in this paper was partially 
responsible for him being receiving the prestigious Taco Bell President s award for contributions to 
the Corporation. Together with William Swart, he received the 1994 Institute of Industrial Engineers 
Operations Research Division Award for Outstanding Application of Operations Research Techniques Producing 
Significant Results. WILLIAM SWART is Dean of New Jersey Institute of Technology s Newark College of 
Engineering. He is a former Vice President of Burger King Corporation, where he received the 1981 Franz 
Edelman award for the practice of Management Science and the Restaurant and Institutions Magazine Honorable 
mention award for Food Facilities Design. Together with Mark Godward, he received the 1994 Institute 
of Industrial Engineering Operations Research Division Award for Outstanding Application of Operations 
Research Techniques Producing Significant Results. He serves as a strategic consultant to Taco Bell Corporation. 
  
			
