
 An Optimal Bound for Conforming Quality Triangulations (extended abstract) Tiow-Seng Tan Department 
of Information Systems &#38; Computer Science National University of Singapore Lower Kent Ridge, Singapore 
0511 Abstract teria of shape and size are somewhat conflicting-good triangles may be the result of adding 
new vertices. Au-This paper shows that for any plane geometric graph ~ tomatic generation of triangulations 
has been a subject with n vertices, there exists a triangulation T conforms for research since the 1960s. 
Nevertheless, many in­to G, i.e. each edge of G-is the union of some edges of T, teresting results, both 
practical and theoretical ones, where 7 has 0(n2) vertices with angles of its triangles have been discovered 
in the recent years too; see, for merwuring no more than ~ r. Additionally, T can be example, [BDE92, 
BEG90, BeEp91, BMR94, Dey91, computed in 0(n2 log n) time. The quadratic bound on MeSo92j Mitc93a, Mitc93b, 
Mitc94, Rupp93, Tan93] the size of its vertex set is within a constant factor of and the survey [BeEp92]. 
worst case optimal. This paper considers triangulating a plane geomet­ ric graph (i.e. plane graph with 
straight edges.) using triangles with no large angles. Such resulting triangu­ 1 Introduction lations 
have potential applications in the area of finite element and surface approximation; ~, for example, 
In many engineering applications such as finite ele­ [BaAz76, BaLi84, Greg75]. It shows that triangulating 
ment analysis [Cave74], surface interpolation [Laws77], a plane geometric graph of n vertices using angles 
no and shape reconstruction [Bois88], two and higher­ larger than ~n requires at most 0(n2) new vertices. 
dimensional domains are frequently decomposed into A previous result of Mitchell [Mitc93b] achieves angle 
small and simple elements before numerical computa­ bound of ~r with 0(n2 log n) new vertices. This pa­tion. 
One particularly important class of decomposi­ per thus provides significantly better bounds on triangle 
tions is the so-called simplicial cell complex, usually shape and vertex size. We also note that the 
quadratic referred to as triangulation, where the domain is de­ bound on the vertex size is within a 
constant factor of composed into simplices triangles in two and tetrahe­ worst case optimal. Our construction 
is conceptually dral in three dimensions-so that the intersection of two simple though its proof is quite 
involved. It has some simplices is either empty or a face of both. flavor of Edelsbrunner and Tan [EdTa93] 
and Mitchell For a given domain such as a polygonal region or, [Mitc93b]. The complete proof indeed uses 
some results more generally, a plane graph with straight edges, there derived from the latter. are clearly 
many ways to decompose or tn angulate it The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formal­into a triangulation, 
with or without the addition of izes the problem. Section 3 provides the outline of the new vertices 
to the domain. But accuracy and ef%ciency method that proves the quadratic bound, and Sections of an 
engineering computation impose optimal criteria 4 to 9 discuss its details for angle bound a = ~n. Then, 
such as the triangle shape (with bounds on triangle an- Section 10 provides details on implementing the 
proof gles away from O and r) and vertex size (with bounds and extending it to a = ~ r, and Section 11 
concludes on the number of new vertices), respectively. These cri­ the paper. This extended abstract 
omits most proofs; the full details can be found in [Tan94]. Permission to copy without fee all or part 
of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the 2 Some Terminology title of the publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association of Computing We first introduce 
some notions, then define the prob- Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee lem. 
and/or specific permission. 10th Computational Geometry 94-6/94 Stony Brook, NY, USA @ 1994 ACM 0-89791 
-648-4/94/0006..$3.50 Plane Geometric Graphs. Let S be a set of n points or vertices in 3?2. An edge 
is a closed line segment connecting two points. Let E be a collection of edges determined by vertices 
of S. Then G = (S, E) is a plane geometric graph if (i) no edge contains a vertex other than its endpoints, 
that is, ab n S = {a, b} for every edge ab E E, and (ii) no two edges cross, that is, abncd E {a, b} 
for every two edges ab # cd in E.  One example of a plane geometric graph is a poly­gon where S and 
E form a single cycle. The cycle is the boundary of the polygon. It subdivides Y?z into a bounded face, 
its interior, and an unbounded face, its exterior. A polygon with four edges or sides is a quadri­lateral. 
Triangulations. A triangulation is a plane geometric graph T = (S, E) so that E is maximal. By maxi­mality, 
edges in E bound the convex hull ch(S) of S (i.e. the smallest convex set in $?2 that contains S) and 
subdivide its interior into disjoint faces bounded by tri­angles. These triangles of 7 are referred simply 
as tri­angles, and their angles as angles. With reference to a polygon, we talk about its triangulation 
as restricted to only its interior. Conforming Triangulations. A plane geometric graph T = (S , E ) conjorms 
to another such graph ~=(S,E) ifSgS Cch(S) andeachedgeinEisa union of edges in E . Each vertex in S 
S, also termed a Steiner vertex, may or may not subdivide an edge of E. A triangulation 7_ conforms to 
a plane geometric graph ~ is called a conforming triangulation of ~. The problem studied here is as follows: 
Given a plane geometric graph ~ = (S, E), find a conforming triangulation T of G with small vertex set 
and with angles measuring at most CY where a<m. Previous Results. Two results are directly related to 
the problem studied here. Bern, Mitchell and Ruppert [BMR94] have recently shown how to augment a poly­gon 
(with or without holes) by linear number of Steiner vertices so that it can be triangulated with no obtuse 
angles. For a general plane geometric graph with n ver­tices, the recent result of Mitchell [Mitc93b] 
constructs 0(n2 log n) Steiner vertices to achieve the angle bound of ~n. This bound on the cardinality 
of Steiner ver­tices is within a logarithmic factor from the lower bound of $2(n2); see [BeEp91, Mitc93b] 
for discussions on the lower bound construction (for any angle bounded away from m) due to M. S. Paterson. 
3 The Outline of Construction Given a plane geometric graph G = (S, E) where ISI = n, the algorithm of 
Edelsbrunner, Tan and Waupotitsch [ETW92] can augment it by edges to a triangulation that minimizes its 
maximum angle over all possible aug­mentations. This triangulation is the so-called min-max angle triangulation 
T of ~. So, for a given ~, we are done if T has angles measuring at most a, the targeted angle bound; 
otherwise, we proceed to refine this trian­gulation by adding Steiner vertices until it has no bad angle. 
We say an angle is bad if it has measure larger than a; otherwise it is good. A good triangle is a triangle 
with only good angles whereas a bad triangle has some bad angle. A polygon (or polygonal region) that 
can be triangulated with no bad triangles is said to have a good triangulation. For our discussion till 
Section 10, a is set to ~rr. Let us assume now that T has some bad angles. Sup­pose Apqr is one with 
a bad angle at q. Then, in refining T, we need to find a vertex t so that qt subdivides the angle at 
q into two smaller ones. Notice that such a t may not be any of the existing vertices of 7-. So, tmay 
possibly be a Steiner vertex. Also, using only one ver­tex tinside Apqr does not improve the situation 
since Lptr > Lpqr. In general, ton pr is chosen to subdivide the angle at q as well as Apqr into two 
new triangles. Such a refinement results in the other triangle sharing pr, say Aprs, to have a vertex 
on pr. So a subdivision on Aprs is now necessary to get rid of the large angle ofr at t.This situation 
may continue to propagate to other triangles. The main idea of our construction is to bound such propagations 
of vertices. The proposed construction has six major phases. The first phase (Section 4) subdivides each 
triangle of 7_ into three quadrilaterals by adding edges, terlmed spokes, perpendicular to its three 
sides from the center of its in­scribing circle. Some of these quadrilaterals are marked as fences; they 
together with traps set up in the sec­ond phase (Section 5) help in controlling propagations of vertices. 
The third phase (Section 6) propagates ver­tices of spokes and traps. From one vertex, we may get a sequence 
of vertices where one propagates to the next. This sequence can be viewed as a kind of path, called propagation 
path, whose vertices are possibly Steiner vertices. The fourth phase (Section 7) removes redun­dant subpaths 
and the fifth phase (Section 8) untan­gles crossings of paths. The remaining vertices of paths form the 
set of required Steiner vertices, amd the final phase (Section 9) triangulates each quadrilateral having 
Steiner vertices on its boundary using edges of paths as guides. We note that the construction above 
as it is may add unnecessarily many Steiner vertices. This can neverthe­less be avoided by modifying 
some steps as described in Section 10. Let us next define a few more notions before discussing the details 
of the construction. Fences and haps. A fence is a polygon that has a good triangulation even if its 
edges contain Steiner ver­~ices. A trnp is a polygon with ; base edge ab and dead ends a , b where a 
and b are connected to the respective dead ends via paths Pa., and &#38;#. Other than a and b may be 
the same point, PaaP and Pijbl, also termed the boundary paths of the trap, do not intersect. Addition­ally, 
Paat with vertices a = p., pl, pz, . . . . pk = a and Pbbl with vertices b = go, ql, qz,..., qk = b are 
such that Pi-lpi and gi-lgi, for 1 < i < k, lie in the closure of some quadrilateral. This condition 
implies that a trap encloses neither vertices of S nor endpoints of spokes. Vertices of a trap are not 
necessarily Steiner vertices in the final construction. The construction of fences and traps in Sections 
4 and 5 considers the following issues: building linear number of fences and traps, and . ensuring each 
trap has at most linear number of vertices. Paths. A path with origin p. is a sequence of vertices where 
pi and pi+l are points on PO$Pl!. ..j Pi, Pi+l, . . . two different edges of some quadrilateral. Two 
consec­utive vertices pi, pi+l of the path define an edge ~ipi+l or, more specifically, a directed edge 
p~pi+l with tail pi and head pi+l. Each directed edge defines four angles at its two endpoints with edges 
of the quadrilateral con­taining it. For our purposes, we use a path to refer to one where the two angles 
at the tail of each directed edge are good, and analogously an inverse path to one where the two angles 
at the head of each directed edge are good. And, vertices of paths and inverse paths are always some 
points on edges of T. The length of a path or an inverse path is its number of vertices minus one, and 
the direction is the direction of its directed edges. Two paths are coherent if they tra­verse through 
the same set of quadrilateral edges, and are parallel if they are coherent and their two edges in the 
same quadrilateral are parallel. We also use coher­ent and parallel to describe two inverse paths, or 
one path with an inverse path. Two directed edgea a% and cl (of some paths) in quadrilateral pq cr are 
uertez disjoint if {a, b}n{c, d} = 0, and cross if they are vertex disjoint and ab n cd # 0. They are 
said to be of the same orientation if a and c are on the same edge of pq cr (so are b and d), otherwise 
opposite orientation. Major issues regarding propagation paths in Section 6 are: tracing linear number 
of paths, and  ensuring each path haa length at mod linear.  Pebbles. Propagation paths leave tr~ 
of its vertices on boundaries of quadrilaterals. A quadrilateral with all traces on its boundary taken 
as Steiner vertices may not have a good triangulation for traces that are too near to each other (unless 
the quadrilateral is a fence). Thus, portions of some propagation paths need to be removed and the remaining 
portions reconnected to nearby ones in the same direction. The set of propagation paths re­mained plus 
the set of centers of inscribing circles form the required set of Steiner vertices (or pebbles) for ~. 
Two major concerns of Sections 7 to 9 are: ensuring paths terminate on convex hull edges, fence edges, 
endpoints of spokes or dead ends, and  triangulating quadrilaterals whose boundaries con­tain Steiner 
vertices using no bad triangles.  Analyzing Cost. Once all the above issues are re­solved, the number 
of Steiner vertices used is clearly quadratic in the number of vertices of T. 4 Erecting Fences The 
purpose of a fence is to block or terminate propa­gations of vertices. We can consider convex hull edges 
of T = (S, E) as degenerate fences since no propagation of vertices out of the convex hull is necessary. 
They are, however, insufficient to block all propagations; we need the following type of fences plus 
traps discussed in the next section. Throughout the discussion, we refer to some specific measures of 
angle. As mentioned, a = ~ n is the targeted angle bound. Let ~ = ~ and f? = ~. No­ticethat cr=r Pand4+ 
2P=x.Weusetheterm isosceles triangle to mean a triangle with apex angle qt and two base angles P. Consider 
a triangle pqr E T. Let c be the center of its inscribing circle, i.e. c is the point common to the three 
angle bisectors. Let p , q , r be the three perpendicular projections of c onto respectively qr, rp, 
pq; see Figure 4.1. Edges cp , cq and cr are spokes of Apqr. Step 1. Erecting Fences. For each Apqr c 
7 with the largest angle at say q, add the center c of its inscribing circle as a Steiner vertex. Also, 
add spokes cr , cp and cq to sub­divide Apqr into three quadrilaterals pq cr , rq cp , and qr cp . Then, 
mark qr cp as a fence. And, mark pqtcrf if [p ~ ,B, and rq)cp) if Lr ~ ~. The above step marks quadrilaterals 
that indeed sat­isfy the definition of a fence aa long as no Steiner vertices 4 P r Figure 4.1: Trianglepqr 
is subdivided into three quadrilaterals pq cr , rq cp and qr cp . It is simple to check that lpr 1 = 
Ipq 1, Irp 1 = Irq 1, Igr 1 = lqp 1, and Icr 1 = Icp 1 = Icq 1 = P where p is the radius of the inscribing 
circle of Apqr. will be added to spokes of triangles. This follows imme­diately from the next lemma. 
Those quadrilaterals that are not marked as fences are referred as non-fences. Lemma 4.1 Suppose quadrilateral 
pq cr is such that [q = [r = $ and .Zp ~ ~. Then it has a good triangu­lation even if pr and pq contain 
some Steiner vertices. l  Setting Traps To supplement fences that block some propagations, we step 
up traps whose dead ends can serve to terminate the other propagations. To do this, we first identify 
portions of quadrilateral edges, other than spokes, that must be bases of traps. Clearly, we need only 
consider those that are not parts of the boundaries of fences. We thus talk about quadrilateral pq cr 
in the following as one with right angles at r and q and [p < /3, un­less stated otherwise. Also, we 
assume pq cr lies inside Apqr of T. To plan for traps, we introduce a special type of in­verse path, 
termed i-path, where all its directed edges define good angles of P at their heads and all such good 
angles are on the same side of the inverse path. We refer to vertices of i-paths w i-vertices. These 
vertices may not be Steiner vertices in the final construction. In the next step, each i-path constructed 
haa length bounded by K where K is one more than four times the number of edges of T. Step 2. Planning 
Traps. Consider each quadrilateral (non-fence) pq cr ; see Figure 5.1. Trace an i-path at r with its 
second vertex r on pq so that L r r q = ,8. Similarly, trace an i-path at q with its second vertex q 
on pr so that L q q r = f?. Suppose rl and q2 are vertices on pq and pr, respectively of the two quadrilaterals 
adjacent to pq cr and incident to p. If q2 lies on pr , trace out two i-paths at q2 such that the first 
edges of the i-paths meet pr at two points that form an isosceles triangle with apex at q2. Simi­larly, 
trace out two i-paths at rl if rl lies on pq . In all the above, we terminate an i-path when it bite 
either a convex hull edge, a fence edge, a spoke, or when its length has reached K. 1 r r2 Figure 5.1: 
For pq cr , one i-path each is tracecl at r and q , and two at w but none at rl. The above step traces 
out a maximum of four i-paths at each endpoint of a spoke-one each into the quadrilat­erals (non-fences) 
where the endpoint is a vertex, and two into the other quadrilateral with the endpoint on one of its 
edges. Notice that the latter two i-paths at an endpoint may not be coherent, though they started off 
by moving to the same edge. With all the i-vertices in place, we can identify (next two paragraphs) some 
portions of quadrilateral edges as bases of traps to be constructed. Consider a directed edge p~pi+l 
of an i-path inside a quadrilateral pq cr with pi c pr and pi+l c pql. The head pi+l subdivides pq into 
two segments: one that form an angle of /3 with pipi+l and the other of m /3. The former is a positive 
segment and the latter (excluding point pi+l) a negative segment. The collec­tion of heads of directed 
edges of i-paths (inside pq cf ) on pq subdivide points on pq into two types: a pos­itive point is one 
in at least a positive segment, and a negative point otherwise. Points p and (q are (arbi­trarily y) 
said to be positive. By the formulation, pq is subdivided into three (possibly degenerate) portions by 
markers say ml and m2 where ml c pm:z. And, the two portions pml and m2q are I-types containing only 
positive points, and ml mz (excluding points ml and rnz) is O-type containing only negative points. Notice 
that the above description ofanedge is with reference toaquadrilateral incident to it. So, an edge is 
subdivided into O-types and I-types on its two sidea due to at moat three incident quadrilaterals. So 
there are at most three portions of O-types. These are possible bases of traps to be constructed. Let 
us assume without 10SS of generality that T contains no horizontal edges. Step 3. Setting Traps. For 
each vertex p c S, consider the at most two quadrilaterals that overlap an arbitrarily small hor­izontal 
line segment having p as an interior point. Pick from each one edge say pg as a candidate edge to construct 
traps: for each quadrilateral incident to pq , construct a trap with base xy G pq into the quadrilateral 
where Zy is O-type. The above construction of a trap with base xy on pq in the direction into plq~cl 
r~ is as follows. We need the notion of a t-path (the reverse of an i-path). A t-path is a path where 
all its directed edges define good angles of P at their tails and all such good angles are on the same 
side of the path. Trace two (coherent) t-paths at z and u into plq~clf~ so that those good angles of/3 
at tails of directed edges are on the same side with re­spect to each t-path. Both t-paths continue until 
they have just reached say xl (possibly z) and VI (possibly Y), on plql of quadrilateral p~q~c~T; where 
one of the following is true: 1. the t-paths intersect at a point, say Zl, in the interior of plqfc~r~ 
when continue to be extended; 2. p~q~ctr~ is a fence or plg~ is a convex hull edge; or 3. plrf is the 
very first edge visited for the fifth times by the t-paths where Aplrlql E T contains p~q~c~r(.  For 
cases 2 and 3, xl and yl are the dead ends and both t-paths are the boundary paths of the trap. For case 
1, consider z G plrj where ZZI is perpendicular to Xlyl. We take z as the dead end if .zz1 does not intersect 
ctr(; otherwise, take r; as the dead end. And, we complete the boundary paths of the trap by extending 
both t-paths till the dead end. Though case 1 modifies t-paths slightly in constructing traps, it is 
easy to check that each trap does have its base connected to its dead end(s) by two paths; see also the 
next lemma. Lemma 5.1 In the construction of a trap with base zy, the two t-paths from z and y are coherent. 
l Lemma 5.2 The number of trapa constructed is at most 6n. l Lemma 5.3 Each trap haa at most K edges. 
Ql 6 Propagating Paths The necessity to propagate vertices to compute quality triangulation is a consequence 
of the following simple lemma, which was introduced in Edelsbrunner, Tan and Waupotitsch [ETW92]. Lemma 
6.1 If zy is an edge in a triangulation ~ of a point set S, then P(T) ~ max.~s Zzsy where P(T) denotes 
the largest angle in T. l In effect, propagation is to subdivide each long edge into small ones so to 
remove large angles extended by the edge. To trace a path, we adapt a few terminology intro­duced in 
[Mitc93b]. Consider a quadrilateral pq cr with Lp < ~ and right angles at q and r . Let s be a point 
on pq . The cone at s consists of all points tof pq cr such that both Ltsp and Ltsq are good (i.e. at 
most o). Next, the maw of s is the portion of the cone at s on the boundary of pq crl, except for S. 
Notice that each point on the maw ofs is a candidate for extending a path froms. Next, the iterative 
construction of union of cones at points in maws, starting with s, results in the s~called horn ofs. 
Initially at stage O, the horn is the cone at s. The horn at stage i + 1 is the union of cones at points 
in the union of maws, or simply maw, at stage i. It is clear that the two paths bounding the horn of 
s are actually t-paths starting at s. They are referred aa the boundary paths of the horn. The center 
path of the horn is the sequence of line segments where each connects the midpoints of the maws (which 
are center path points) for two consecutive st agea, starting at s. (We can assume because of Lemma 6.2 
below that each maw contains only points on one edge of a quadri­lateral, so the midpoint of the maw 
at a stage is well defined.) Given some point t in the maw of s at stage j, it is trivial to work from 
tback tos to obtain a path of length j + 1 with origin s and last vertex t.This is how the propagation 
phase constructs a propagation path for a vertex s by generating the horn ofs iteratively until it intersects 
(or covers) some point tthat is an endpoint of a spoke, a dead end, or a point on a fence or a convex 
hull edge. Besides these, tmay possibly be some point common to cones of the horn from different stages 
which happens when the horn is self-intersecting inside some quadrilateral. In this case, the chosen 
t has to agation paths. appear as the last vertex as well as some intermediate vertex of the constructed 
propagation path. One such Step 4a. Propagating Paths Beginning Case. possiblet is a point in the current 
mawofstagej that For each endpoint s of a spoke that lies on some is also a center path point of stage 
i for i < j and the edge of T, we consider the two t-paths with origin horn defined from t contains t. 
A propagation path s in the direction of a propagation path to be con­ constructed using this condition 
has length j + 1 and structed for s (in Step 4). These t-paths sandwich consists of a subpath from s 
to t followed by a loop an angle of n 2P at s and each terminates once (1) containing tasderived from 
the horn oft. it visits an edge of 7_ twice or (2) it {crosses some Due to a technical reason (Section 
7), we need to dis-spoke or arrives at a fence or a convex hull edge. tinguish two types of self-intersecting 
horns one inter-Only for (1), the last vertex of the t-path becomes sects while passing through a quadrilateral 
for the sec-an origin as if it is a dead end which Step 4 uses to ond time in the same orientation to 
one intersects while generate two propagation paths. passing through in opposite orientation. It is the 
latter Step 4b. Propagating Paths Exceptional Case. that we do not use for constructing propagation path. 
Suppose in Step 4, a propagation path remains un-This is to avoid terminating a propagation path with 
di­determined for s after its horn has since entered therected edge gi?j such that the last vertex rj 
(other than base zy of a trap, say T, and traversed the same an origin of some propagation path) being 
also a tail of number of edges as T to reach the edge containingother directed edge inside the quadrilateral 
containing the two dead ends, xd and ~d, of T. L,et w be anygi7j. (On the other hand, it is possible 
that a vertex, point in the intersection of the horn c}f s with zy,other than dead ends and endpoints 
of spokes, is passed and let aW and bW be the two points of the bound­through by two different propagation 
paths in opposite ary paths of the horn of w (in T) on xdyd. Treatdirections. This does not create technical 
difficulties for aW and bW as two additional dead ends just like theSection 7. But, for convenience, 
we will interpret such other dead ends identified earlier on. So each is an a vertex as two nearby vertices 
in Section 7.) origin of two propagation paths to be generated byWe say a propagation path P terminates 
properly if Step 4, one into T through Xdyd anti one out ofits last vertex rj is an endpoint of a spoke, 
a dead end, T. And, we complete the construction for s by a a point on a fence or a convex hull edge, 
or a head propagation path that terminates at aW or bW. common to another directed edge of P or other 
propa­gation path inside the quadrilateral containing the last directed edge of P. A few remarks are 
in order. First, the two t-paths of s in Step 4a actually bounds the horn ak s initially, Step 4. Propagating 
Paths. i.e. they are coherent. But they are not necessarily Take endpoints of spokes and dead ends of 
traps coherent in extending new directed edges and one may aa the current Steiner vertices of T. These 
Steiner actually be longer than the other eventually. Note that vertices, except for centers of inscribing 
circles, are we talk of these t-paths without requiring their vertices origins of propagation paths 
to be generated. For be Steiner vertices in the construction so far. Second, an endpoint of a spoke 
on an edge of T, we generate when both t-paths end in case (1), we can actually cre­ a propagation path 
in the direction out of the tri­ate just one new dead end instead of two as stated. For angle containing 
the spoke. For a dead end (which this, we then fix one t-path as the initial part of the is not also 
an endpoint of a spoke), we generate propagation path to be constructed for s, and apply two distinct 
propagation paths one each into the Step 4 to the last vertex of the t-path to complete the two quadrilaterals 
containing the dead end on their remaining part of the propagation path of s. This way boundaries. All 
propagation paths are to terminate avoids creating two other propagation paths. Third, we properly. 
 will see that the above special arrangement of Step 4b is needed at most once for each trap (with two, 
dead ends). The following two addenda to Step 4 are to ensure So we generate only O(n) propagation paths 
in total. that the lengths of all propagation paths are bounded Fourth, the horn of w in T is properly 
contained in T, by O(n). Firstly, Step 4a is performed to generate some as the horn of s does not meet 
the boundary paths of new origins of propagation paths before the normal pro-T; otherwise, we would have 
a propagation path with cessing of Step 4. This extra effort is to avoid using origin s that terminates 
properly at one dead end of T. horns self-intersect in opposite orientations to create So, a~ and bW 
are well defined. Again, we talk of the propagation paths. Secondly, Step 4b handles an ex-horn of w 
without requiring vertices on its boundary ceptional case due to Step 4 so to cut short some prop paths 
be Steiner vertices. The next result implies that once a horn intersects some spokes, we can construct 
from the horn a prop agation path that terminates properly. So, we avoid propagation paths that cross 
spokes. Lemma 6.2 Let s be a point on pq of quadrilateral pq cr . If the maw of s contains points on 
cq or cr then the maw ofs contains rt. Q1 Lemma 6.3 For a propagation path P to return to an edge of 
T, P has to visit some candidate edge (identified in Step 3). QI Lemma 6.4 If the horn ofs self-intersects 
in opposite orientation at stage t, then there exists a propagation path with origins that terminates 
properly and has less than t + 3n vertices. l Lemma 6.5 Each propagation path constructed b Step 4 has 
less than 15n vertices. d Lemma 6.6 Step 4 computes less than 66n propa a­tion paths. b Removing Complications 
The result of the propagation phase (Step 4) is another plane geometric graph conforms to 7. Each vertex 
s on an edge, say pq , of a quadrilateral (non-fence) pq cr is such that there is another vertex t on 
pr where st is an edge of some propagation path passing through pq cr . So, either the two angles at 
s or that at t in­side pq cr are good. Because of this, quadrilaterals with vertices on their boundaries 
can be triangulated with no bad triangles except when there are vertices due to nearby directed edges 
of the same orientation. As such, we use the following merging step to remove this complication . Vertices 
of pq cr along pq are labeled as p = qo, ql, q2, ., .,ql = q and along pr as P = ro, rl, rz, . . ..rm 
= r . A neighboring pair of di­rected edges are two directed edges of the same ori­entation such that 
the segment defined by their tails contains no other tail. Step 5. Merging Paths. For each quadrilateral 
pq cr , repeat the following so long there exists a neighboring pair qi~il and qj~j , with i ~ j and 
good ~rilqjp and ~rilqjq or, analogously, a neighboring pair ri~i, and rj~j, with i < j and good [qi, 
rjp and .Lqi, rjr . We just describe the former case. Let P, be the shortest subpath of some propagation 
path P starting with qjrj, until a vertex of P that is a head common to two (or more) directed edges, 
or a vertex on a fence or convex hull edge, or an origin of other propagation paths. We remove edges 
and vertices of P, except possibly for the last vertex of Pa that is shared by other propagation paths, 
and terminate P by new edge qj?i,. Vertices of spokea and of propagation paths remained after Step 5 
form the final set of Steiner vertices for T. Lemma 7.1 All propagation paths still terminate properly 
with each merging of paths. Q Lemma 7.2 Once Step 5 has completed, any two di­rected edges of the same 
orientation inside a quadrilat­eral do not cross. Q Lemma 7.3 Once Step 5 has completed, any two di­rected 
edges that are vertex disjoint and of the same orientation inside a quadrilateral define a region that 
has a good triangulation. Q 8 Untangling Crossings For this and the next section, we view each directed 
edge as an individual with two good angles at its tail, without associating it to a particular propagation 
path. Though Step 5 (Section 7) also removes some crossings, directed edges of opposite orientations 
may still cross inside a quadrilateral. With reference to a quadrilat­eral (non-fence) pq cr , the next 
step is to get rid of all crossings by modifying edges while maintaining the following invariants: 1-1. 
each edge is assigned an orientation with its tail defin­ing two good angles; 1-2. each Steiner vertex 
is an endpoint of some directed edge; 1-3. no Steiner vertex is a tail of more than one directed edge; 
 1-4. directed edges of the same orientation do not cross; 1-5. for two (non-crossing) vertex disjoint 
directed edges qi~i and qj~j with ; < ~, the region defined by these four vertices can be subdivided 
into two good trian­gles using rilqj. Analogous assertion applies to two vertex disjoint directed edges 
ri7qi and rj~qj. These invariants are true initially. In particular, 1-1, I-2 and I-3 are trivially 
true, and I-4 and I-5 are true due to Lemma 7.2 and Lemma 7.3 respectively. In Step 6, the next available 
index from i refers to the smallest index, starting at i and in increasing order, whose correspond­ing 
vertex can be used as the head of a new directed edge while maintaining 1-4. We say an ordered pair (a, 
b) is lexicographically smaller than another ordered pair (a , b ) if a< a , or a= a and b< b . Step 
6. Removing Crossings Consider each quadrilateral pq cr in turn to re­move crossings. The following two 
cases are re­peated until all crossings are removed. Each iter­ation involves edges qi ri, crosses rj 
qjl such that (i+ j, il + jl ) is lexicographically the smallest or­dered pair. See Figure 8.1. Case 
A. qi?il crosses rj~jl. We first add qirj with the appropriate orientation and remove qi ?i ~ and rj 
~jl. Next, there are two symmetrical caaes depending on whether qjl ril de­ fines two good angles at 
qj, or at r~l. Let us discuss only the former. If qjl is no longer a vertex of any directed edge, we 
add qjl?iz where i2 is the next available index from il. Next, if ril is no longer a vertex of any directed 
edge, we add ril<jz where jz is the next available index from jl. Case B. r,~q; crosses qj~rj. We add 
qi~j if qi is not a tail of any directed edge, else add rj~i if rj is not a tail of any directed edge. 
Next, if ri, (qjl, respectively) is a vertex of other di­ rected edges, we are done by removmg ri I qi 
(qj I rj, respectively). Otherwise, move all directed edges (inclusive of ri~qi) crossing gj~rj with 
heads at qi to qjl where j = i+ 1. r =rm Figure 8.1: Since directed edges of the same orientation do 
not cross (invariant 1-4), the underlying directed edges based on the two chosen line segments q,r,l 
and r~qll must have opposite orientations. Any directed edge e with endpoint on r,, for j s i < il must 
cross q,r,, by the choice of (i+j, il +jl). As such and because of 1-4, the other endpoint of e must 
be q~~ for ~z 2 ~1 with strict inequality for Case B. and e must have the same orientation as the directed 
edge based on rjqjl. A similar statement applies to directed edges with endpoints ongj, fori~j <jl. It 
is clear that each iteration of either Case A or Case B may introduce new crossings. Still, the process 
can be shown to terminate. Lemma 8.1 When applied to a quadrilateral pq cr , Step 6 terminates by removing 
all crossings. l Lemma 8.2 Invariants l-l to I-5 are maintained after each iteration of Case A. l Lemma 
8.3 Invariants l-l to 1-!5 are maintained after each iteration of Case B. Q 9 Triangulating Quadrilaterals 
We now have for each quadrilateral pq cr some Steiner vertices on its boundary and directed edges in 
its in­terior. Each Steiner vertex lies on some directed edge, and each directed edge defines two good 
angles at its tail. Since directed edges do not cross, they subdivide pq cr into regions of three, four, 
or five sides. We la­bel these regions in their natural sequence starting with that containing c as R1 
then its adjacent one as Rz and so on until that containing p aa Rm,. All except pos­sibly for RI have 
straightforward good triangulations. We must however first handle RI by mer,ging nearby regions to R1 
until we have obtained a region with a good triangulation. As such, some directed edges may not be in 
the final triangulation they serve as guides in our construction. Step 7. Triangulating Quadrilaterals. 
Quadrilaterals with no Steiner vertices or are fences can eaaily be triangulated with no bad triangles; 
re­fer to Lemma 4.1. We next consider each non-fence pq cr . Label its regions subdivided by directed 
edges from that containing c to that containing p as RI, R2, ..., Rm,. Starting with R = 0 and k = O, 
we then repeat incrementing k and including Rk into 7? until we can produce a good triangulation for 
72 = U~=l Ri. Then for the remaining regions Rj, j = k+ l,k+2. ... m of three or four sides, we triangulate 
each in a straightforward way. Lemma 9.1 Each region Rk for k = 2,3, . . .,m hss a good triangulation. 
l Lemma 9.2 There exists a k < m such that X! = U#=l Ri has a good triangulation. Q Till here, we have 
the following theorem: Theorem 9.3 Triangulating a plane geometric graph ~ = (S, E) of ISI = n vertices 
and Il?l = O(n) edges using angles no larger than ~ r requires O (n2) Steiner vertices. Q1 10 Implementing 
Construction In this section, we describe an efficient algorithm to implement the above constructive 
proof. Also, we dis­cuss ways to avoid some redundant Steiner vertices, and extend the construction to 
a better angle bound of a = ~r. Let us assume that each point coordinate can be stored in a constant 
amount of storage and that basic geometric operations, such as projecting a point onto a line can be 
carried out in a constant amount of time. Theorem 10.1 Triangulating a plane geometric graph G = (S, 
E) of ]Sl = n vertices and IEI = O(n) edges using angles no larger than ~ T requires 0(n2) storage and 
0(n2 log n) time. el  Reducing Steiner Vertices. The above construction generates substantially many 
Steiner vertices, though it achieves the worst case optimal bound. As implied by Lemmas 6.5 and 6.6, 
the constant factor in the quadratic bound is relatively large. Fortunately, we see in the following 
a modified construction that avoids many redundant propagation paths and Steiner ver­tices. Let us start 
with Step 1. Instead of subdivid­ing each triangle pqr of T with largest angle at q into three quadrilaterals, 
we subdivide it into two or three triangles as follows depending on Lg. Case a. /q > cr. Subdivide Apqr 
into Apqq and Arqq where q G pr and [pqq = Lrqql. We treat qq as a spoke.  Same as Case a. Additionally, 
mark Apqq as a fence if Lp ~ ~, and similarly mark Arqq if .Lr z ~. Case c. Lq < 2P. Subdivide Apqr 
into Apr q , Aqp r , Arq p and Ap q r where p E qr, q ~ pr, r E pq are so that  Pq = pr , qp = qr , 
rq = rp . Also, treat edges of Ap q r as spokes, and mark each of the other three tri­angles as a fence 
if its angle opposite its edge incident to Ap q r is no less than ~. With this subdivision, we then plan 
and set up traps in Step 2 and Step 3, and create other dead ends in Step 4a. As before, we next generate 
propagation paths in Step 4 (and Step 4b) but only for selected vertices. Each q obtained in Case a is 
an origin of a propagation path out of the triangle containing the spoke with q as an endpoint. We next 
consider whether more propagation paths are to be created for s where s is either q in Case b, p or q 
or r in Case c, or a dead end. When s terminates some propagation path P1 generated so far, we generate 
a propagation path P l for it following P{ (so we can imagine P to include also the part of P ); otherwise, 
it is ignored in Step 4 and is not considered a Steiner vertex in later steps. Step 5 and Step 6 are 
the same as before. The for­mer actually further removes away some unnecessary Steiner vertices. Note 
that a dead end can be treated as an ordinary vertex subject to removal by Step 5 if the dead end originates 
one instead of two propagation paths (in opposite directions) at the completion of Step 4. A similar 
consideration applies to an endpoint of a spoke. Finally, Step 7 works quite the same as be­fore: for 
a non-fence, we just use the straightforward method in Lemma 9.1; otherwise, we have a fence with /3 
~ Lp < 2P that can be solved with Lemma 4.1. How­ever, there is one problem let us pick Case c for the 
discussion, and note that a similar situation occurs for Case b. Vertices p , q , r used in Step 1 to 
subdivide Apqr into three triangles are not necessarily Steiner vertices as mentioned. So the resulting 
triangulation obtained from Lemma 9.1 or Lemma 4.1 may have tri­angles with vertices that are not actually 
created. These triangles have to be discarded. As a result, we obtain an untriangulated region R supported 
by edges of Apqr and directed edges inside Apqr. It can be proved that R resulted from Case b or Case 
c always has a good tri­angulation and one can thus be constructed in constant time since R has at most 
six edges. In summary, the im­provement still runs with 0(n2) storage and 0(n2 log n) time. Reducing 
Angle Bound. The angle bound of ~ m can slightly be improved to a = fir (i.e. 1320), but with a larger 
constant in the quadratic bound on vertex size. In this case, isosceles triangles has base angles ~ = 
~ T (i.e. 48°) and apex angle # = *7r (i.e. 840). All re­sults developed starting from Section 4 are 
valid except for Lemma 4.1 and Lemma 9.2. We need not worry about Lemma 9.2 since it is no longer relevant 
to the above improved construction. As for Lemma 4.1, prob­lem arises when 4< Lp < 2/3. One way to resolve 
this is to perform the following before Step 1: subdivide each triangle pqr of T with largest angle less 
than 2P by a new vertex s inside pqr into triangles with angles at s equal to ~ n. The existence of such 
a subdivision can easily be verified. 11 Concluding Remarks Given a plane geometric graph, this paper 
shows that a conforming triangulation with a quadratic bound on its vertex set and the ~ n bound on its 
angles can be computed in slightly more than quadratic time. Addi­tionally, the result applies to the 
better angle bound of ~ n, but with a larger constant factor in the quadratic bound on the vertex set. 
This paper improves the re­suit of Mitchell [Mitc93b] by reducing the asymptotic bound on the vertex 
set by a logarithmic factor and the angle measure by at least ~. Further reducing the angle bound closer 
to $ is still very interesting. The main idea of the paper is on the control of the lengths of propagation 
paths using fences and traps. This is a similar strategy used in Edelsbrunner and Tan [EdTa93], where 
the corresponding concept is termed walls. The current paper is, however, much more com­plex; major difficulties 
include the construction of the linear number of traps and the modification of prop­agation paths, whereaa 
these issues do not appear in [l!klTa93] due to the nice feature of constructing walls inside disks that 
are mutually disjoint and using only non-crossing propagation paths.   Acknowledgement I would like 
to thank Scott Mitchell for providing details of his paper [Mitc93b]. References <RefA>[BaAz76] I. Babudca 
and A. K. Aziz. On the angle condition in the tlnite element method. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 13 (1976), 
214-226. [BaLi84] R. E. Barnhili and F. F. Little. Three and four­dimensional surfaces. Rocky Mountain 
J. Math. 14 (1984), 77 102. [BDE92] M. Bern, D. Dobkin and D. Eppstein. Triangulat­ing polygons without 
large angles. In Proc. 8th Ann. Sympos. Comput. Geom., 1992 , 222 231. pEG90] M. Bern, D. Eppstein and 
J. Gilbert. Provably good mesh generation. In Proc. 31st Ann. IEEE Sympos. Found. Comput. Sci., 1990 
, 231-241. To appear in J. Comp. System Science. [BeEp91] M. Bern and D. Eppstein. Polynomial-size nonob­tuse 
triangulation of polygons. Intl. J. C omput. Geom. Appl. 2(3) (1992), 241-255. [BeEp92] M. Bern and D. 
Eppstein. Mesh Generation and Optimal Ti-iangulation. In Computing in Eu­clidean Geometry, D. Z. Du and 
F. K. Hwang, eds., World Scientific, Singapore, 1992, 23 90. [BMR94] M. Bern, S. A. Mitchell and J. Ruppert. 
Linear­ize non-obtuse triangulation of polygons. In Proc. 10th Ann. Sympos. Comput. Geom., 1994 . [Bois88] 
J. D. Boissonnat. Shape reconstruction from pla­nar cross sections. Computer Vision, Graph its, and Image 
Process. 44 (1988), 1 29. [Cave74] [Dey91] [EdTa93] [ETW92] [Greg75] [Laws77] [MeSo92] [Mitc93a] [Mitc93b] 
[Mitc94] [Rupp93] [Tan93] [Tan94] J. Cavendish. Automatic triangulation of ar­bitrary planar domains 
for the fite element method. Intl. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 8 (1974), 679-696. T. K. Dey. Decompositions 
of Polyhedra in Three Dimensions. Techn. Rep. CSD-TR-91-056, Ph.D. Thesis, Comput. Sci. Dept., Purdue 
Univ., IN, 1991. H. Edelsbmnner and T. S. Tan. ArI upper bound for conforming Delaunay triangulations. 
Discrete Comput. Geom. 10 (1993), 197 213. H. Edelsbrunner, T. S. Tan, and R. Waupotitsch. An 0(n2 log 
n) time algorithm for the minmax angle triangulation. SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Com­put. 13 (1992), 994-1008. 
J. A. Gregory. Error bounds for linear interpola­tion on triangles. The Mathematical of Finite El­ement 
and Applications 11, J. R. Whiteman, cd., Academic Press, NY, 1975, 163-170. C. L. Lawson. Software for 
C1 surface interpola­tion. In Math. Software III, J. R. Rice, cd., Aca­demic Press, 1977, 161 194. E. 
A. Melissaratos and D. L. Souvaine. Coping with inconsistencies: a new approach to pro­duce quality triangulations 
of polygonal domains with holes. In (Proc. 8th Ann. Sympos. Comput. Geom., 1992 , 202-211. S. A. Mitchell. 
Mesh Generation with Provable Quality Bounds. Techn. Rep. CS-TR-92-1327, Ph.D. Thesis, Comput. Sci. Dept., 
(Cornell Univ., NY, 1993. S. A. Mitchell. Refining a triangulation of a pla­nar straight-line graph to 
eliminate large angles. In Proc. 34th Am. IEEE Sympos. Found. Com­put. Sci., 1993 , 583-591. S. A. Mitchell. 
Fkling a covering triangula­tion whose maximum angle is provably small. In Proc. 17th Ann. Computer Science 
Conference, ACSC-17, 1994 . J. Ruppert. A new and simple algorithm for qual­ity 2-dimensional mesh generation. 
In Proc. 4th ACM-SIAM Sympos. Discrete Algorithms, 1993 , 83-92. T. S. Tan. Optimal Two-Dimensional Triangula­tions. 
Techn. Rep. UIUCDCS-R-9 2-1783, Ph.D. Thesis, Comput. Sci. Dept., Univ. Illinois, Ur­bana, IL, 1993. 
T. S. Tan. An optimal bound fc)r conforming quality triangulations. Techn. Rep., Dept. Inform. Sys. &#38; 
Comput. Sci., National Univ. Singapore, Singapore, 1994.  
			</RefA>
