
 AN OVERVIEW OF SUPERTOROIDAL NETWORKS RICHARD N. DRAPER Supercomputing Research Center ABSTRAG~ The 
objective of this paper is to define a new class of interconnection networks called supertoroidal networks, 
to describe their physical layout, scalability, routing, and performance. These networks have topologies 
which are Cayley graphs of non-commutative groups. The networks are of node degree four and are closely 
re­lated to k-ary 3-cubes of comparable size. Supertoroidal networks have smaller diameter and average 
diameter than k-ary 3-cubes of comparable size, thereby provid­ing a design alternative which reduces 
pin complexity of wide-data-path interprocessor communication in tightly coupled multiprocessor systems. 
I. Introduction. The objective of this paper is to introduce the reader to a new class of interconnection 
networks which we call supertoroidal networks. These networks are intended to serve as interconnection 
networks for tightly cou­pled multiprocessor systems. Properties of the networks seem most appropriate 
for use in wide-data-path MIMD systems. A tightly coupled multiprocessor system is connected together 
by a network. Abstractly, the network consists of a graph commonly called the network topology, an addressing 
scheme, and a routing scheme. A routing protocol and a layout may also be specified as part of the network. 
To be of serious practical interest a net­work must be part of a family of closely related networks of 
various sizes, a property called scalability. Much of the research into novel networks starts with the 
topol­ogy and then passes on to some or all of the other is­sues we have listed. The work reported on 
here is of Typeset by A@-~. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this matertial is granted pro­vided 
that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice 
and the title of tie publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and(or 
specific permission, @ 1991 ACM 089791-438-4/91/0007/0095 $1.50 95 this type. We start with a topology, 
determine an ad­dressing scheme, a routing scheme, a layout, and the scalability of the network. We do 
not examine routing protocols. There are three genres of interconnection networks which have been implemented 
in machines. The most popular is the hypercube or slight variants thereof [Se] [Hi], which we call a 
2-ary n-cube following the termi­nology of [Da]. Other topologies which have been im­plemented or are 
under serious consideration are low di­mensional meshes, k-ary n-cubes with small n, and mul­t ist age 
networks of low degree. Supertoroidal networks are an intermediate class lying somewhere between k­ary 
2-cubes and k-ary 3-cubes. They offer alternatives with tradeoffs which are reasonably well exposed. 
The underlying concept also can be used in other ways which lead to alternatives to k-ary n-cubes for 
many values of k and n or to alternatives to n-dimensional meshes. In general supertoidal networks gain 
reduced node degree at the expense of longer links and more complicated routing. This is the reason that 
they appear most ap­propriate for use in wide-data-path systems. The research leading to the discovery 
of supertoroidal networks was directed at finding alternative topologies for a particular kind of multiprocessor 
system, It was a wide-data-path, fine-grained MIMD shared memory ar­chitecture much like the architecture 
now called TERA [Sin]. An architecture of this type imposes constraints on the interconnection network 
that have been stud­ied in detail by others [PS]. One of these constraints is that the network must be 
based upon a topology in which the nodes have very low degree. Another is that the network should scale 
without changing the de­gree of the nodes. If the multiprocessor is envisioned to have packet switching 
time equal to CPU operation time, then the network must have a layout with rela­tively short links and 
it must be capable of routing pack­ets within the CPU operation time. These constraints lead to networks 
based upon low-dimensional meshes, k-ary n-cubes for small n, or to multistage intercon­nect ion net 
works. The mult ist age networks seem to be eliminated from consideration for fully shared-memory systems 
in which the potential for locality of reference is desired. For these reasons, we focused this research 
project on finding scalable alternatives to the k-ary n­cube having node degree less than n, high speed 
routing algorithms and topologies which are simple enough that the network can be built. Supertoroidal 
networks belong to a class of networks which are Cayle y graphs of groups. The groups used are composed 
of a pair of cyclic groups by a construction called the semi-direct product [Sco]. The presentation given 
here supresses this terminology and supposes no familiarity with these concepts. However, it is helpful 
to introduce this terminology in order to relate this work to other research on interconnection networks. 
The idea of using Cayley graphs of groups as sources of interconnection network topologies has been exam­ined 
by many authors beginning with the work of Ak­ers and Krishnamurthy [AK1]. However, only a few of these 
investigations have involved Cayley graphs of semi-direct products. Most of the latter investigations 
have focused on wreath products, a form of semi-direct product in which one of the component groups is 
a cyclic group Z/m and the other component group is a power (Z/n)k of a cyclic group [Sco]. Commonly 
n = 2, k = m and the network has k2k nodes. The network topologies based upon wreath products are closely 
re­lated to the cube connected cycles of Preparata and Vuillemin [PV]. Information about this work can 
be found in section 7 of [AK2], [CCSW] and [ABR]. The third reference also relates network topologies 
based upon wreath products to the DeBruijn graph, the shuffle-exchange graph and the butterfly graph. 
Recently Shee and Teh [ST] proposed using the Cay­ley graph of a semi-direct product of a cyclic group 
of prime order p with its automorphism group, which is a cyclic group of order p 1, as the topology 
of an inter­connection network. This is the only work other than our own to focus on the Cayley graph 
of the semi-direct product of two cyclic groups as a source of network topologies. Our research into 
network topologies is quite distinc­tive from that referred to above. It differs from the work on wreath 
products because the networks which we con­struct belong to the family of k-ary n-cubes and provide useful 
alternatives when n is small and k is large. Net­works based on wreath products belong to the family 
of cube connected cycles and provide useful alternatives for 2-ary n-cubes when n is large. Our work 
differs form the work of Shee and Teh because we have found networks which scale gracefully and have 
simple lay­outs in 3-space whereas they have not addressed these issues. Furthermore, it is highly unlikely 
that the net­works they found will scale gracefully. This paper surveys research on supertoroidal net­works 
that is carried out in greater detail in other sources. Three dimensional layout and scalability are 
examined in detail in [Dl]; a study of the diameter and average diameter, which is joint work with Vance 
Faber, is in [DF]; and a study of routing algorithms is in [D2]. The reference [D3] is essentially identical 
to this paper. There remain two major tasks in the study of super­toroidal networks. One is a comprehensive 
comparative study of network performance and the other is an exam­ination of the mapping of more conventional 
topologies onto supertoroidal networks. The remainder of this paper is organized into five sections. 
Section II describes the logical structure of the network topology, Section III examines the layout of 
these networks in three space, Section IV discusses routing and Section V discusses scalability. The 
last section gives conclusions and indicates open questions and areas for future study. II. General Description 
of Supertoroidal Net­works. This section contains a description of the address space and connections 
of a supertoroidal network. A su­pertoroidal network depends upon parameters k,l and c which are nonnegative 
integers. The parameter c deter­mines a family of networks parameterized by k and 1. A member of the 
family is denoted I (c, k, 1). It has klc3 nodes, all of degree four. To simplify the discussion, c is 
assumed to be even. For the networks to be interesting, c >4 so that also is assumed. The address space 
for I (c, k, 1) is [0, ck) x [0, cl) x [0, c), i.e., representatives of the integers modulo ck, cl and 
c, respectively. However, the underlying arithmetic of this address space is not arithmetic modulo ck, 
cl and c, respectively. Let us denote a member of the address space by (z, y, z). The terms y and .z 
are the coordinates of a mixed radix-( cl, c) representation [Hw] of an integer modulo C21 of the form 
y+ ZC1 modulo C21. The term z is a representative of an integer modulo ck. The product of two addresses 
(xl, yl, Z1) and (Z2, y2, Z2) is computed by matrix multiplication: ( 1 y~+yz %1 + Z2 + Zzyl = 01 Zl+q 
. 00 1 ) In a more compact notation (2) (w, Yl, ~1)(~2, Y2, z2) = (*I +Z2, Y1 +Y2, ZI +Z2 +Z2Y1) where 
the coordinate xl + X2 is reduced modulo ck and the coordinates yl + YZ, and .z1 + Z2 + Z2Y1 are taken 
from the mixed radix-( cl, c) represent ation of Y1 + Y2 + (.z1 + Z2 + z2Y1)c/ modulo C21. It is a tedious 
but straightforward exercise to show that this multipli­ cation is well-defined, is associative, has 
(O, O, O) for mul­ tiplicative identity, and that the multiplicative inverse of (z, y, z) is ( x, y, 
z + zy). The multiplication is not commutative.1 The purpose for introducing this multiplicative law 
is to use it to determine connections between nodes of r(c, k, 1) as they are represented in the address 
space. Each node is connected to four other nodes by links or edges labeled (+1, O, O) and (O, Al, O) 
according to the group law. That is: (x, y, z) is connected to (3) (%, y,z)(+l, o,o)=(z+l, y,z+y) by 
links labeled (+1, O, O), and (x, y, z) is connected to (4) (X, y,z)(o, +1, o) = (z, y* l,Z) by links 
labeled (O, +1, O). The links of opposite sign are opposites of one another so the graph has bidirectional 
links. Because the sec­ond coordinate y is taken modulo C21, the link labeled (O, 1, O) generates a cycle 
of length ;Zl on I (c, k, i) ex­actly as would the link labeled (O, 1) on a ck x Czi toroidally connected 
mesh. That is, (5) (O, 1,0) = (0,0,1) and (0,0, 1) = (0,0,0). Somewhat more obscurely, since the third 
coordinate z is taken as ZC1 modulo C21 and the first coordinate x is taken modulo ck, the link labeled 
(1, O, O) generates a cycle of length ck on I (c, k, 1, ). The network I (c, k, 1) is closely related 
to the 2­dimensional ck x C21 toroidally connected mesh, which is also a network of degree four. It is 
also closely related to the 3-dimensional ck x cl x c toroidally connected mesh, a network of degree 
six. In [DF] the diameter and average diameter of r(c, k, /) was computed. Ta­ble 1 illustrates the relationship 
of these parameters for the three related networks. 1TM~ ~ul@licative law can also be viewed as mukiplication 
;n the semi-direct product Z /.k K Z/.21 of the elements (cI, yl + Clzl ) and (Z2, y2 + C1Z2) where the 
first coordinate belongs to Z /ck and the second to Z/c21. The action of Z/ck on Z /c21 is given by multiplication 
by 1 + cl [Sco]. The form presented in (1) is as the multiplication of integer matrices in a Heisenberg 
group modulo a relation on the coordinates [%h]. Table 1 dia. r(c, k, 1) ck/2 + cl/2 2-dim.ck x C21 mesh 
ck/2 + c21/2 3-dim.ck x cl x c mesh ck/2 + cl/2 + c/2 ave. dia,, r(c, k, 1) 1/2 dia. + O(ln(c)/@ 2-dim.ck 
x C21 mesh 1/2 dia. 3-dim.ck x ci x c mesh 1/2 dia. This table is correct for c ~ 8. For smaller values 
of c the diameter of I (c, k, 1) is greater than the value in the table. See [DF] for details. Notice 
that the diam­eter and average diameter of I (c, k, 1) behave asympt­otically like the diameter and average 
diameter of a 2­dimensional cross-section of the 3-dimensional ck x c1 x c mesh. In terms of these metrics, 
supertoroidal networks get the third dimension (of length c) at no cost. In terms of these metrics it 
is desirable that k and 1 be ap­proximately equal. Our table gives an unrealistic value for the 2-dimensional 
mesh because, with c3kl nodes, it would be constructed in a square having diameter 0(c312) instead of 
0(c2). III. Layout of I (c, k, l). The address space [0, ck) x [0, cl) x [0, c) can be viewed as a rectangular 
volume of points in the integer lattice 233 within Euclidean 3-space. In this section the physi­cal location 
of the links given by (3) and (4) is examined. We refer to the resulting collection of points or nodes 
and links in Euclidean 3-space as a layout c~f I (c, k, i). A modification of this layout which reduces 
the length of the longest link required is presented. Lastly a layout for a network prototype project 
at the Supercomputing Research Center which embraces both the sulpertoroidal topology and the 3-dimensional 
mesh is described. This project is called H-net. Consider a cross-section perpendicular to the z-axis, 
z = Zo. The links labeled (O, +1, O) connect nodes in this cross-section according to (4) in a manner 
which is independent of X.. We observed in the previous sec­tion that the nodes in such a c1 x c cross-section 
are connected into a single cycle by these links. This is pic­tured in Figure 1 for I (4, 1, 1). The 
horizontal axis is the y-axis and the vertical axis is the z-axis, In a cross-section perpendicular to 
the y-axis, y = y., the links labeled (+1, O, O) connect nodes according to (3) into cycles of length 
ck. In this case the role of the third coordinate is more complex. As a result, these links have slopes 
which are dependent on go, the value of the coordinate determining the cross-section. It is very important 
that the slopes of these links only take are reduced. The longest of these links is in the outer­ z 
Figure 1. Cross Section ZO of r(4, 1, 1) the values O, 1, . . . . c 1 because (x, y, z) = (z, y, Z+C) 
in the arithmetic defining r(c, k, 1). That is, the slopes of these links are independent of k and 1. 
This observation is fundamental to the scalability of these networks with respect to the parameters k 
and 1. The four distinct cross-sections of I (4, 1, 1) are pictured in Figure 2. The horizontal axis 
is the x-axis and the vertical axis is the z-axis. most ring of the cylinder and has length proportional 
to 2irck/cl. If, in addition, the nodes on the x-axis are interleaved in the pattern O, ck 1, 1, ck 
 2,2, . . . . ck/2 then the links connecting the left and right extremes in Figure 2 are reduced so 
that the longest link has length proportional to c. A more detailed study of these issues has been carried 
out in [Dl]. The conclusion of this analysis is the following result. Theorem. If k/1 < M, there exist 
three dimensional layouts of 17(c, k, /) in a volume proportional to klc3 having links of maximal length 
proportional to c. The constraint on k/1 is compatible with the result on diameter reported in Table 
1 of Section II. However, the result on maximal link length is in opposition to the result on diameter 
in Section II because the advantage in network diameter increases with c but the length of the longest 
links also increases with c which is a disad­vantage. y=l y=3 y=2 Figure 2. Cross Sections yO of r(4, 
1, 1) There are two sources of long links in this layout. One source originates in the behavior of the 
third co­ordinate under the action (3) of the link (1, O, O). It is intrinsic and imposes links of length 
proportional to the parameter c, The other source is the wrap-around effect of creating cycles. It leads 
to links of two differ­ent lengths: some of length proportional to cl, as can be seen in a special case 
by examination of Figure 1, and some of length proportional to ck, as can be seen in the same case in 
Figure 2. This phenomenon can be eliminated by standard techniques used in laying out toroidally connected 
meshes. If, for example, the y­axis is laid out as a ring of length c1 then the address space becomes 
a cyclinder and the long links in Figure 1 Figure 3. H-Net Layout for r(4, 1, 1) Figure 3 is a visualization 
of (part of) the wiring for r(4, 1, 1) in another layout discussed in [Dl]. The re­lationship between 
the coordinates used in this paper and the natural coordinates of the nodes of the lay­ out in Figure 
3 is more complicated than that required in the previous discussion. In the layout in Figure 3 the x-axis 
is a horizontal ring so the cycles of length four with links labelled (+1, O, O) appear as horizontal 
rings with dark links. The ~axis and the z-axis are in­ terwoven vertically with each group of four horizontal 
planes constituting a fixed value of g and four values of z. Displacements between these groups of four 
are exagerated to enhance the clarity of the figure. Each corner column constitutes one of the cycles 
of length 16 pictured in Figure 1. Only the front right column pictures all of the links labeled (O, 
+1, O). The left front and right rear columns picture half of these links and the left rear pictures 
none of these links. The omis­sions are made to enhance clarity. The columns have different interconnection 
patterns which result from the fact that the value of z, being nonconstant along link (1, O, O), is not 
constant on the horizontal planes in this figure. This layout was proposed as part of a project at the 
Supercomputing Research Center to build a recon­figurable network architecture capable of realizing both 
I (4, 1, 1) and a 3-dimensional 4 x 4 x 4 toroidally con­nected mesh. The mesh can be achieved by linking 
each group of four nodes in a column into a cycle of length four and appropriately reconnecting the gray 
links in Figure 3. With this layout both the mesh and I (4, 1, 1) have maximal links of the same length.z 
IV. Routing on I (c, k, /). We have developed two distributed routing algo­rithms on I (c, k, l). Our 
network model is one in which unit time is required to traverse all links even though some are longer 
than others in the layouts described earlier. The first algorithm is optimal, in the sense that the algorithm 
chooses a minimal route from source to destination in the abscence of contention. The second algorithm 
is suboptimal. Given a source S = (xl, VI, Z1) and destination D = (z2, Y2, 22), a distributed routing 
algorithm d must choose one of the four links (+1, O, O), (O, &#38;l, O) along which to send a packet. 
This choice must be based only upon knowledge of S and D. Global knowledge of the network topology can 
be embedded using the arithmetic structure of the underlying address space of the net­work. If the link 
chosen is L and a packet is sent from S on link L, itarrives at node SL. The algorithm A is re­called 
with S = SL and D = D. Clearly, an algorithm A which examines D-l S in order to choose link L will be 
called upon to examine (D )-lS = D-lSL at the node S = SL. Therefore, in the context discussed here, 
a distributed routing algorithm d must choose a link L by examination of D-l S. As S and D vary over 
the 2This layout was not chosen for that reason, however. It was chosen and later modified slightly because 
of factors such as power supply, cooling, and dimensions of off-the-shelf components. address space of 
I (c, k, i), D 1S varies over the same space. Therefore, a routing algorithm A is a function from the 
address space to {(+1, O, O), (O, +1, O), home}. When D-15 = (O, O, O), i.e. when D = S, the packet is 
home. That is, it has arrived at its destination. We are tacitly assuming that nodes have the ability 
to compute D-1 S given D and S, that packets carry D in a header and that nodes know their own address 
S. We indicated in the Introduction that the address space for I (c, k, 1) together with the multiplicative 
law (2) defines a group. An optimal routing algorithm A is a recursive algorithm capable of finding minimal 
length representations for elements of this group. This prob­lem is known to be hard. (See [EG] and [J] 
for stud­ies of its complexity.) Most network topologies in real machines which are based upon groups 
are based upon commutative groups where the problem is much eas­ier. The problem is not easy in the group 
underly­ing r(c, k, 1). The only way to achieve optimal routing on r(c, k, i) is by means of look-up 
tables. Coupled with the abil­ity to calculate D-1 S, the look-up tables are identical for all nodes. 
Assuming that D-lS = (O, O, O) is rec­ognized outside the table, these tables require c3kl x 4 bits. 
(There are techniques in [CF] for compressing the width of the entries. ) This is an acceptable solution 
to the routing problem provided that the network clock operates at the speed of memory chips. However, 
if the network clock is to operate at speeds comparable to the logical units, which would be the case 
in a very fine grained parallel MIMD machine [Sin], this solution is unacceptable. We have recently discovered 
a suboptirnal routing algorithm for I (c, k, 1) which uses much smaller look­up tables or which can be 
implemented entirely in logic. The proof that the algorithm is correct and an analysis of the algorithmic 
diameter of I (c, k, 1) are carried out in [D2]. The principal results of that analysis and the algorithm 
follow. Let D-lS = (z, y, z) and j = y+.zcl modulo C21 with the representative j chosen so that c21/2 
~~ j < c21/2. There is a unique representation (6) j=q(cl l)+r with ITI < (cl 2)/2 and Iql < c/2. (See 
[D2], (3.8) and (3.9). ) The supoptimal routing algorithm depends only upon x, r and q. Furthermore, 
it is like a routing algorithm on a 3-dimensional toroidal mesh in that it only needs to determine whether 
a coordinate is nonzero and, if so, whether it is greater or less than zero. In terms of look-up tables, 
this means that a table of length C21 with two-bit entries specifying whether r = O and its signature 
if r # O is required. Since (6) is a form of division algorithm, it can also be implemented in logic 
rather than ram. Here is the algorithm, which we will denote by 2? to in the definition of multiplication 
given in (2). It also distinguish it from the optimal algorithm d. means that at least half of the nodes 
must have their (7) own identifiers changed. These requirements must also home if (x, y,.z) = (0,0,0) 
(0, 1,0) if r >0, (0,1,0) ifr <O, (x y z) = (1,0,0) ifr=Oandq #O, ( 1,0,0) ifr=O, q= Oandz>O, (1,0,0) 
ifr=O, q= Oandx <O. I Theorem. The algorithm B is a distributed routing algorthim on I (c, k, l). The 
diameter of I (c, k, 1) with respect to 1? is bounded above by ck/2 + cl/2 + c/2+2. This algorithm can 
be implemented at speeds which compare favorably with routing algorithms on 3­dimensional toroidally 
connected meshes. Note that the algorithmic diameter has an upper bound which is worse by +2 than the 
diameter of a 3-dimensional mesh and that some of the power of the supertoroidal network has been lost 
by using this algorithm. (See Table 1 in Sec­tion II.) However, the algorithm B is optimal locally. Specifically, 
if the distance from S to D is less than three, then B is optimal. Furthermore, each node haa a two dimensional 
neighborhood, given by q = O, on which B is optimal. V. Scalability of I (c, k, /). With respect to network 
topologies, the issues raised by scaling are related to node degree, link length, di­ameter, address 
space, node addresses, routing logic and physical layout. For a family of networks to scale gracefully, 
the logical structure and topology of a small network must be related to that of a large network in a 
rational and useful way. We claim this to be the case for supertoroidal networks. In fact, large networks 
can be constructed from smaller networks, provided they share the same value of the parameter c, in a 
relatively straight forward manner. In this section we examine how this can be done and look fairly closely 
at changes required in the node addressing, the logic and the net­work links. For the sake of simplicity, 
we will discuss the special case of constructing r(c) 2, 1) or r(c, 1, 2) from two copies of r(c, 1, 
1). Because supertoroidal networks have node degree four, which is independent of network dimensions, 
node degree is not a problem in scaling. Also, link identi­fiers are identical for all nodes of all of 
these networks, so no change in port references is needed. Since larger net works require larger address 
spaces, we will assume that every network in a family has the address space capacity of the largest member 
of the family. Notice that this means that the node hardware which calcu­lates D-l S for the routing 
algorithm must be capable of modification because the parameters k and 1 appear be met by a family of 
k-ary n-cubes if they are to scale gracefully. In Section III a physical layout is exhibited in which 
the length of maximal links is proportional to c. The scaling problem will be discussed in terms of this 
layout because bounding maximal link length for all networks in a family is highly desirable. In this 
layout the y-axis is a ring and the x-axis is interwoven in the pattern O,ck l,l, ck 2,2,..., c2/2. Let 
us first examine the construction of I (c, 1, 2) from two copies of I (c, 1, 1). These copies are cylin­ders 
which have the property that nodes with a fixed value of the coordinate z are linked into a cycle of 
length C2 by the links (O, +1, O). (See (4) and the discussion associated with Figure 1.) These nodes 
must be linked into a single cycle of length 2C2 in r(c, 1, 2). This can be accomplished easily and gracefully 
provided the cylin­ders are flattened into two parallel planes which can by joined at one end. A top 
view is pictured in Figure 4 where the y-axis is pictured as a cycle and the x-axis is vertical. No change 
in the links labeled (+1, O, O) (see (3)) is required. It is clear that no link haa its length increased 
in this process. This scaling is also relatively graceful with respect to node addresses. The x-and z-coordinates 
are unaffected. In the two original net­works, the y-coordinates are arranged aa a cycle in the order 
0,1,2, ..., c 1. In I (c, 1, 2) the y-coordinate is arranged in a single cycle in the order O, 1,2, 
. . . . 2C 1. This can be accomplished by adding c/2 to the values of the y-coordinate in the second 
copy of r(c, 1, 1) and c to the y-coordinate of the last half of the nodes of the first copy. !! !! 
1 Ww 2 3;, ;: $3 must join the z-axes of the two networks so, physically, we must place one cyclinder 
inside the other. The top view of this is pictured in Figure 5. With the cylinders flattened as in the 
above discussion two halves of one copy must be placed on either side of the other copy. As a result, 
some of the links in the cylindrical direction in the outer copy (copy 2 in Figure 5) will be lengthened 
in scaling. This is the sense in which this scaling is less graceful. Figure 4. Scaling I (c, 1, 1) up 
to r(c, 1, 2) Construction of r(c, 2, 1) from two copies of r(c, 1, 1) in this layout is somewhat less 
graceful. Logically, we Recalling the discussion of the links (+1, O, O) in Sec­tion III, these links 
have slopes which are determined by the class of the y-coordinate modulo c. As joined, these slopes agree 
in both copies of the network for each value of y because these values are aligned in both copies. Therefore, 
reconnecting the links labeled (+1, O, O) at the edges of the two copies to create one network is not 
difficult. Node addressing is handled exactly as above except that in this case t is the x-coordinate 
which must be modified. Figure 5. Scaling I (c, 1, 1) up to I (c, 2, 1) Alternative physical layouts 
may alter the relative ease with which scaling with respect to k or 1 can be achieved. For example, the 
layout pictured in Fig­ ure 3 for H-net scales very gracefully with respect to k. Given two copies of 
the machine I (4, 1, 1) as pic­ tured, I (4, 2, 1) could be built by standing the machines side by side 
and rewiring the horizontal 4-cycles into 8­cycles. Routing poses a more challenging problem. The cal­culation 
of D-1 S is dependent upon k and 1 as well as c. Therefore, the ability to modify this part of the routing 
logic must be available in the hardware. If op­timal routing based upon lookup tables is used then space 
for the table for the largest network in the family must be present in the same way that adequate address 
space must be present. If the suboptimal algorithm is used and scaling is confined to the parameter k, 
then scaling only effects routing on the z-axis. Either lookup tables or a division algorithm to implement 
(7) are unaf­fected. In this case scaling is no more complex than for any toroidally connected family 
of meshes. If, however, scaling is done on the parameter i, appropriate modifi­cation in the lookup tables 
or division algorithm which implements (7) must be available in the node logic. The scaling properties 
of the family I (c, k, 1) for a fixed value of c are inherent and depend in a funda­mental way upon the 
fact that the coordinate z of the address space is determined independently of k and 1. V. Conclusions 
and Future Research. Supertoroidal networks are a new class of networks. A member of the class is denoted 
I (c, k, i). It is of degree four and has c3kl nodes. For fixed c, the net­works form a family which 
depend on the parameters k and 1. The networks in this family are scalable in both concept and physical 
layout. These networks are closely related to two and three dimensional toroidally connected meshes. 
They have degree four but have di­ameter approximating that of 3-dimensional meshes of comparable size. 
As a result, they offer a design alter­native to three dimensional meshes in which pin com­plexity is 
traded for routing complexity and wire length. Supertoroidal networks appear to be best suited for use 
in wide-data-path MIMD multiprocessors. Two distributed routing algorithms have been pre­sented. One 
of these is suboptimal but can. be imple­mented in hardware in a manner analogous to imple­mentations 
of algorithms on k-ary n-cubes for k >2. It is, therefore, capable of much higher speed implemen­tations 
than the other algorithm, which is optimal but based upon full size look-up tables. The suboptimal al­gorithm 
is one of three related algorithms discussed in [D2]. They have some very interesting properties. For 
example, the path form S to D is not the opposite of the path from D to S. There are hysteresis loops 
in the routing algorithm. What do they mean and do they have any use in managing or analyzing routing 
conges­tion? The algorithms are all coset algorithms [SS] so choose two of the links much more frequently 
as first steps of optimal paths. Therefore, in the presence of random traffic, the frequency count of 
link traversal is not uniform. This is intrinsic to any coset algorithm, even those on hypercubes. However, 
coset algorithms have the desirable feature that they are parallel. How does this phenomenon relate to 
congestion on the net­work? In addition to addressing the questions just raised, there are two major 
tasks remaining in the study of supertoroidal networks. One of these is a comprehen­sive study of network 
performance under various load­ing conditions. Some of this work, using a network sim­ulator, has been 
done but is not reported in this paper. Additional study using the simulator and a network pro­totype 
called H-Net, which is being constructed at the Supercomputing Research Center, will be carried out. 
The second major task is to examine the emulation of more conventional network topologies on supertoroidal 
[Se] C. L. Seitz, The Cosmic Cube, Communications of the networks. ACM 28 (1985), 22 33. [ST] S. C. Shee 
and H. H. Teh, An Application of GTOUpS to the Topology Design oj Connection Machines, Group REFERENCES 
<RefA>TheoTy (Singapore, 1987), de Gruyter, Berlin-New York, 1989, pp. 519 529. [AK1] Sheldon B. Akers and 
B. Krishnamurthy, A Group The­ [Sin] Burton Smith, The Tera ComputeT System, Confer­ oretic Model for 
Symmetric Interconnection Networks, ence Proceedings, 1990 ACM International Con.feTence Proc. 1986 International 
Conj. on Parallel Processing, Supemomputing, 11-15, Amsterdam, pp. 216 233. IEEE Computer Society Press, 
Washington, D. C., 1986, on June 1990, The Netherlands, The Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, 1990, pp. 1 7. [AK2] , A GTOUP Theoretic Model foT Symmeis-ic Inter­ connection Networks, IEEE 
Trans. on Comp. 38 (1989), 555 566. 17100 SCIENCE DRIVE, BOWIE, MD 20715-4300 [ABR] Fred Annexstein, 
Marc Baumslag and Arnold L. Rosen­ E-mail: draper fk.uper.org berg, GTOUP Action GTaphs and Pa Tallel 
Architectures, SIAM J. Comp. 19 (1990), 544-569. [CCSW1 G. E. Carlsson, J. E. Cruthirds, H. B. Sexton 
and C. G. Wright, Interconnection Networks Based on a Gcn­eTalization of Cube-Connected Cycles, IEEE 
Trans. on Comput. C-34 (1985), 769-772. [CF] Gene Cooperman and Larry Fhdcelstein, New Methods joT Using 
(?ayley Graphs in Interconnection Networks, College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, preprint, 
J. Discrete and Appl. Math., to appear.. [Da] William J. Dally, Performance Analysis of k-aTy n-cube 
Interconnection NetwoTks, IEEE Trans. on Comp. 39 (1990), 775-785. [Dl] Richard N. Draper, Supertoroidal 
Networks, Su­percomputing Research Center, Technical Report SRC-TR-90-O05. [D2] , A Fast Distributed 
Routing Algorithm for Su­pert o To idal Networks, Supercomputing Research Center, Technical Report SRC-TR-91-032. 
[D3] , An overview of Super foToida! Networks, Supercomputing Research Center, Technical Report SRC-TR-91-035. 
[DFJ and Vance Faber, The Diameter and Mean Di­am ct eT of Supert oroidal Net works, Supercomputing Re­search 
Center, Technical Report SRC-TR-90-004. [EG] S.Even and O. Goldreich, The Minimum-Length Gen­erato7 Seqtience 
PToblem is NP-HaTd, J. Algorithms 2 (1981), 311-313. [Hi] W. D. Hillis, The Connection Machine, The MIT 
Press, Boston, Mass., 1986. [Hw] Kai Hwang, Computer Arithmetic: Principles, Archi­tecture, and Design, 
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1979, p. 8. [J] M. Jerrum, The Complexity of Finding Minimum-Length Sequences, 
Automata, Languages and Program­ming; 11th Colloquium, Antwerp, 1984, Lecture Notes in Comp. Sci., vol. 
172, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1984, pp. 270 280. [Ps] F. Pittelli and D. Smitley, Analysis of 
a 3D ToToidal Network for a Shared Memory Architect us-e, Proceed­ings Supe TcOmputing 88, November 14-18, 
1988, Or­lando Florida, IEEE Computer Society Press, Washing­ton, DC, 1988, pp. 42 48. [Pv] F. P. Preparata 
and J. E. Vuillemin, The Cube-Connected Cycles: A Vemiti!e GTaph for Pa Tallel Computation, JACM 24 (1981), 
300-309. [Sch] Walter %hempp, NeuTocompute r Architectures, pre­print, Dept. of Math., Univ. Siegen, 
Siegen, Germany. [ss] Stephen T. Schibell and Richard M. Stafford, Proces-SOT Interconnection Networks 
fTom Cayley G?_aphs, to appear, Discrete and Appl. Math.. [sCo] W. R. Scott, Group Theory, Prentice Hall, 
Inc., Engle­wood Cfiffs, N. J., 1964.
</RefA>			
