
 Analysis of Careers for Georgia Youth in Computer Occupations, 1971-76 John L. Fulmer Georgia Institute 
of Technology The materials for this paper are based on the CAREERS FOR YOUTH SURVEY, GEORGIA, 1971-76, 
which was prepared under contract with the Georgia State Department of Education and published in October 
1972.(1) The data were obtained by mailed questionnaires,(2) representing a probability sample of the 
state's 38,185 employers, varying in size from three workers to some multi-unit operations with 15,000 
or more employees. The response to the mailed questionnaire was 1,893 firms which filed usable replies 
to the questionnaire, representing a 5% response ratio to the universe. In terms of the state's total 
employment of 1,429,997 employees in September 1970, the sample base period for the study, the response 
ratio was 27%, which reflected a relatively higher rate of returns from the larger firms, many of which 
fell in the multl-unit category. Estimated employment for each of the four jobs is as follows, Key-punch 
operator #,695 Verifier operator 669 Digital computer operator 1,856 Programmer 2,554 Total 9,554 It 
is noted that the key-punch operator which is a cleri- cal type job outstripped the other three jobs 
by a wide margin and accounted for 49% of total employment for the four jobs. YEARLY JOB OPENINGS AND 
TRAINING REQUIREMENTS The demand for the four types of computer personnel included in the study during 
the period 1971-76 convert- ed to a yearly rate equals I,~77 jobs. Two major components constitute yearly 
Job demand. These are jobs originating from growth in the Georgia economy and replacement demand for 
workers who retire or withdraw from the work force permanently for any reason. During the period the 
growth factor in the economy is expected to create 652 jobs yearly and the replacement factor 825 jobs 
yearly. It is noted that replacement demand which is expected to account for 56% of total' job open- 
ings for computer personnel will be somewhat larger than growth in demand from an expanding economy. 
Among the four jobs under study largest total demand will be for Key Punch Operator with 809 job openings 
and Digital Computer Operator second with 280 jobs yearly. Program- mers are projected for 276 jobs demanded 
yearly. Training requirements are defined in such a way as to indicate number of each of these four 
jobs which will have to be trained from outside companies. Normally companies conduct internal training 
programs. The data show that companies in Georgia, based on sample replies, will train 20~ of job needs 
yearly or 295 annually with the bulk being concentrated in the Key Punch Operator class with 168 trained 
yearly. Deducting the number expected to be trained internally leaves 1,182 total for the four jobs which 
must be trained in public institu- tions and some private training institutes. Largest training requirements 
will be for Key Punch Operator with 641 training requirements yearly. In second rank, but considerably 
down the line in number, are Digital Compu- ter Operators with annual training requirements of 242 and 
Programmers with yearly training needs of 205. Thus, companies in Georgia are expected to meet 21% of 
their requirements for Key Punch Operators from internal training programs and 26 percent of requirements 
for Programmers. (See Table i) TRAINING REqUIR~ENTS AND PERSONAL qUALIFICATIONS Jobs in data processing 
concern data coding and data processing, including complex manipulation and calcula- tion of data pertinent 
to business or scientific re- search. The operation requires input of data punched in cars or put on 
tapes by various electronic techniques and printed output of the processed results. Punching of data 
in cards involves keypunching of data by persons trained to operate a key-punch machine. Analysis of 
data and preparation of output in form of statistical tabulations require the services of a programmer 
who prepares coded instructions for computer manipulation of data in the cards. The computer operator 
follows the programmer's instructionsand after loading the computer with tapes, discs and cards, he manipulates 
switches and observes numerous lights to get the output which the programmer has set up. The positions 
above key punch operator are key punch verifier, key punch supervisor in large installations, computer 
operator and programmer. Advances to upper ~.~ ~ "4" ¢~1 0 oo 0 o ~,~ .~ ~ N ~ ~.~ I~,~ ~ 0 0 ~..-~ 
0 ~o~ ~ 0 "~ ~.-~ "~ 0 "~ "~ 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ co 0 ~ o ~ m .~ o o ~ °~ 0 oo ~ .~ 0 ~ I,.~ ~ o co ~ oo ill q.I 
Ill t~ o ~'1 .,-t o.~ 0 m ~ m ~ 0  o~ oo o,I ~ ~ ~ 0 N 0 ~ m ~D oo o~ o o 0 0.~ 0 ,C o o 0 4-,I 0 0..,.~0 
oO 0 ~ ~ m 0 ~ ~ m ° o N level positions on the Career Ladder will require continuation of the intense 
relevant on-the-job instruc- tion fortified by specialized training in a Special IBM School, Area Vocational-Technical 
School or college, more particularly for the programmers. Training programs for both Digital Computer 
Operators and Programmers are provided in seven of Georgia's Area Vocational-Technical Schoolsl also 
in some state univer- sities and colleges, although the major emphasis in university programs is the 
training of Systems Analysts which was not included in the questionnaire survey. Programmer training 
in the Area Vocational-Technical Schools is generally referred to as Data Processing Tech- nology which 
is a two-year or eight-quarter sequence of courses. In the Atlanta Vocational-Technical School the program 
is called "Computer Programming Technology." An eight-quarter sequence is also the requirement of the 
program of the other six Area Vocational-Technical Schools which offer programmer training. The training 
program offered in the Atlanta Vocational-Technlcal School pro- vides the following broad sequence of 
courses for training of a computer programmers General Accounting 2 quarters Cost Accounting 1 quarter 
 Accounting Systems 1 quarter General Math and Algebra 2 quarters Data Processing Mathematics 2 quarters 
 Business Statistics 2 quarters Communication Skills and Technical Report Writing 1 quarter each Computer 
Programming 6 quarters Job Simulation 2 quarters Prospectivestudents for Computer Programming Technology 
should be high school graduates with ~wo years of alge- bral other desirable courses as prerequisites 
include geometry, trigonometry, physics, mechanical drawing, typing, accounting and industrial arts. 
(3) A special follow up during Spring Quarter 1973 of Georgia employers who reported data processing 
employ- ees on the CAREERS FOR YOUTH SURVEY questionnaire were asked to report percentage of yearly needs 
for Digital Computer Operators and Programmers recruited from several sources and the technical competencies 
required of the employee when recruiting from outside. Through WATS line contacts reports were obtained 
from repres:entative employers throughout Georgia relative to the technical competencies which directors 
of computer centers in organizations require of Digital Computer Operators and Programmers, as well as 
information on educational background, aptitudes, and training methods. These survey statements are summarized 
in the two sec- tions which follow. Summary Statements Relative to Technical Competencies Required by 
Employers pi~ital Computer Operators I. Accuracy and speed in performance 2. Follow written instructions! 
read flow charts and instructions  3. Have technical insights in how system works  4. Exercise great 
care to be sure that tapes and disks are mounted properly on drives  5. Get forms in printer and make 
certain they are properly located  6. Understand job control language  7. Be able to use console typewriter 
with speed and accuracy to communicate with computer  8. Reads technical print-out on a console typewriter 
(or video screen) in order to recognize deviations from normal and then take necessary steps to correct 
 9. Is someone who does not mind standing as he works  Education, High school education with ability 
to read with understanding! gets on-the-job training. Computer Programmers I. Have knowledge of computer 
language(s) and its tech- nical performance. 2. Ability to organize work and communicate skills for 
users of print-outs. . Have detailed knowledge of any applications of computers that may be needed 
by the organization for which he works. . Programmer accepts problem from analyst and works it out 
on his own, showing logical analysis to get best solution. . Ability to select program or sub-programs 
from library programs and formulate a program which is most applicable for problem at hand. . Once 
program is written, test against simulated re- sults and modify as necessary. Is responsible for "trouble-shooting" 
once it is in production. 7. Produce an output which management (or other users) wants and can use. 
 Education, Most employers hire graduates directly from high school for programming work if the youth 
has aptitude for programming analysis. A number of agencies have developed aptitude tests which show 
de- gree of qualification for this type of work. In this case the youth is hired as a Programming Trainee 
and gets training and instruction through video tape structured courses. Trainee must show math and analytical 
skills! math analysis is mostly algebraic. Some companies in Georgia hire programmers from Area Vocational-Technical 
Schools who have completed the two- year course in Data Processing Technology or Computer Programming 
Technologyl others hire youth who have comp- leted the course in a Data Control School. Companies also 
hire college graduates with aptitudes for program- ming work, although this occurs mostly in the Atlanta 
Area where the bulk of the state's largest and most com- plex organizations are located. Effect of Data 
Processing Equipment on Office Accounting Personnel The complexity and rapid growth of American business 
enterprise has been accompanied by a massive amount of paper work which must be accessible to top managers 
quickly and in usable form. The computer was developed and continues to evolve along with technological 
ad- vances in the American economy. Since computers have the capability of doing much of the accounting 
work, it has been assumed that they affect the relative use of 6? accounting personnel. This hypothesis 
was tested by tabular and graphic analysis showing the relationship of type of business and size to the 
relative use of computers compared to accounting personnel. In order to test the impact of computer personnel 
on accounting, bookkeepers, and supporting staff, the sample of firms in this Careers survey was tabulated 
according to size and industry type for three accounting-bookkeeping jobs and the three data processing 
jobs. The accounting- bookkeeping jobs are, Job Accounting Clerk Bookkeeper Bookkeeper Machine Operator 
 Data Processing Jobs Programmer Digital-Computer Operator Key-punch Operator The results are presented 
in Table 2. The data are presented by expressing each job and job category as a percentage of the total 
of all six jobs, in order to isolate any displacement effects or change in job structure. It is very 
clear from the data that utili- zation of the new computer technology is a combined function of size 
of company and type of industry. In terms of size of company it may be noted from the table that use 
of computer personnel is practically nil in companies of small size, i.e., those with 19 workers or less. 
If the comparison is made in terms of the next two company sizes, it is seen that the relative employ- 
ment of computer jobs is three times as great in compan- ies with lO0 or more workers as in companies 
with from 20-99 employees. On the other hand, accounting-bookkeep- ing personnel show a parallel decline 
from 90% of the six job-totals in establishments with 20-99 workers to 68% for establishments of i00 
or more workers, a relative loss of 22% for the largest group. Proceeding with the comparison to compare 
development trends with industry type, the data show that trade and services led all industry groups 
in every industry size in relative use of computer personnel. Construction was lowest. Yet government 
and others as a group led all industry groups in emphasizing computers. The reason for such a large lead 
in the relative employment of computer personnel (and, of course, computers) is due to the nature of 
business which it serves. Most notable of all in this category is the federal government which has 83% 
of the six jobs concentrated in the three computer I I ! ,i! :I I I 4.-I II gl I ! 0 ~. O0 0o~ @4 e-i 
r.i o~1 co o ~l oD ii ¢'~1,00 N ~NI H IJ °.~ r.-. u'~ oo ,.4,? ) e-I .-4 0 .~o o" "~ S::I ~ "~l ~ ~' 
0 qJ .IJ 0 4" .,:1".,,1" e"~ ,,O Or'.. 0'3 U L~ 0 ~ r,,-I e~l ~ e, lO P.4 c',4 0 r.,.~ o tc,"~ ¢,~ ~,o 
~ ~I~ ~1 ~ 0 II ! I ! I ¢~1 0 °.~ I 0 .~ ,.,,@ ~,.2 .2 0 '4" ~g ~g i ;r oo oo~ ~ C~uE 0 ~ 0 ~.~ "~ 0 
 ?o jobs. Here as elsewhere in the category a great volume of financial transactions and all sorts of 
paper work are involved, creating a mountainous but ever growing demand for record keeping and data processing. 
 The dramatic manner in which computers and their accom- panying personnel displace accounting'bookkeeping 
person- nel, particularly bookkeepers, is demonstrated by Chart i. Note the sharp decline of bookkeepers 
with size of estab- lishmentl contrariwise government and other have a re- verse movement up to 33% compared 
to 16% for the 100 and over group and an equally dramatic rise in key-punch operators and programmers. 
Yet this group reports no accounting clerks, so great is the emphasis on data processing jobs. Certain 
important inferences can be drawn from the chart relative to skills. An accounting clerk can be a high 
school graduate with commercial courses, featuring book- keeping. Programmers are generally two-year 
technical school graduates, although top programmers would be college graduates with a major in mathematics 
or engineer- ing. On the other hand, the key-punch operator is a much less highly trained clerical worker 
than a bookkeeper. Consequently, the new technology based on computers has had two major consequences, 
(a) produced a significant restructuring of Jobs and (b) reduced the skill level and complexity of jobs 
by the new jobs that have been introduced. In this sense the development is favorable for the unskilled 
classes in society. A key-punch opera- tor is undoubtedly trained more readily than a bookkeeper, provided 
there are personal aptitudes for preciseness and routineness. THE CAREER LADDER FOR WORKERS IN DATA 
PROCESSING The career ladder for workers in data processing occupa- tions begios with the entry level 
position of key-punch operatortD) and the progressively higher steps up the ladder are as follows~ 
Second step - Verifier Operator Third step - Digital Computer Operator Fourth step -Programmer In 
order to gain entry into Data Processing Occupations as key-punch operator, the girl or boy must be a 
high school graduate and preferably a person 20 years of age with typing skills of 40 words per minute, 
knowledge of ?l Chart 1 Relationship of Size of Company to Relative Use of Accounting-Bookkeeping and 
Data Processing Services, Percent CAREERS FOR YOUTH SURVEY, GEORGIA,1972 100 ~ . Three Accounting-Bookkeeping 
\\ Job, 90 -- 80 -- 70 -- \ \ 'X p \ I 60 -- \ I ,X, 50 -- 0 I \ \ / , ,   \ / / ', / , \, 40 --\ / 
/ , Accounting /K //Clerks / \ / "f30 --  /o// / -/'" / / \ ../"'/ 20 --/ Three Data / z\ / Procmin~ 
/ ~/'" " Jobs f ~ ,, 10 -- /~-~'key Punch Operator 4-19 20-99 100 or More Government Workers Workers 
Workers and Other ?z adding machines and pass a six-part aptitude test. This includes office terms, numbers, 
perception, memory, dex- terity, and parts of the machine. Training in the speci- fic skills is provided 
in many high schools of the State and in most of the network of Area Vocational-Technical schools. An 
employee, however, with typewriter skills and having ability in the six-part aptitude tests can gain 
employment directly in some companies through on- the-job training under the direction of the key-punch 
supervisor through tela training at the work location. In order to advance up the career ladder from 
key-punch operator to Verifier operator, digital computer operator, and programmer, the worker must maintain 
a continuation of the intense, relevant on-the-job instruction, supple- mented by special training in 
the skills of each higher level job by scheduling programs of training in a special IBM school, if accessible, 
Area Vocational-Technical school, or some nearby college. The factors which identify workers in the 
early stages on the career ladder for data processing who may be expected to advance to key-punch supervisor 
are the ability to im- prove performance in technical aspects of the job and display leadership characteristics. 
Those employees in data processing having strong potentials for advance to computer operator and then 
on to programmer must demon- strate strong aptitudes for the upper level skills, demonstrate high level 
logical analysis relative to the technical characteristics of the computer, tenacity to get the job done, 
and reflect high level responsibility in all work. Pay levels for the different steps of this career 
ladder in the State of Georgia in the Spring of 1972, converted to yearly earnings rates, are as follows, 
 Yearly Earnings Rates Reported by Georgia Employers in Spring of 1972 Average Reported Pay Lowest Reported 
Pay Highest Reported Pay Key-Punch Operator $5,470 $5,160 $8,694 Verifier Operator 5,512 4,160 7,280 
Digital Computer Op. 7,592 4,992 12,022 Programmer 9,235 5,824 13,770 See Chart 2 for a graphic relationship 
between the pay ranges reported for the State of Georgia during Spring, 1972, for the four steps on 
the career ladder considered in this study. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The four data processing jobs 
included in the study (key-punch operator, verifier operator, digital computer operator and programmer) 
had an estimated total employ- ment of 9,554 for Georgia in Fall of 1971. Largest em- loyment was for 
key-punch operator with 4,595 jobs or 9% of the total. Second in importance was programmer with 2,334 
jobs. Yearly job demand, or job openings, are estimated at 1,477 of which 56% will be for replace- ment 
of workers who retire or withdraw from data proces- sing jobs permanently. Company training programs 
are providing 295 trained workers yearly, covering 20% of total annual needs. Net training requirements 
for the four data processing jobs in the study will average 1,182 annually which must be trained by 
the area vocational-technlcal schools or by other outside training organizations. Computer programming 
technology, in an eight-quarter sequence, is provided in seven area vocational-technical schools in Georgia. 
Requirements for students to be admitted to the program are as follows, high school edu- cation with 
two years of algebra including as desirable prerequisites geometry, trigonometry, physics, mechani- cal 
drawing, typing, accounting and industrial arts. Computer programming technology in the area vocational- 
technical schools provides training in accounting, gener- al math and algebra, data processing math, 
business statistics, communication skills and technical report writing, computer programming in a six-quarter 
sequence, and job simulation. Analysis of the displacement effects of computers on accounting personnel 
shows a strong impact on the rela- tive use of accounting personnel. The ratio of dis- placement of 
accounting personnel by computer personnel is a direct function of size of business and also type of 
business. The replacement ratio by computer personnel rises from 10% for employers of 20-99 workers to 
32% for employers having i00 or over employees. By type of in- dustry the displacement ratio is strongest 
in government, over double that for the largest firms in the private sector. By type of employer, the 
next highest ratio is for trade and services, followed by manufacturing. The Career Ladder for Data 
Processing Occupations begins with key-punch operators and ends with key-punch super- Chert 2 CAREER 
LADDER FOR DATA PROCESSING OCCUPATIONS IN GEORGIA, 1972 Monthly YearlyPay income $1200 --$14,400 ~ogmmm~ 
 Digital-Computer Operator 1,000 m 12,000 Key Punch Supervisor 800 Verifier Operator 9,600 Key Punch 
Operator 600 7,200 400 4,eoo LEGEND Averege Reported Pay ~ -- 200 2,400 Highest Reported Pay Lowest Reported 
Pay ...... J. J L__ Llnd~gnated Promotion Intervals Time-on-Job, Respondbility. and Performance Lnwl 
?5 visor for most female workers. Men dominate employment among computer operators and programmers, the 
third and fourth steps on the Career Ladder. Pay ranges for key- unch operators, the lowest starting 
job, varied from 5,160 to $8,694, on an annual pay basis, while for programmers, the fourth step on the 
Career Ladder, as organized for this study, reported annual pay ranges between $5,824 to $13,770. The 
Digital Computer Operator must have ability to follow written instructions from the programmer! technical 
in- sights in how the system works! understands job control language! exercises care in mounting tapes, 
reels, card decks, etc., and forms on printerl and ability to use console typewriter with speed and accuracy 
to communi- cate with computer. A high school education is suffi- cient for entry position trainee if 
he has the ability to read with understanding. The Computer Programmer must have knowledge of computer 
language(s) and the computer's technical performance~ ability to take problem from Systems Analyst and 
work out typical solution, employing most efficient library programs and sub-programs! test correctness 
of program through trial runs! and construct print-outs in form and arrangement that meet needs of users. 
High school educa- tion will also be sufficient for a programmer trainee if youth has aptitude for programming 
analysis for which there are "Aptitude-Type Tests" available from a number of sourceswhich will determine 
the candidate's poten- tial for training in this highly technical and exacting logical analysis with 
a high degree of dependability. Almost one-fourth of companies in Georgia hire program- mers trained 
by Area Vocational-Technical Schools in either Date Processing Technology or Computer Programming Technology, 
an eight-quarter sequence of courses highly specialized to the requirements for programming analysis. 
Many of the larger Atlanta companies hire college gradu- ates who have aptitudes for computer programming 
or who acquired these technical competencies in specialized college courses. The conclusion is that 
a variety of interesting jobs, with attractive pay scales, exists for youth in Georgia and elsewhere 
in the United States in several job levels related to computer work, representing one of the most rapidly 
growing categories of occupations included in the CAREERS FOR YOUTH SURVEY, GEORGIA, 1971-76. While the 
specific jobs in the category of computer occupa- tions studied pertain to high school graduates with 
var- ied levels of training in post-secondary training pro- grams, the programmer, the highest level 
studied is quite sophisticated and his training requires intensive, specialized training in post-secondary 
Area Vocational- Technical Schools, much of which is college level or equivalent in order to develop 
analytical aptitudes required of computer programmers. The Systems Analyst, which was not included in 
the questionnaire and there- fore is not shown as a part of the Career Ladder as sketched out heretofore, 
would require college level, specialized training. Therefore, the youth who really becomes enthusiastic 
about occupations in computer work and gains rapid advances up the Career Ladder should consider dropping 
out of the work force for a period in order to gain a college degree in systems analysis or he might 
pursue this sort of training on a part-time basis in college courses offered during the evening. REFERENCES 
<RefA> i. Fulmer, John L. Careers for Youth Survey, Georgia, 1971-76, Survey of Employment Opportunities, Career 
Ladders and Training Requirements for Basic Jobs in the Vocational Job Clusters, 1971-76, on Contract 
for the Georgia State Department of Education, pub- lished by Industrial Management Center, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, October 1972, pp. 69-79 and </RefA>Appendix A. Five Brochures will be published to illustrate 
and give pertinent data about 48 Career Ladders. . Materials for the brochures were obtained through 
personal interviews, supplemented by specialized types of questionnaires. . From the catalogue of the 
Area Vocational-Technical Schools of Georgia, 1970, p. 25. 4. Non-profit is higher, but the size of 
total employ-ment does not support its significance. . It should be noted, however, that in large data 
processing organizations and also in some large corporate organizations with strong emphasis on data 
processing, the Career Ladder for key-punch operator would generally involve several grade levels for 
key punching work, based on higher levels of skills and experience with comparable pay ranges for each 
grade level. DISCUSSION OF FULMER PAPER Fred A. Gluckson National Bank of Detroit Professor Fulmer's 
paper continues a tradition with SIGCPR --an investigation of supply and demand at the entry levels 
in data processing. Last year we heard Professor Morris Pollack of CUNY and in 1971 Professor Gary 
~)pkin described junior college curricula. Also in 1971, Professor Ethel Shrout surveyed working systems 
 analysts to learn what competencies and training are actually required by their job. Similar papers 
can be found in prior proceedings. Please note that Professor Fulmer stops short of systems analysts, 
just addressing programmers and operators of keypunch machines and computers. His paper is rather wide 
ranging. In addition to quantifying demand, he touches on training requirements, personal qualifications, 
job descriptions, aptitude testing and career ladders. I would direct the interested reader to prior 
CPR re- search findings that concentrate on each of these areas. Our proceedings cover them in some depth. 
 Now for specific observations and opinions of my own. Professor Fulmer's growth trends seem rather 
mo=e con- servative than those of the Department of Labor. In 1968, the State of Georgia had 2.3% of 
the population of the United States. The Department of Labor projects 23,000 annualprogrammer openxngs, 
while this paper projects 276, or approximately 1%. I suspect this con- servative trend is more accurate 
since it is based on hard data from a local survey. However, Professor Fulmer does not mention thai'of 
his annual demand for programmers, many are not at the entry level. In my installation, for example, 
we currently have requisitions to hire several programmers. We could fill them tomorrow with trainees. 
But our deadlines are such that we have no ~Ime for training and are looking for experienced people that 
we can lure from other companies. Thus the student just out of a two-year col- lege may have trouble 
getting his first break. An observation on the data regarding growth of key-punch and computer operator 
jobs, in our large installation these jobs are actually shrinking. Where we had five computers three 
years ago, by year-end we will have two (larger) to do far more work. And our trend is to move data 
entry terminals into the user departments and make users responsible for entering and validating their 
own data. Thus our centralized key-punch group is diminish- ing. So I would view these growth figures 
with some caution. Perhaps enough smaller companies are growing to offset the large ones which are shrinking. 
 A minor point, I do not see a key verifier operator as a step up from key-punch. They are essentially 
the same job and are usually performed by the same individual. If anything, key verifier is less rewarding, 
as he or she doesn't get to make any little holes. ~ey-punch to key-punch supervisor, O.K. But to computer 
operator? To programmer? Professor Fulmer's analysis of job trends by type of in- dustry is interesting, 
something I have not seen before. Nor can I explain why construction is the lowest user of computer personnel. 
I suppose they shovel dirt ~ as opposed to paper, as in industry or government. Professor Fulmer concludes 
that computers have restruc- tured jobs, which no one can deny. Yet I disagree with his contention (b), 
that "the new ~echnology has reduced the skill level and complexity of Jobs." Would that it were so. 
 
			
