
 Proceedings of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference eel. J, J. Swain, D. Goldsman, R. C. Crain, and 
J. R. Wilson An investigation ofa Standard Simulation-Knowledge interface Carol S. Russell Adel S. E3maghraby 
James H. Graham Computer Science and Engineering Program University of Louisville Louisville, Kentucky 
40292, U.S.A. Abstract The benefits of separating the simulation of a physical system from the decision-making 
process are discussed. A formal model for the interface between such a simulation and a knowledge-based 
manager is presented. The model is then applied to a case study involving a scheduling and planning problem 
from manufacturing. 1 Introduction Simulations are conducted for the purpose of illustrating, defining 
and/or analyzing the behavior of complex systems. The system itself is often a collection of subsystems. 
While the subsystems may be well-defined, it is possible that the interaction among the subsystems is 
not well-defined. When this is the case, the usual procedure is to provide some a priori rule to regulate 
the interactions and then run the simulation, After successive runs, the data from the simulation are 
analyzed and necessary modifications are made in the simulation, While this run-analyze-modify procedure 
is appropriate for some simulations, it is not necessarily the most efficient or the most productive 
method. This is especially true if the modifications are applied to the rules of interaction among modules 
within a system which is sensitive to rapidly changing conditions. In systems of this type, it may be 
desirable to provide a mechanism by which decisions concerning the interaction of the subsystems can 
respond to current simulation conditions by modifying the rules of interaction while the simulation is 
still in progress. This work will show that by separating the physical characteristics of the system 
from the rules of interaction, a more efficient and effective simulation will result, This will aHow: 
1, dynamic allocation of resources and processes; 2, selection of best interactive rule based on current 
and changing conditions; and 3. decoupling into a modular simulation which can accommodate changes in 
either the physical description and/or the management objectives, Section 2 provides a brief overview 
of the incorporation of intelligent decision-making into simulations and a rationale for the proposed 
approach. Section 3 presents a formal model for an interface between a simulation and an intelligent 
decision-maker. Section 4 discusses an application of the formalism to a problem from manufacturing. 
2 Overview of Al and Simulation 2.1 Artificial Intelligence in Simulation Since the mid-70 s [~ren 1977], 
many attempts to use artificial intelligence to benefit simulation have been made, Much of this work 
has been devoted to helping investigate the problem, develop the simulation and analyze the results. 
These attempts are well documented as in Floss and Talavage [1988], Fishwick [1988], Rozenblit and Zeigler 
[1985], and Widman [1988], among others, Cognizant simulation [Oren and Zeigler, 1987], which implies 
the existence of a knowledge base about the system being simulated, also provides the ability to explore 
various levels of abstraction within a single simulation or to explore various viewpoints or goals [Fishwick 
1989]. 807 Russell, Elmaghraby, and Graham Some implementations of these concepts have taken the form 
of the simulations, the knowledge base and the inference engine for decision-making all written entirely 
in procedural languages such as FORTRAN. Others have written all the requisite parts of the intelligent 
simulation in a traditionally Al language such as PROLOG [0 Keefe 1989], Still another approach has been 
the development of hybrid languages that provide simulation constructs and statistic-gathering properties 
with pattern-matching abilities and reasoning capabilities [Ruiz-Meir and Talavage 1989], Unfortunately, 
there seem to be almost as many solutions to the problem of integrating simulation and artificial intelligence 
as there are investigators into the problem. However, there is one point of agreement among all the previously 
cited works ­the need for some intelligent agent to control the behavior of the simulation. This paper 
presents an alternative solution to the problem which provides a means to utilize the strengths of existing 
simulation and Al languages and provide greater flexibility than either one alone.  2.2 Al and Simulation 
Languages The use of a single language to provide intelligent control for a simulation has some desirable 
aspects. This approach also has two distinct drawbacks: 1. It presupposes that the language can handle 
all the requirements of both the intelligent decision-maker and the simulation; and 2. It presupposes 
that the programmer has  expertise in both simulation and Al, Simulation languages provide elements 
that are specific to the construction of simulations: means to describe physical entities, attributes 
and relations to other entities; mechanisms for specifying the passage of time; functions and procedures 
to gather and compute statistical measures; and means to provide for random events, Queuing structures 
and event scheduling are well-defined and the typical simulation language is capable of complex numeric 
computations. In contrast, the strengths of the Al languages lie in the ability to extract patterns from 
a complex set of facts, to reason on incomplete information, and to resolve conflicting goals, Al languages 
have the power of symbolic computing but are not suited for complex numeric computation, Therefore, an 
ideal solution to intelligent simulation would take advantage of these language traits and strengths 
by keeping the physical simulation separate from the Al engine that makes the decisions. This separation 
also addresses the second point above. The use of separate languages allows for separate development, 
testing and debugging of the individual components by programmers with expertise in the specified field. 
It also allows for modular development of a complex system and for interchangeability among compatible 
components. These issues lead us to consider the alternative of writing the physical simulation in a 
simulation language and the decision-maker in an Al language and then providing an interface between 
them. Therefore we propose a Standard Simulation-Knowledge Interface (SSKI) as a formal model, Elements 
in the development of SSKI include: 1. How will an expert system/rule-based manager for a simulation 
be invoked? Will it be invoked as needed, by monitoring a variable or group of variables in the simulation? 
Or will it be invoked on a regular basis using the simulation timing mechanism and/or event scheduler? 
 2. What information is needed in order for the decision-maker (the Manager) to reach a decision? Should 
specific information pertaining to a particular goal or all information about the system be available 
to the Manager? 3. What information from the Manager needs to be returned? Will the Manager alter attributes 
of the simulation directly, or will it be necessary for the Manager to pass the desired values and have 
the simulation alter the attributes?  4, What device or system should be used for the passing of information 
back and forth between the simulation and the Manager? A system of shared files, a common knowledge base, 
or a blackboard environment? These issues, as well as many others, must be addressed in order to design 
a successful interface between the simulation and its decision-maker. 3 The SSKI Formalism 3.1 General 
Considerations A simulation S of a real system can be defined as S = {A, R, O, T} consisting of a set 
of observable attributes A and a relation R defined on A which results in a set of outputs O at some 
simulation time t, where t e T. This definition holds for all simulations of real systems and is independent 
of the formal model or definition. Similarly, a knowledge-based manager M can be defined as M = {K, C, 
T} consisting of predicates K along with an inference engine which acts on K at time t and yields a 
result c as a conclusion, wherec GC, If a manager M is to make decisions concerning simulation S, then 
the following must hold: a, There exists a subset V s A u O in S which is necessary and sufficient for 
such decisions, b. M can assert predicates based on V consistent with K and can derive conclusion c. 
 c. Conclusion c can be used as input to S in order  to affect some changes in S. Given a simulation 
S and manager M as outlined above, an interface I can be described thus: I= {V, K, C,T,f,g} where V 
s A u O in S as defined above; K = {predicates} in M as defined above; c c C = {conclusions} in M; T 
c {reals} > t e T s t >0 denoting time in S; Define P(V) and P(K) as the power sets of V and K, respectively. 
Then: f = function mapping a set of variables of S at time t, into the predicate set of M: (f:P(v) x 
t. -+P(K)); g = function mapping a set of predicates in M at time t~ into the set of conclusions C: (g:P(K) 
x tm -+ c 3 g(P(K),tm) = c). In order for the interface to be generic, t. and t~ may assume any values 
in T such that t. < t.. However, for the purposes of this paper, the following assumption will be made: 
1, t,= t~ : that is, the simulation will assume the responsibility for calling the manager at time t. 
and will suspend all activity until a response is made by the manager, Since t, represents simulation 
time, not computational time, no simulation time will be recorded during the call-and-wait procedure. 
 Although the general model could support a manager which could interrupt the simulation at any time 
with the results of the original call, the above restriction provides for the following to hold: 2. The 
function g:P(K) x t. -C, P(K) is defined by P(K) = f(P(A), t,): the subset of the predicates mapped back 
as a conclusion is precisely that result of the function f. The changes made in simulation S as a result 
of conclusion c at time t~ are a direct result of the invocation of the manager by the simulation at 
time t.. The above assumptions define the relationship between the simulation and the manager as a call-and-wait 
system with the manager in the role of a knowledge server to the calling simulation. Thus the simulation 
itself must be defined so as to provide a means to call the manager and respond from the output of the 
manager even as the manager must be defined to respond to appropriate input from the simulation. It is 
possible to use Hoare s [1985] description for subordinate processes to describe the relation between 
S and M. However this does not address the issues of what information must be communicated between these 
processes and what effects M may have upon S. Wkhin the general definition of interface 1,some further 
observations and restrictions are made: 3. V (the set of variables in S communicated to M) can be partitioned 
into V. and V~ where V, represents the static, unchangeable attributes of S whereas V~ represents the 
dynamic, changeable ones. Clearly, if V, is known to M at t = O,then it is also known to M for all t 
>0 as well. Thus there is no need to communicate this subset of V to M for ti+l provided it has already 
been communicated at ti, Conversely, since V~ at ti+l is likely to differ from V~ at ti, then V~ must 
be communicated to M on each call. 4. In order to simplify an implementation, it will be assumed that 
V~ can only be affected within the simulation itself. Thus the actual mechanism for altering attributes 
will be provided within the simulation program, This eliminates the need to provide the manager direct 
access to those attributes and maintains the knowledge-server position of the manager. In other words, 
the manager will make the recommendations for changes in the simulation variables, but it is up to the 
simulation to implement these changes. This recommendation is embodied in the predicate value c as described 
above.  4. Application Problem 4.1 Overview of Recent Work A flexible manufacturing system (FMS) was 
chosen as a case study for several reasons. Foremost is the inherent complexity of planning and scheduling 
in an FMS. Even well documented scheduling rules, as summarized in Gupta, Gupta, and Bettor [1989] and 
Montazeri and Wassenhove [1990], are inadequate for solving every scheduling problem, Many recent attempts 
to solve scheduling problems have been made ranging from an algorithmic approach [Chan and Bedworth 
1990] and knowledge-based interactive systems [Sarin and Salgame 1990] to simulation approaches [Wu and 
Wysk 1989]. Despite these varied approaches, an ideal solution has yet to be found. Russell, Elmaghraby, 
and Graham 4.2 Problem Description In a traditional FMS scheduling problem certain assumptions are made: 
1. The jobs to be processed are independent; 2, Jobs enter the system simultaneously; and 3. Jobs leave 
the system after completion. With these assumptions, the goals of the scheduler are generally related 
to minimum makespan (minimum time to complete all jobs). These assumptions and goals generally lead to 
the use of a few static rules such as SPT (shortest processing time) to select the next job for processing 
when several jobs await service at the same machine, In the problem chosen for this work, these three 
assumptions concerning jobs are not valid. Instead, the following relationships must be satisfied: 1. 
Parts may enter the system at any time and must follow the processing schedule as given in Table 1 below; 
2, On entry, parts become work-in-progress (WIP) and remain WIP until exiting the system; 3. A part may 
not exit the system until it is assembled with other required parts; 4. WIP must be limited to a total 
of 500 parts;  5, The three types of machines (A, B and C) have unlimited queuing capacity and require 
a set-up time of 60 minutes whenever switched from one operation mode to another; and 6. Transportation 
time between machines and assembly time of completed parts is negligible. The goal of this Table 1: Order 
of operations for FMS is not to each part minimize the Pt.# op,# Mch,lD Time makespan of the 1 10A 5 
individual parts 20B 3 but to devise a 30A 3schedule which 40c 3 will maximize the 2 10c 2 number of 
20A 3 assembled 30A 8 items able to 40 B 15 exit the system 3 10 c 3 in afixed 20 A 5 amount of time. 
30 B 2 4 10c 20 Therefore, the 20A 1 application of 30B 3 traditional 40B 11scheduling rules 50c 5 maynotbe 
I appropriate since there must be a balance among the parts of various types in order to provide an assembled 
item at the exit point. The aspects of this problem making it a suitable case study for the proposed 
interface are threefold: 1. The problem contains various levels of decision-making, from simple deterministic 
conditional branches to multi-criteria, multi-conditional branches. 2. The problem is small enough to 
be able to investigate several possible alternative designs yet complex enough to provide interesting 
insights into the proposed formalism. 3. The problem has a dynamic structure in that entities can be 
introduced into the system, manipulated and removed from the system according to different conditions 
allowing for the investigation of various strategies,  Therefore the use of this factory problem will 
provide a means for discussing and clarifying the interface model.  4.3 SSKI for the Case Study Simulation 
While many models are possible for the illustrative problem, let us consider the following structure. 
Variables ­ 1. Parts and Machines are described as entities having the following attributes: A. Parts: 
a part number (PT. NUMBER) a batch size (PT, BATCH. SIZE) an imminent operation number (PT.OP) a per/item 
processing time (PT. OP. TIME) B. Machines: an identification/name (MCH. ID) a current operation number 
(MCH,OP) a busy/idle status (MCH.BUSY) 2, Machines have queues of batches of pans and the length of a 
machine s queue is stored in the variable N. MCH. QUE(MACHINE) indicating the number of batches waiting 
service at MACHINE, 3, The accumulations of various part-types in the system are stored in the variables 
P.COMPLETE(lYPE) indicating the number of completed parts of each TYPE waiting for assembly and P.WIP(TYPE) 
indicating the number of each TYPE currently being processed in the system. The above variables constitute 
the set V~ as discussed in a previous section, There are other dynamic variables tracked by the system 
but these are used primarily for the reporting of statistics on the plant operation and are not necessary 
for the purpose of decision-making. V, consists of such information as the number of machines (N, MACHINES), 
the number of part types (N. PARTS) and the number of parts allowed in the system at any one time (MAX. 
PARTS). Processes ­ 1. OBSERVE. MACHINES: This is the heart of this decision-oriented simulation model. 
At every minute of simulation time an observation is made of each of the machines. It has been assumed, 
for this implementation, that if a machine has become idle and has only one batch of parts in its queue, 
it will immediately begin working on that batch. This could be replaced by a global, look-ahead scheme 
that would survey the system for batches of parts that would be joining the machine queue and, perhaps, 
override the one-batch default mechanism. While this option could be readily implemented, it will not 
be considered in this discussion. If a machine is busy, nothing happens until the next observation period 
with respect to the observed machine. If the machine is idle and either has no batches in its queue or 
has more than one batch, then a decision must be made as to what the machine should do next, There are 
three basic options: 1. Wait and do nothing. 2. Process a new batch of parts. 3. Process a batch from 
the queue,  2. MACHINE. WORK: When a decision is made to process a batch of parts on a given machine, 
the status of the machine is set to busy and the machine operation number is compared to the part operation 
number. If these operation numbers are different, the machine operation number is changed to match the 
part operation number and the total processing time for the batch is incremented by one hour. Once the 
batch has been processed, the PT,OP is increased by 10, the batch is filed in a temporary set and the 
MOVE.PART routine is called which routes the batch to the next machine and establishes the per/item operation 
time, The machine status is returned to idle. 3, ASSEMBLE: When the part-operation number indicates that 
ail machining has been accomplished, the batch of parts is available to be assembled, Although, for this 
particular example, the assembly process consumes no simulation time, it is advantageous to schedule 
ASSEMBLE as an event so that it can be given priority over starting new batches into the system. Figure 
1 shows the logical relations among these events and processes, The initialization routines and reporting 
processes have been omitted for simplicity. A nonstandard flow-chart symbol, the circle, has been used 
to denote a multiple value, complex decision block. IK 1 * Figure 1: Process flowchart for application 
problem While Figure 1 shows the logical connections among the major event and processes in the simulation 
model of the factory, it does not show the complexity of the logic involved. Figure 2 shows the flow 
of batches of parts through the three machining centers as a network model. The conditional branches 
are based on the fixed routings of the various part types. In this figure, the multiple branches into 
the machines indicate the complexity in the decision as to what should happen next at a given machine. 
Let us refer to these entry points as Decision Points. A given decision point corresponds to the logical 
questions of Figure 1 as to whether to start a part, process a part or have that machine wait and do 
nothing until the next observation period. Although the logical diagram asks the same questions as the 
decision points in the network diagram, it is not obvious from Figure 1 how complex these decisions might 
be. For example, the decision point at machine C not only concerns whether to start a batch of parts 
at that machine but which part type to start, Whichever diagrammatic model is used, it can be seen that 
the number of complex decisions to Russell, Elmaghraby, and Graham I I I  Figure 2: A network model 
of the application problem be made is constrained by: 1, the number of processes and events in the simulation, 
and 2. the number of physical interactions in the system being modeled. In the given model, only one 
process (OBSERVE. MACHINES) requires some higher-level decision-making and it can be invoked for each 
of the three machines. Therefore, there are at most three distinct decision points to be considered in 
this model. In general, if there are p processes that require some high level decision-making and-each 
process can be invoked for dP distinct cases, then there are at most D = X di, i = 1, 2, .... p, decision 
points. Now since each decision point requires the intervention of the intelligent manager, the function 
f: P(V) XT-P(K) can be restricted to at most D distinct subsets of V, each subset consisting of those 
variables necessary to make the decision in question,  4.4 Variable Selection In the design of the interface, 
one must be cognizant not only of the physical attributes of the system modeled by the simulation but 
also of the decision-making criteria demanded by the knowledge-server. In the worst-case scenario, under 
the circumstances that the interface designer either does not know the decision criteria or wishes to 
give the knowledge-server as much flexibility as possible, then each of the D subsets mapped by the function 
f can be equivalent to the entire set V. In other words, on each call to the knowledge-server, all the 
variables concerning the simulation can be communicated to the manager. One restriction that could reduce 
communication costs would be to make V, (the static variables) available to the knowledge-server at some 
point during the simulation before a decision point is reached and enable the knowledge-server to retain 
this information for the duration of the run. This could be accomplished in two ways: 1. encode the static 
information into the data base of the knowledge-server; or 2, pass the information to the knowledge-server 
as part of the initialization or set-up routine of the simulation at simulation time t = O. For the illustrative 
problem, it was deemed more efficient to include the static information as facts in the manager s data 
base. The benefits of this approach can be disputed, especially if a purpose of the simulation is to 
investigate the behavior of a system given different static parameters for separate runs (for example, 
changing the number of machines), If this restriction is made, then even in the worst case, the amount 
of information to be communicated at each of the D decision points is less than the entire set of variables. 
Indeed, each of the D subsets will now be a subset of Vd! the dynamic variables. To illustrate the different 
subset requirements for the different decision points, consider the following: Example 1. if the machine 
s queue is empty and if the Machine ID = A and if the total number of parts in the system is less than 
the maximum allowed, then start a batch of Part 1. The amount of information needed to reach a conclusion 
for Machine A is quite different from a similar situation regarding Machine B: If the machine s queue 
is empty and if the Machine ID = B, then wait. Performing some preliminary screening of variables before 
the manager is invoked can help to reduce the number of variables necessary. If no such qcreening is 
done, then it may be necessary to pass all the variables in each case. In the factory example, if the 
decision to be made concerning a particular machine is based on some local property (information concerning 
that machine only as opposed to information from all the machines), then the set of variables can be 
restricted accordingly. In this case, pre-screening by MCH.ID restricted the information being passed 
to that which concerns only the batches of parts in the machine s queue. Additional restrictions on the 
amount of data communicated can be made if more is known about the nature of the decision-making process. 
For a comparison as to the varying amount of data needed, consider the two following decision criteria 
for a given machine having three batches in its queue (B1, B2, B3). Example 2. 1. If the queue length 
>1 then process the batch having the shottest imminent processing time. 2. if the queue length >1 then 
process the batch whose part type has the fewest items completed.  Quite clearly the two different selection 
strategies require not only different information, but different amounts of information. In case (l), 
the manager must know the batch size and the per/item processing time for each batch in the queue in 
order to reach a decision. Therefore the minimal subset would be: {BATCH. SIZE(BI), OP.TIME(B1), BATCH. 
SIZE(B2), OP.TIME(B2), BATCH. SIZE(B3), 0P, TIME(B3)}. In case (2) however, each part type must be known 
as well as how many parts have been completed. Therefore the minimal subset would be: {PART. NUMBER(B1), 
PART. NUMBER(B2), PA RT, NUMB ER(B3), P, COMPLETE(l), P. COMPLETE(2), P, COMPLETE(3), P, COMPLETE(4)}. 
More complicated decision-making, involving perhaps multi-level comparisons, would require more information. 
An example of such a multi-level process, requiring the union of the above sets could be: If queue >1, 
then process the batch having the shortest imminent processing time. If there is a tie among batches, 
break the tie by processing the batch whose part type has the fewest number of completed parts.  If 
the goal of the interface designer is to minimize the variable subsets to be communicated from the simulation 
to the manager, then the interface designer must know both what pre-screening has been done in the simulation 
(Example 1) and what decision-criteria is necessary in the manager (Example 2). Figure 3 illustrates 
the variable-selection process that leads to minimal subsets for each decision point.  6==J*-- V*L 
V42 . . . vdD R.&#38;.t L. 9. . . . . . 0..,.,. ?. LF... v.,, V-.2 . . . v * m.du.t lo . . . . . . . 
P..-......i., -d. ,., ., s ,... A o 0.. .,. ..,,,-1. -a, V-.2 !8!/ where V-ti c V df Cvd, c Vdc V fOr 
i -1,2, . . ..D and where V4 n v, = 0 and Vduv, -v. Figure 3: Reduction of variable subsets 4.5 Restricting 
the f-Function In the general description of the interface, F is defined on the power set of V (simulation 
variables) together with the set T (simulation time). Once we have isolated D decision points, each with 
its own specified properties and restrictions, we can now restrict the f-function accordingly. Therefore 
we can now define f as follows: f( V,,o) fifi V) XT= f(VdFt) for i=l,2,...,L7; &#38;O 0 otherwiseI The 
size of set V~ may vary depending on whether entities are created and/or destroyed during the simulation 
run. It is possible to partition V~ into those variables which are always present, VP, and those which 
are temporary, Vt. To illustrate these two concepts, consider the variables of interest in the example 
problem: VP = {MCH.ID(MACHINE)), MCH.OP(MACHINE), MCH.BUSY(MACHINE), N, MCH.QUE(MACHINE), P,COMPLETE(TYPE), 
P.WIP(TYPE) [ MACHINE = 1,2,3 and TYPE = 1,2,3,4} and Vt = {PT. NUMBER(PART), PT. BATCH. SIZE(PART), 
PT, BATCH, NUMBER(PART), PT, OP(PART), PT.OP.TIME(PART) I PART = 1, 2, ... }. In order to relay information 
to the manager concerning subsets of Vt, it will be necessary to ascertain the number of PARTS in question 
and be able to identify which PARTS are needed. In most cases, temporary entities such as PARTS are moved 
through the system by being removed from one queue and placed in another, Therefore it is possible to 
isolate these entities by examining the various queues in the system. In this factory problem, all PARTS 
reside in a MACHINE queue from the moment of creation until they exit from the system via the ASSEMBLE 
event and are destroyed. PARTS are moved from one MACHINE queue to another by the MOVE. PARTS routine 
which places them in the system-owned set called TEMP. However, MOVE. PARTS consumes no simulation time. 
So the PARTS are considered as residing in the TEMP set for no simulation time and can be viewed as belonging 
to MACHINE queues only. Since the number of PARTS in a given MACHINE queue can vary widely, the transmission 
of any subset of Vt relating to these PARTS is dependent on the state of the simulation at the time of 
the communication.  4.6 Restricting the g-Function This implementation assumes that only the simulation 
can change values of the variables. Thus, it is assumed that the set of conclusions C is of a form which 
can be used as input into the simulation in the same way that information from the simulation is used 
as input to the manager. In general, there will be less variability in the amount of information needed 
to be passed from the managed to the simulation. It is possible that this information will be restricted 
to a simple logical value, but it is likely that the conclusion will contain some specific instructions 
to the simulation. In the factory problem, if the conclusion is made to start a batch of parts on Machine 
C, then information concerning which of the possible parts must be communicated to the simulation. 5 
Conclusions [n order for simulation to benefit from the advances in artificial intelligence, it is necessary 
to provide a mechanism for them to interact, Rather than merge the two distinct activities of simulation 
and control into a single, continuous process, this work proposes to decouple the functions, allowing 
information to flow between them as needed. This decoupling will enable the development of the separate 
functions individually and within the framework of the language of best fit. It will also enable incremental, 
modular changes to be made which will not affect the behavior of the other function. To this end, this 
paper describes a formal model for a standard simulation-knowledge interface (SSKI) and shows how it 
may be applied to a scheduling and planning problem in the manufacturing area. A simulation of the physical 
plant, the machines and the parts was written in SIMSCRIPT 11.5[1987] and a manager was written in NASA 
s C-based language CLIPS [1988]. Subset reduction was achieved through partitioning the set V and encoding 
V, directly into the rule-based manager. V~ was reduced by using decision-point restrictions and pre-screening 
of certain variables, namely MCH, ID and N. MCH,QUE. Preliminary work has shown that this interface model 
can achieve the desired results for modularity and flexibility by providing for interchangeability among 
managers and/or simulations and allowing for incremental modifications in both. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This 
material is based upon work supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship. REFERENCES 
<RefA>Chan, Ding-Yu, and David D. Bedworth. 1990. Design of a scheduling system for flexible manufacturing 
cells. hwematiorrd Journal of Production Research 28:11, 2037-2049. CL/PS reference rnanua/. 1988. Artificial 
Intelligence Section. Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. Fishwick, Paul A. 1988. Qualitative simulation: 
fundamental concepts and issues. In A/ and simulation: rhe diversity of applications, ed, Troy Henson, 
25-31, San Diego: Society for Computer Simulation. Fishwick, Paul A. 1989, Process abstraction in simulation 
modeling, In Artificia/ inte//igence, simulation and modeling, ed. Lawrence Widman, Kenneth Loparo and 
Norman Nielsen, 93-131, New York: John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc. Floss, Peter, and Joseph J, Talavage. 1988. 
A knowledge-based design procedure for flexible manufacturing systems. In A/ and simulation.-the diversity 
of applications, ed Troy Henson, 251­ 255. San Diego: Society for Computer Simulation, Gupta, Yash P., 
Mahesh C. Gupta, and C. R. Bettor, 1989. A review of scheduling rules in flexible manufacturing systems, 
/nternationa/ Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 2:6, 356-377, Hoare, C. A, R, 1985. Communicating 
sequentia/ processes. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall International. Montazeri, M., and L. 
N. Van Wassenhove, 1990. Analysis of scheduling rules for an FMS, lnternationalJourna/ of Production 
Research 28:4, 785-802. O Keefe, Robert M. 1989. The role of artificial intelligence in discrete-event 
simulation. In Artificial intelligence, simulation and modeling, ed. Lawrence Widman, Kenneth Loparo 
and Norman Nielsen, 359-379. New York: John Wiley &#38; Sons. Oren, Tuncer 1. 1977. Simulation -as it 
has been, and should be. Simulation 29:5, 182-183. Oren, Tuncer l., and Bernard P. Zeigler. 1987. Artificial 
intelligence in modeling and simulation: directions to explore. Simulation 48:4, 131-134. Rozenblit, 
Jerzy W., and Bernard P. Zeigler. 1985. Concepts for knowledge-based system design environments. In Proceedings 
of the 1985 Winter .Simr.dation Conference, ed, D, T, Gantz, G. C. Blais, and S, L, Solomon, 223-231, 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, San Francisco, California. Ruiz-Meir, Sergio, and 
Joseph Talavage. 1989, A hybrid paradigm for modeling of complex systems. In Artificial intelligence, 
simulation and modeling, ed. Lawrence Widman, Kenneth Loparo and Norman Nielsen, 381-395. New York: John 
Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc. Sarin, S. C., and R. R. Salgame. 1990. Development of a knowledge-based system 
for dynamic scheduling. /ntemationa/ Journa/ of Production Research 28:8, 1499-1512. SIMSCRIPT //.5 programming 
language. 1987. La Jolla, California: CACI Products Company, Widman, Lawrence E, 1988, Knowledge-based 
fault identification and what if simulation in symbolic dynamic systems models, In A/ and simulation: 
the diversity of applications, ed. Troy Henson, 89­ 94. San Diego: Society for Computer Simulation. 
Wu, Szu-Yung David, and Richard A. Wysk, 1989. An application of discrete-event simulation to on-line 
control and scheduling in flexible manufacturing. /nternationa/Journa/ of Production Research 27:9, 1603-1623. 
</RefA>AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES CAROL S. RUSSELL is a doctoral student in the Computer Science and Engineering Department 
at the University of Louisville. She is currently employed as a lecturer in mathematics at Indiana University 
Southeast, New Albany, Indiana. Adel Said Elmaghraby is an Associate Professor of Engineering Mathematics 
And Computer Science at the University of Louisville. His research areas include Simulation and Artificial 
Intelligence, Robotics and Automation. He is the founding editor of the ACM/lEEE joint Simulation Newsletter 
and chairman of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Simulation (TCSIM). James H. Graham 
is currently Henry Vogt Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Louisville. 
His research interests include robotics, artificial intelligence and distributed computing. He is the 
editor of Safety, Reliability and Human Factors in Robotic Svstems, published by Van Nostrand Reinhold 
in 1991. 
			
