
 Proceedings of the 1983 Winter Simulation Conference S. Roberts, J. Banks, B. Sc~neiser (eds.) AN ANALYSlS 
AND SIMULATION OF AN EXPERIMENTAL SUEZ CANAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEM Thomas D. Clark: Jri,, DBA Air Force 
Institute of Technology Magdi M. Kabil, M.Sc. Operations Research Center, Egypt Moussa I. Moussa Mostafa, 
M.S., M. Sc. Operations Research Center, Egypt A SLAM model of Suez Canal traffic flow is reported in 
this paper. An experi- mental traffic control scheme is proposed, tested, and discussed. A method for 
analysis of multi-response-variable systems is discussed and illustrated. I. INTRODUCTION Man has long 
seen the economic advantages of a navigable link between the Red Sea and the Medi- terranean. The first 
canal was built 4,000 years ago between the Nile River and Bitter Lake, which then opened onto the Gulf 
of Suez. Abandoned and restored several times, the canal was blocked for good in the eighth century A.D. 
It was not until 1859 that Ferdinand de Lesseps, a French engineer and diplomat, combined the vision, 
authority, financial backing, and perseverance to build another canal. The Suez Canal was opened to traf- 
fic in November 1869 under a concession terminat- ing in 1968. When the June 1967 war between Egypt and 
Israel closed the canal, it had become one of the most important waterways for international cargos. 
In the last full year of operation, fourteen percent of world seaborne traffic passed through the canal. 
The canal earnings of foreign exchange for the Egyptian government increased from the equivalent of about 
fifteen million dollars in 1957 to nearly two hundred million dollars by 1966 (7). The canal had become 
Egypt's second most important foreign exchange earner. The canal shortened the distance between Odessa 
and Bombay by eighty percent compared with pas-sage via the Cape of Good Hope, more than fifty percent 
between London and Persian Gulf ports, and about thirty-three percent between Rotterdam and Tokyo. Closure 
of the canal in June 1967 created an immediate shortage of shipping and much higher rates. A United Nations' 
study esti- mated that closure of the canal cost the world seven billion dollars from June 1967 to December 
1971, and one point seven billion dollars each year thereafter (7). Some countries, largely in East Africa 
and Southeast Asia, lost export mar-kets because their products could not support the higher costs. The 
growth in the size of tankers was a matter of considerable concern to canal authorities because nearly 
three-quarters of FY 1967 traffic had been petroleum. The canal in 1975 could accommodate tankers of 
60,000 deadweight tons laden and 125,000 deadweight tons in ballast (7). These dimensions would have 
permitted about three-quarters of the tankers in service in 1966 to use the canal; by 1975 about half 
of the tankers in service could use the canal; and by 1983 probably only about two-fifths were able to 
pass. A dredg- ing program that was ready to start in 1967 when war closed the canal would have increased 
permis-sible draft to fifty-three feet. In 1975, Egypt arranged for a Japanese firm to start the initial 
work on this postponed expansion under a Japanese credit of 140 million dollars. The dredging to widen 
and deepen the canal was scheduled for com-pletion in 1980, at a cost of about 720 million dollars. The 
canal, after the project, was able to accommodate vessels of 150,000 deadweight tons laden, and 250,000 
deadweight tons in ballast, increasing the traffic potential in 1983 to three times the traffic possible 
without the expansion. Since the canal has been reopened, traffic has continued to increase. This increase 
has resulted in long waits for ships in the canal's holding areas at Port-Said, Suez, and in Bitter Lake. 
The purpose of this study is to provide a transporta- tion control system that will provide the most 
efficient use of the canal for passing ships and limit balking, thus maximizing through-put and attendant 
revenue. 2. SYSTEM STRUCTURE The Suez Canal allows one-lane traffic flow except in the area of Bitter 
Lakes. Traffic is controlled with modern control systems that follow the path CH1953-9/83/0000-0311 $01.00 
m 1983 IEEE Thomas D. Clark, Jr., Magdi M. Kabil, Moussa I. Moussa Mostafa of each ship and instruct 
movement based on classic traffic control problem discussed by existing patterns. The structure of the 
canal is Pritsker and Pegden (8:212) There are three sepm shown in Figure I. rate processes in the system 
consisting of traffic ~SUEZ / BITTER LAKE PORT-SAID ~ 2____5 miles ~ ~ 64 miles v Figure I. Schematic 
Diagram of Suez Canal Currently, convoys of ships are formed at Suez and at Port-Said, are periodically 
input to the canal, and flow in one direction except through the two-way passage at Bitter Lake (2). 
The objective of the modeling effort is to demon-strate a different way to control traffic to re-duce 
waiting time for ships at Suez and Port-Said and to reduce balking. To model the structure, assume traffic 
lights have been placed at entry points at Suez, Bitter Lake, and at Port-Said, labeled one, two, and 
three in Figure I. The lights allow for a speci- fied time interval from only one direction in the one-lane 
areas. When a light turns green in Port-Said, the waiting ships start and pass the light every 12 minutes, 
which assures the proper clearance between ships. If a ship arrives at a green light when there are no 
waiting ships, the ship passes through the light without delay. This situation isrepeated at Suez. There 
is very little direct data concerning arrivals. As a re- sult, the arrivals were assumed to be exponential 
and a mean was developed using figures for total ship passages in a given period. An average of .8 hour 
between arrivals is used. Study of the sensitivity of this variable is required (7,1O). Since the difference 
from Port-Said to Bitter Lake is greater (64 miles) than the distance from Suez to Bitter Lake (12 miles), 
it will be the "determining factor" in the traffic flow. Once the light at Port-Said is green, ships 
will con-tinue to enter the Canal from both directions. The light at Suez is closed when the first ship 
that entered at Port-Said passes a point in the Bitter Lake, such that the flow will continue un- interrupted 
to Suez. The Port-Said light is turned red at the same time. Light number 2 in Figure l is changed to 
green when the last ship from Port-Said passes into Bitter Lake. Experi-ments with the cycle time for 
the lights will be discussed in a later section. The system was modeled using the network features of 
the Simulation Language for Alternative Model- ing (8). The network model of the traffic system is presented 
in Figure 2. Its structure is quite similar to that of the flow from Port-Said and traffic flow from 
Suez to Bitter Lake, and information flow representing the traffic light cycle. Each of these processes 
is modeled by the movement of an entity through a subnetwork. Gates are used to model the traffic light 
system where an open gate represents a green light and a closed gate represents a red light. To insure 
that only one ship passes through the light at a time, a resource with a capacity of one is employed 
in conjunction with each gate. These resources are named Port-Said, Bitter Lake, and Suez, corresponding 
to LIGHT l, LIGHT 2, and LIGHT 3, and represent the starting location before each light. The starting 
loca- tion is seized by each ship entity before passing through the light and then freed immediately 
after it passes the light. In this way, only one ship can pass through the starting location at a time. 
First, consider the traffic flow from the direc- tion of PORT-SAID. Entities representing ships are created 
at the CREATE node with the time be- tween ships exponentially distributed with a mean of 0.8 hours. 
The time of creation of each ship entity is recorded as attribute one [ATRIB (1)]. Each entity then awaits 
the resource, Port-Said. The entity then proceeds to the AWAIT node where it continues if LIGHT l is 
open. Otherwise, it is delayed. The following COLCT node records values of the waiting time of the ship 
at the light, and the entity is then routed through one of the two emanating activities. A ship that 
stopped has an arrival time different from the current time, TNOW. The condition specified on the first 
activity is for those ships that were stopped to insure a twelve-minute delay for the ship to pass the 
light. The second ACTIVITY is taken if and only if the first is not taken. This ACTIVITY models the passage 
of moving ships that do not incur a delay. The resource PORT-SAID is then freed and the entity flows 
uninterrupted to the terminate node. The traffic flow for the SUEZ direction and BITTER LAKE leg is modeled 
in an analogous manner. The traffic light segment of the model controls the changes in the traffic lights 
and consists of a series of OPEN and CLOSE nodes separated by activities. As noted pre- viously, the 
ship's arrival follows the exponen- tial distribution with lambda = 0.8. The speed of ships in the canal 
is limited to reduce the NNQ(I),LE,25 SUEZ/ ~" "JBALKSJ ~/ ~/~ BITTER LAKE THE CONTROL STATION Figure 
2. SLAM Network effect of corrosion on the edges. So, the company determined an average speed of eight 
miles per hour in the direction of Suez to Port-Said and 8.6 miles per hour in the direction of Port-Said 
to Suez. From this data, the flow time may be con- sidered virtually constant and equal to II.74 hours 
from Port-Said to Suez, 4.63 hours from Suez to Bitter Lake, and 8.00 hours from Bitter Lake to Port-Said. 
These times are included in the model for sensitivity analysis. They may be replaced by distributions, 
if desired. Balking is included in the model at Port-Said and at Suez. Very little is documented about 
the balking rate and the complex information feedback structure that would determine when balking occurred. 
To characterize the pattern and estab- lish a mechanism in the model to investigate the problem, balking 
after twenty-five ships were waiting at either entrance was established. A sep- arate study of the structure 
of balking for the canal is required. 3. MODEL OPERATION AND EXPERIMENTATION The design of the experiment 
for the model pre- sents a problem which is rarely addressed in the simulation literature. Measurement 
of the system must be established across several dimensions be- cause of the direction changes in the 
network. Waiting time is incurred at three places in the system requiring three separate response variable 
measures, and balking is incurred at two places requiring two more response measures. Since balk- ing 
data were contrived to provide a mechanism for later research, it will not be included in the analysis. 
A minimum linear combination of the three waiting times will be sought. Given the minimization criteria, 
a structural data model can be developed using the opening cycles of the two control variables, LIGHT 
l and LIGHT 2. LIGHT 3 is not used as a control variable because the limiting link of the system is the 
Suez-to- Bitter Lake leg. The opening and closing of LIGHT 3 is cycled in coordination with movement 
from Bitter Lake to Suez by south-bound ships. The re- sulting data structure is shown in Figure 3. Initial 
runs of the network were accomplished to establish a range for the XX(1) and XX(2) vectors that would 
be used for further data development and analysis. The initial runs were completed to establish an operable 
functional model along the lines given by Shannon (9:155-161). The objective is to determine the number 
of replications required to adequately characterize each variable and the number of computer runs required 
for analyses. The model initially was operated for 720.0 time units (one month). Results showed highly 
variable dis- tributions with large standard deviations relative to the mean. The distributions had very 
small error estimates, however, indicating they were accurately captured with runs of the chosen length. 
To insure this, runs of 1440.0, 2210.01, 4420.0 time units were conducted to test the hypothesis 314 
Thomas D. Clark, Jr., Magdi M. Kabil, Moussa I. Moussa Mostafa XX(2) ................. XX(2)n XX(1) j 
r > W1 i W2 i W3 i XX(1) m W11 W21 W31 Figure 3. Data Structure for each variabie: The variances 
of the distributions were virtually unchanged, indicating the run length of one month was adequate. Runs 
were conducted along each XX(1) vector from nine to twenty-one hours. A low region of the response surface 
was selected for further analy- sis. The target response surface bounds are shown in Figure 4. XX(2) 
~CK(1) 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 12 1 2 3 4 5 13 6 7 8 9 i0 14 ii 12 13 14 15 15 16 17 18 19 20 16 21 22 23 
24 25 Figure 4 Response Surface Bounds This provides twenty-five cells for analysis. If the control 
variables are combined to form a single policy, twenty-five policies are genera-ted for analysis. The 
dynamic behavior of the system is illustrated in Figure 5. As shown, as the lights cycle there is a slow 
build-up and rapid draw-down of ships at Suez and Bitter Lake. The waiting time at either location is 
a function of the cycles Balking after twenty-five ships are waiting is illustrated. As previously discussed, 
this is included for sensitivity analysis and is not directly addressed in this study. Also, balking 
should be more carefully addressed The model must include alternative routing for ships if conditions 
provide more beneficial routes. Work in this area should focus on the decision structure of major ship 
companies using the canal. Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was chosen to test the hypothesis: 
where is a vector of the means of the three response variables. The experimental model is: where is 
the N by p data matrix,_(~ is the N by p matrix of residuals, and A is the N by m analysis of variance 
matrix as discussed in Finn (1:205-250). By considering each combination of XX(1) and XX(2) as a single 
policy, a one-way model such as this may be employed Four replications of each policy were conducted, 
even though the estimate error for the mean on the pilot runs was quite small The functional matrix shown 
in Figure 6 resulted. The objective is to determine if policy has an effect on waiting time and if one 
policy is better than the others. As a result of multiple observa- tions, the model is represented as: 
~.~-A O'+f. where Y. and E. are J by p with the rows of E. distributed n~mally with expectation zero. 
~omo-geneity of variance is assumed. The model was estimated using the Statistical Pack-.~for the Social 
Sciences (SPSS), MANOVA program The Box's M statistic was used to test the homogeneity assumption. ?[be 
14~: (P~, 6,~,, hypothesis was rejected. As noted by Kleijnen for the univariate model, the errors need 
not be nor- mally distributed with common variance because the power of the test is not affected seriously 
when there are equal observations in each cell (5:302-305) and there are sufficient observations. The 
values of Hotelling's trace and Wilk's lambda indi- cate that some set of policies is different from 
other sets, but, because of the homogene%ty assum~ tions, the results remain questionable Results are 
shown in Figure 7. The difficulty, in any case, is discerning the set of policies that pro- vides the 
best operating conditions There are two courses available. The first is to operate the model further 
to generate more data in the hope of better discerning the distributions or to use other variance reduction 
techniques. This method may,however, still lead to results that would violate the homogeneity assumption 
and may not change the data structure. The computer runs, in this case, are also expensive, which mitigates 
such a strategy. The second course is to perform further statistical and qualitative analysis with existing 
data. The first step in pursuing the latter strategy was to plot the variables for waiting time at Port-Said 
and Bitter Lake. The results are shown in Figures 8 and 9. The response surfaces are gene-rally flat 
and increase only slightly from a given low point. One could conclude that the points are most likely 
statistically the same over large por- tions of the surface. The problem now is how to Suez Canal Traffic 
Control System 315 s = Said Await z = Suez Await  J I , i i. , z , F-~J .~.J ; i' Figure 5. System 
Behavior over Time Policy 1 .... 25 Observations Varl. l 1 Var 2. 1 Var 3 i 4  Figure 6. Functional 
Matrix Test Value Approx F Sig Off Pillas .99982 137953. 0 Hotellings 5669.34 137953. 0 Wilks .00018 
136953. 0 Roys .99982 137953. 0 Figure 7. Multivariate Tests of Significant (s=l, m=½, n=35½)  316 
Thomas D. Clark, Jr., Magdi M. Kabil, Moussa I. Moussa Mostafa identify policies which are, in fact, 
statisti- cally the same. .9,' -~ -t~_]. "-~]L~-_DL-L]T,'--:L-.]. ]..- ].- ;~.: ").: ... -.. ;". "-].< 
~-'.?-:7~L~-.C-_:----CE]I.- -->1~ + 7.]3.+7+.7 ~, ;~ ~-L .,~E.17> .-- Figure 8. Port-Said Waiting Time 
Response Surface ~;:"-fi] !!;~i-(?:-7..:-::!7~7---#t! S ...... Figure 9. Bitter Lake Waiting Time Response 
Surface A factor analysis of the data was accomplished to identify which vectors had common factor vari-ance 
and to create a set of factor scores that could be used for further analysis. To establish the structure, 
the SPSS factor analysis program was operated with the default eigenvalue (1) set to one. The results 
are shown in Figure I0. The only significant factor using I : 1 is the first factor, which indicated 
57 percent of the total variation in the data can be explained by the first factor. Since factor two 
has an eigenvalue close to one, it also will be included. The factor matrix is shown in Figure II. The 
question Factor Eigenvalue Pct Cum Pct 1 1.73285 57.8 57.8 2 .98902 33.0 90.7 3 .27813 9.3 lO0.O Figure 
lO. Factor Analysis Results Factor 1 Factor 2 Commonali~ Port-Said waiting -.92720 .01499 .85967 Bitter 
Lake waiting .85775 .91859 .73574 Suez waiting .37070 -.38078 .13742 Figure If. Factor Matrix is, of 
course, what are the two factors? As shown, there is strong commonality or common var- iation, in both 
Suez and Bitter Lake waiting tim% indicating these variables are strong contribu-tors to factor I. The 
same is true for Suez waiting time for factor two. Given this, we will continue to focus on the two variables 
believed to be the most important to the process. The factor scores for the variables for each poli- 
cy are used to create a linear composite that may be used for further analysis (6:6-72). Using this composite 
variable, a one-way ANOVA was performed using Duncan's Multiple Ranges method of a'poster- iori contrast. 
The test produces ranges that allow grouping homogeneous subsets of policies. Results are shown in Figure 
12 for the two subsets with minimum values for the composite variable. To interpret the results, refer 
to Figures 8 and 9. The lowest areas of surfaces can be related to the first subset of policies from 
Duncan's test. Poli-cies 5, 4, I0, 15 and 14 are grouped and are low-est. One can see these policies 
occur in the lower areas of the response surfaces. The area of the policy is labeled in each figure. 
These poli- cies are reviewed in Figure 13 and would be recom- mended if this traffic control system 
were imple-mented. The discussion presents a method to approach mul- tivariate response problems. Each 
problem, of course, has unique properties that require selec-tion of different multivariate techniques. 
The main point is that a system need not be restricted to one response measure across several factors 
or levels. 4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS A proposed traffic control system for the Suez Canal has been presented 
in this paper. Its structure was tested, using a multivariate statis-tical approach. What remains is 
to compare this system to the existing control system. Work in this area has been started (4). The objective 
will be to compare revenue under the current sys-tem to that of the proposed system. Subset 1 Group 
Mean Grp 5 -1.5076 Grp 4 -i.1922 Grp l0 -1.1581 Grp 15 -1.0759 Grp 14 -1.0659 Subset 2 Group Mean Grp 
4 -1.1922 Grp i0 -1.1581 Grp 15 -1.0759 Grp 14 -i.0659 Grp 25 -.7989 Grp 13 -.6751 I Figure 12. Results 
of Duncan's Multiple Ranges Test 318 Thomas D. Clark, Jr., Magdi M. Kabil, Moussa I. Moussa Mostafa 
Green Time Ships Passing Policy Light 1 Light 2 Light 1 Light 2 5 12 18 736 871 4 12 17 720 858 i0 
13 18 716 823 15 14 20 724 854 14 14 19 731 831 Figure 13. Lowest Waiting Time Policies 5. REFERENCES 
 <RefA>Finn, Jeremy D., A General Model for Multivariate ' (New York: Holt Rinehard and Winsto~ 74. Hassan, 
Emtissal M., "Traffic Simulation of the Suez Canal," Fifth International .Congrgss' fo r Statistics, 
Computer Sc.ience, Soc.ial and Demographic Research Proceedings, 29 March- 3 April 1980. Cairo, Egypt: 
El Ehram Publi- cations, pp. 54-66. Hull, C. Hadlai and Norman H. Nie, SPSS Updat.e 7-9, New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., 1981. Kabil, M. M. and M. R. EI-Hefny, "Suez Canal Traffic System," unpublished working paper, 
AFIT/ENS 82-3, Air Force Institute of Tech- nology, Wright-Patterson AFB OH, Sept 1982. Kleijnen, Jack 
P.C., Statistical Techniques in Simulation, Part II (New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.), 1975. McNichols, 
Charles W., An Introduction to Applied Multivariate Analysis (Dayton OH: Air Force Institute of Technology), 
1980. Nyrop, R. F. et al, Area Handbook for Egypt, 3rd ed. (Washi~t~DC: U.S. Govt Printing Office). 1976. 
Pritsker, A.A.B. and C. D. Pegden, Introduction to Simulation and SLAM (New York: Halsted Press), 1979. 
Shannon, Robert E., Systems Simulation: The Art and Science (Englewood Cl'iffs NJ: 'Prentice- Hall, Inc.), 
1975. Statistical Yearbook: Arab Republic of Egypt, 1952-79 (Cairo, Egypt: Central Agency for Public 
Mobilization and Statistics), July 1980.  
			</RefA>
