
 AN APPROACH TO COMPUTER PERSONNEL EVALUATION PAUL D. OYER Oyer Professional Computer Services, Inc. 
An extensive study of the capabilities and proficiency of the staff of program- mers and computer systems 
analysts was recently conducted for a large financial company. The purpose of the study was to provide 
company management with a detailed analysis of the skill levels and proficiency of the current staff 
and to make specific recommendations for individual and group training to enable the company to achieve 
its computer plans and objectives. The steps taken in the course of the study were: I. Test and interview 
staff. 2. Classify all staff personnel. 3. Design a Personnel Resume form. 4. Recommend a formal professional 
training program. 5. Estimate the EDP manpower and skill requirements needed.  A specialized proficiency 
test was designed and used for testing staff mem- bers. The same test was used for both programmers and 
computer systems ana- lysts (all had previous programming experience). The common use of the same test 
for both groups was intended to enable us to determine whether any program- mers had learned systems 
analysis on their own initiative. On the basis of the test, we were able to recommend specific training 
and professional development courses that staff members should receive, covering over 20 subject areas. 
Some subject areas were strongly recommended for certain individuals or groups while others were merely 
suggested. Current knowledge and proficiency areas that were determined by the test and by individual 
interviews included programming languages, equipment knowl- edge, file-organization techniques, system 
design and implementation experience (in major applications). NEED AND PURPOSE Many corporations are 
not getting their money's worth from their computers. They are unable to achieve their EDP plans and 
objectives, or the plans are de- layed and schedules drastically slipped. The major reason is lack of 
skilled people to plan and carry out the plans. The purpose of the study was to help this company evaluate 
its chances of achieving its EDP plans and objectives with the present staff. THE APPROACH AND STEPS 
TAKEN The method of the study was to examine this company's EDP plans and ob- jectives; to estimate the 
EDP manpower needed to achieve these plans; to esti- mate the proficiency and capability of the current 
EDP staff, and to uncover areas of knowledge and proficiency needed and to recommend specific courses 
for groups and individuals to fill in this knowledge gap, plus equip them to do their job better. The 
steps taken in the course of the study were: 1. Test and interview individual members of the current 
data processing staff. 2. Classify all staff personnel into areas relating to specific knowledge and 
general capabilities. 3. Design a personnel resume form and record the individual background and experience 
of the present staff. 4. Recommend action to reinforce existing capabilities and develop a formal professional 
training program. 5. Review present and future data processing plans of the company and esti- mate the 
EDP manpower and skill requirements for their successful imple- mentation.  One purpose of the study 
was to define the capabilities necessary to achieve the planning objectives of the company and to fill 
the need for accomplishing these objectives, through the professional development of current and new 
data processing personnel. With the goal of developing an effective staff in mind, members of the data 
processing department were tested and interviewed, and their personnel files were reviewed. The personnel 
data collected was evaluated in order to deter- mine relations between displayed capabilities and background 
information such as length of service, formal education, age, sex and marital status. TESTS A special 
test was designed to measure proficiency and knowledge of pro- grammers and computer systems analysts. 
The test consisted of 75 multiple choice items. The first 40 items were intended to measure programmers, 
and the last 35 were intended to measure systems analysts. The results were quite satis- factory. In 
at least one instance we found that a programmer had acquired enough knowledge of computer systems analysis 
to qualify for immediate promotion. Test scores ranged from 21 to 60 with an average of 44.0 where the 
maxi- mum score possible was 75. As a result of the tests we were able to detect areas of knowledge where 
indi- viduals and groups were lacking. On this basis, we recommended specific courses for professional 
development and skills training. INTERVIEWS All the EDP technical staff was interviewed by the consulting 
group on a one-to- one basis. Each interview lasted from 45 to 60 minutes. Interviews were conducted 
after test scores and newly designed and com- pleted resume, experience and educational forms were available. 
Thus the inter- viewer and the interviewee had substantial facts available, including an individual personnel 
summary. The interview was informal but structured. During the interview the inter- viewee was measured 
(or ranked) on company awareness, attitude and aspira- tions. His desires and hopes for training, advancement 
and company objectives were explored. After the interview, each person was placed in a group classifica- 
tion 1A, IB or I1 for both programmers and systems analysts. Each person was also given an interview 
score and ranked. General training approaches were then recommended for each group. lO1 SAMPLE INTERVIEW 
SUMMARY Interview Score Rank Company Awareness Attitude Aspirations Total Group Classification SAMPLE 
RESUME FORM DATA PROCESSING PERSONNEL Date: Training Education &#38; Experience Summary Name /Date Employed 
Department /Present Position Formal Education Years Attended Graduated Main Subjects From To Yes No Studied 
High School lunior College College or University Post Graduate School Business School Other Current Educational 
Efforts: Data Processing Training Record Year Subjects Level Class Conducted by Total Attended Taken 
(Introductory what Organization Class Length Intermediate (Days&#38;Hours) Advanced) Data Processing 
Experience Record Project Type Describe your What Machines What Languages When &#38; How or Application 
Responsibility Were Involved Were Used Long on Project To what Professional groups do you belong? What 
added Data Processing or Systems education do you feel you need or would like? What job would you like 
to be doing in two years? Special awards or honors? iSpecialinterests? GROUP CLASSIFICATIONS DEFINITIONS 
I. Aggressive, motivated, eager to accept new challenges and responsibilities. A. Has acquired the ability 
to seek out, learn and generally retain the knowl- edge or information required to accomplish the task(s) 
at hand. There is an apparent correlation between the level of this ability and the level of formal education; 
most individuals in this category have had at least three years' college training. There are exceptions, 
of course. B. Without the proper guidance, the individual may have difficulty in acquir- ing the knowledge 
or information necessary to accomplish the task(s) at hand. Generally, individuals in this category will 
ask for assistance. How- ever, when this assistance is not available, as may be the case in a high- pressure 
situation, they are likely to become frustrated and their level of performance tends to decrease. This 
problem was uncovered during the course of interviewing the individuals. I1. Individuals in this category 
have expressed an eagerness to expand their capabilities through (company provided) training in new languages 
and data processing techniques. These individuals have indicated that they enjoy their work; however, 
they do not possess the high degree of personal motivation as found in category 1. While there are, no 
doubt, many factors involved, most significant are age and/or spouse-not head of household. SKILL-LEVEL 
DEFINITIONS Definitions of the various skill levels and associated job titles used in the study are shown 
below. Programmer Trainee Personnel in this category should exhibit programming aptitude by either test 
performance or previous data processing experience or both. A high school education is required; a bachelor's 
degree is desirable. Programmer Prior to receiving project responsibility the individual must have shown 
ability to flowchart, code and debug accurately with limited supervision. Must have ability to independently 
handle routine problems while maintain- ing a high production and accuracy rate. A bachelor's degree 
or equivalent EDP experience is desirable. Senior Programmer At least two years of significant and progressive 
complex data processing experience in which he has demonstrated a mature grasp of problem-solv- ing techniques 
and ability to lead, teach and guide other programmers. Must be capable of flowcharting, coding, debugging 
and documenting complex applications accurately, quickly and with a minimum of supervision. Must show 
above average aptitude or an interest in systems analysis. A bachelor's degree or equivalent EDP experience 
is desirable. Junior.4nalyst Personnel in this category should average four or more years progressively 
responsible EDP experience. Capable of assuming responsibility for proj- ects of moderate size and complexity 
including but not restricted to analysis and supervision of subordinates' efforts. A proven record of 
independent achievement and originality in previous work is required. Education require- ment: A bachelor's 
degree and/or specialized training is highly desirable. "~~~~~--~ k~ ,< ~Z &#38;#169; ~ - c) e,,,, Q 
 ~E<< ~'N EN~E ~" I I I ~ - I- ' ~ ~ ~ ~'h ~'~ ~ '~" ~ ~ IN ~ ~ ~ ~ I ~- ~ ~ - .=_ ~ ~. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~.~ E~ ~ ~ Intermediate.4 nalyst All the qualifications of a junior analyst but with sufficient 
experience to warrant assignment of responsibility for overall design and control of large, complex programming 
efforts. Personnel in this category will usually aver- age five or more years of EDP experience. Senior 
dnalyst All the qualifications of intermediate analyst but with additional experience enabling the Senior 
Analyst to make substantial contribution to concurrent projects and to assume full responsibility for 
projects or complete systems. Personnel in this category will usually average six or more years EDP experience. 
SOME RESULTS Test scores were related with interview results and the personnel resume forms (specially 
designed for this study). Analyses were made comparing dis- played capabilities and background information 
such as length of service, formal education, age, sex and marital status. The most significant results 
of individual evaluations were related to aggres- siveness and self-determination. Those individuals 
who exhibited above-average aggressiveness and determination showed markedly higher test scores, company 
awareness and business responsibility than those who displayed average deter- mination. The level of 
formal education related well to the test performance in the case of the highly motivated individuals; 
however, this was not the case for those who showed average motivation. A summary of average scores and 
ranges on the test and interviews is shown here. AVERAGE RANGE MAXIMUM TEST 44.0 21-60 75 INTERVIEW 39.9 
25-51 70 COMPANY AWARENESS 9.0 5-13 15 STATE OF MIND 11.4 0-18 20 ASPI RATIONS 19.0 12-25 35 Complete 
findings of the study in proficiency, capability, salary, background, attitudes, sex, age and group classifications 
are shown in the StaffSummary Data Sheet (for 31 staff members). CURRENT CAPABILITIES OF STAFF A tabulation 
of the number of staff members with specific knowledge and experience is listed here. PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES 
Number of Individuals ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 1 * ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 2* COBOL* FORTRAN ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 3 ASSEMBLY 
LANGUAGE 4 23 4 12 3 0 3 EQUIPMENT KNOWLEDGE COMPUTER I COMPUTER 2 COMPUTER 3 COMPUTER 4 COMPUTER 5 ANCILLARY 
EQUIPMENT COMPUTER 6 23 8 7 7 4 3 2 FILE ORGANIZATION TECHNI QUES SEQUENTIAL (DISK/DRUM) INDEX SEQUENTIAL 
DIRECT (RANDOM) ACCESS 2 2 2 SYSTEM DESIGN 6 MACHINE OPERATIONS 2 IMPLEMENTATION EXPERIEN CE (MAJOR APPLICATION) 
5 * Except for this language specific kndata processing profession not exhibited. EDP PLANS AND MANPOWER 
owledge of other languages in REQUIREMENTS The company EDP plans for the next three years were examined 
in detail, along with past performance, including some records and estimates of manpower expended to 
reach the present computer and business system status level. Estimates were then made by the consulting 
team as to total EDP manpower requirements to achieve the three-year plan. This was further broken down 
into staff requirements by function and skill level. Based on measurements of current staff available, 
the net manpower requirements were derived. The net manpower requirements still needed can be acquired 
by: I. Training and upgrading present staff and adding numerous trainees. 2. Hiring large numbers of 
skilled EDP people. 3. Cutting back on the goals of the three-year plan or realistically ex- tending 
it to four years or five.  4. Any combination of the above three alternatives. Since the current staff 
of 31 programmers and systems analysts was far short of the 135 needed to meet the goals of the three-year 
plan, the company chose alter- native 4 above. PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS NET SYSTEM S AN ALYSTS PRESENT 
FUTURE ADDITION SENIOR 5 7 2 INTERMEDIATE 0 21 21 JUNIOR 4 7 3 Total: 9 35 26 PROGRAMMERS SENIOR 2 25 
23 PROGRAMMER 20 55 35 PROGRAMMER TRAINEE 0 20 20 Total: 22 100 78 TOTAL: 31 135 104 MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS 
LONG-RANGE NEW APPLICATION BASIC BUSINESS PR. S/A PR. S/A. COMPUTER SYSTEM DESIGN 5 24 6 17 PROGRAMMING 
EFFORTS 65 6 97 7 DOCUMENTATI ON 15 15 24 12 SYSTEMS TEST 1 1 1 FINALIZATION &#38; MAINTENANCE 9 2 9 
2 FUTURE PLANNING &#38; RESEARCH 12 7 Total 95 60 137 45 TOTAL SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS 105 TOTAL PROGRAMMING 
EFFORT 232 TOTAL EFFORT 337 Based on a review of current and future systems, as now defined, the above 
schedule illus- trates the manpower requirements in man-years. STAFF REQUIREMENTS BY FUNCTION AND SKILL 
LEVEL SYSTEM S AN ALYSTS TOTAL SENIOR 7 1NTERMEDI ATE 21 JUNIOR 7 35 PROGRAMMERS SENIOR 25 PROGRAMMER 
55 PROGRAMMER TRAINEE 20 100 Total 135 The above illustrated manpower requirements are for the three-year 
period at 80 per cent operating efficiency (allowing for vacations, etc.). SPECIFIC TRAINING RECOMMENDATIONS 
Specific training recommendations in computer and systems skills are summarized below. This applies to 
current staff as well as new hires. Courses Systems Analyst Programmer Computer Installations &#38; How 
They Operate XX XX Work and Tools of the Systems Analyst XX XX Business Data Processing XX X Basic Business 
Systems Analysis XX X Magnetic Input/Output Devices XX XX Advanced Systems Analysis X Programming XX 
XX Languages (General Concepts) XX XX Operating Systems XX XX Multi- Programming XX XX Time-Sharing XX 
X Data Communications XX X Files and Records XX XX Data Base Design X Sorts and Merges X XX Debugging 
X XX Documentation X XX Professionalism X X Information Storage and Retrieval XX XX Statistical Computing 
XX X Business Report Generating X XX Management Information Systems XX X Basic Assembly Language Programming 
X X COBOL Language Programming X XX X = recommended XX = strongly recommended GROUPING FOR TRAINING 
PURPOSES Three group categories for computer analysts and programmers were established for training purposes. 
The group categories and number of staff members in each are given below: SYSTEMS ANALYSTS (9) Group 
IA (6) Computer analysts in this group are capable of selecting, on an individual basis, those training 
areas which will most effectively contribute to their professional growth. Key areas of knowledge must 
include a thorough under- standing of systems concepts and a comprehensive awareness of the variety of 
computer equipment, languages and other vendor-provided software avail- able. This training will not 
only enhance individual professional growth but will greatly assist in effective systems implementation 
and the most economical use of data processing systems. Group IB (1) The training for the analysts in 
this group should be the same as for those in Group IA. However, the control of the training will need 
to be more formal and the individual progress reviewed at more frequent intervals. Group 11 (2) Analysts 
in this group, although being trained in the same areas as other com- puter analysts, will require the 
personal guidance of either a senior staff member or training supervisor so that he can realize some 
professional growth and performance at his own pace. PROGRAMMERS (22) Group IA (5) Programmers in this 
group are capable of quickly learning alternative lan- guages and programming techniques and should be 
given every opportunity to do so. Many of the personnel in the group appear to possess the potential 
to become computer analysts. These individuals, whenever the opportunity exists, should be chosen for 
projects in which cross-training is possible. Group IB (9) Programmers in this group, although possessing 
similar capabilities as those in Group IA, will require longer periods of training and a greater degree 
of guidance. This will be required before they can be expected to demonstrate their productivity in new 
areas. Group I1 (8) Personnel in this group appear to have some aptitude for programming. The majority 
indicated a strong desire for additional training toward professional growth. Any training program designed 
to enhance their technical abilities must be supplemented by an intense effort to build and sustain their 
motiva- tion level. ANALYSIS OF GRAPHS Graph 1 reflects the distribution of test scores for both the 
computer analysts and programmers. The results illustrated a statistically normal bell-shaped curve, 
indicating a normal distribution of scores above and below the average. In order to determine whether 
there is any significant relation between test scores and formal education or years of experience or 
both, the individuals were grouped by level of education. Graph 2 illustrates the performance of individuals 
as a function of education level. For those with a high school education, there appears to be no relation 
between years of experience and test scores other than the fact that most scores fell within the range 
of 39 to 45. In the performance of individuals with two years or less of college education, there seems 
to be a trend toward higher test scores as years of experience in- crease. For those with three years 
or more of college education, as experience in- creases, so does test performance. This seems to be a 
significant trend with a maximum at the two-year level. U z 2 I , '1 ~ 40 ~0 60 TEST SCORE  Graph 1 
: Computer Analysts &#38; Programmers Frequency Distribution of Test Scores HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION | 
| e e | 5 ~4 u.l 5 3 TWO YEARS OR LESS OF COLLEGE l e i   e I I U THREE YEARS OR no MORE OF COLLEGE 
O  ~'o 3~ 1o 5'0 TEST SCORE Graph 2: Computer Analysts &#38; Programmers Test Scores by Level of Education 
and Experience SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS It is believed that this is one of the most extensive studies 
conducted to eval- uate total company capability of its computer personnel, estimating skill levels and 
EDP manpower needed to achieve company computer objectives and devel- opment of training plans for staff 
members to upgrade them to provide the needed computer skills. The performance of these employees will 
be monitored further to try to determine the validity of the specially designed proficiency test and 
the effective- ness of the training program and of the study. It is hoped that this test can be applied 
to other personnel in business data processing and that more companies will study this all-important 
area of com- puter staff evaluation, in the light of their company computer plans and objec- tives. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
<RefA>I. "Montessori Techniques Applied to Programmer Training in a Workshop Environment" by Elizabeth R. Alexander. 
Proceedings of the SJCC, May 1969. 2. "Training of Advanced Business Systems Analysts" by Paul D. Oyer. 
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference, Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group 
on Computer Personnel Research, June 1968. 3. "Correlates of Programmer Proficiency" by Raymond M. Berger 
and Robert C. Wilson, CPRG 4th Annual Conference Proceedings, June 1966. 4. "A Survey of Test Use in 
Computer Personnel Selection" by R. A. Dickmann and J. Lockwood, ibid. 5. "CPRG Programmer Performance 
Prediction Study" by Robert N. Reinstedt, et al; The RAND Corp. 1965. 6. "The Development of Programmer 
Evaluation Measures" by Ray M. Berger and R. C. Wilson, CPRG 3rdAnnual Conference Proceedings, June 1965. 
 7. "Computer Sciences Curricula for Colleges," A CM Communications, March 1968. 8. "That Persistent 
Personnel Problem," EDP Analyzer, May 1967, Canning Publications. 9. "The Upgrading of Data Processing 
Personnel," EDP Analyzer, August 1967. </RefA> me m Paul D. Oyer is president of Oyer Professional Computer 
Services, a firm specializing in computer-oriented education and training. He has BS and MA degrees 
in education from Indiana University, and has held management positions in the computer field with IBM 
Corporation, Westinghouse, lIT Research Institute, and the Department of Defense. He has extensive consulting 
and teaching experience in the field. He is a past chairman of the New York chapter of the ACM.  
			
