
 Proceedings of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. J, Swain, D. GoMsman, R. C. Crain, and J. 
R. Wilson ANALYSIS OF MATERIAL HANDLING EQUIPMENT FOR MARITIME PROPOSITIONING SHIPS (MPS) INSTREAM OFFLOAD 
 John D. Sumner IRMD, Code 762 Marine Corps Logistics Base Albany, GA 31704, U. S. A. ABSTRACT The Maritime 
Prepositioning Force (MPF) program enables the United States Marine Corps to globally project rapid and 
sustainable combat power. The instream method of offloading equipment and supplies from the Maritime 
Prepositioning Ships (MPS) provides the flexibility needed to respond to a broader range of contingencies 
dictated by the increasingly dynamic geostrategic environment. In this paper, we develop a simulation 
model of an MPS instream offloading operation to provide Marine Corps commanders with a decision support 
tool for best allocation of material handling equipment to rapidly achieve fully operational capability 
ashore. 1 INTRODUCTION The Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF) enables a rapid and sustainable military 
response to short­warning global contingencies. To minimize response time without overtaxing available 
sealift and airlift assets, the entire complement of weapons, equipment, and supplies required for three 
Marine Expeditionary Brigades (MEB) was prepositioned aboard three squadrons of Maritime Prepositioning 
Ships (MPS), a total of thirteen ships. The strategic forward basing of this fleet provides a flexible 
global response capability for each MEB. Figure 1 depicts the strategic reach of the three-squadron MPS 
fleet. Normal operating areas of the three MPS squadrons are indicated on the map by the smallest concentric 
circles, while the larger circles represent maximum closure times of 7 and 14 days respectively, Each 
MPS squadron (MPSRON) is spread-loaded with weapons, equipment and supplies sufficient to sustain a MEB 
for thirty days of sustained combat (Auditor General of the Navy, 1989). Because the MPF is such a recent 
development, the topic is largely unexplored, and doctrine is still being developed. The preliminary 
MPF planning Keebom Kang Code AS/~ Logistics Group Naval Postgraduate School Monterey, CA 93943, U. S. 
A.  efforts proved prophetic when on August 2, 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait and threatened Saudi Arabia. 
Within two weeks, the Indian Ocean based MPSRON-2 arrived at the Port of Al Jubail and offloaded three 
ships simultaneously within 36 hours (Evans, 1991). The MPS-established 7th MEB provided the first credible 
deterrent capability in the region. Since then, the MPS operation has received more attention. The offload 
and marriage of prepositioned equipment with the airlifted combat troops is required to establish an 
operationally ready Marine force ashore. Each MPS is capable of offloading either pierside or instream 
in an area which is devoid of significant enemy threat. The pierside offload is preferred due to its 
speed and safety. Containerized cargo is lifted off the ship dh-ectly to the pier. All rolling stock 
is driven or is towed off the stern ramp of the ship. Additionally, most ports have equipment assets 
and an infrastructure which facilitate rapid offloading and organization of the MEB s assets. However, 
port facilities may be sabotaged or mined to deny access. A highly urbanized area surrounding the port 
may impede vehicle movement, impose space restrictions, and favor terrorist actions. The instream offload 
provides strategic planning flexibility when a port is either unavailable or undesirable for offload. 
With the ship at anchor offshore, all vehicles and containers are lifted onto floating lighterage which 
shuttle the gear from ship to shore. This operation is slower, more dangerous, and sensitive to environmental 
and terrain factors, Congestion at the beach area must be minimized by the efficient allocation of material 
handling equipment, The distribution and operation of the material handling equipment ashore is the responsibility 
of the Marine Corps commander. Understanding the capabilities and limitations of the MPS offload process 
will enable the commander to best employ his assets to rapidly develop and achieve full operational capability 
ashore. 1087 Figure 1: MPF Strategic Reach The objective of thk paper is to provide the Marine Corps 
commander with a decision support tool to augment hk sound situational leadership by indicating optimal 
allocation of scare resources, and material handling equipment, for rapid instream offloading. We develop 
a simulation model to analyze the flow of containerized cargo offloaded from the ship, across the beach, 
and delivered to the Combat Service Support Area (CSSA) during a self-sustained two-ship instream offload. 
The goal of the model is not to simulate a particular scenario, but to give decision makers or commanders 
a feel for the impact of different policies regarding resource allocation. The simulation model is written 
in SIMAN (Pegden, Sadowski, and Shannon, 1990) with its enhanced modeling capability of material handling 
systems. Details of the program are available in Sumner (1991), The structure of this paper is as follows. 
Section 2 describes the MPS instream offloading operation and the material handling equipment used during 
the operation. Section 3 includes the results and analysis of material handling resource allocation alternatives 
for various scenarios. Section 4 contains concluding remarks. (Pernini and Eacott, 1988) 2 INSTREAM OFFLOADING 
OPERATION Upon receipt of an alert order, the Survey Liaison and Reconnaissance Party (S.LRP) is formed 
and deployed to the objective area. This small team s mission is to collect essential information concerning 
the suitability of the Arrival and Assembly Area (AAA) for the conduct of the offload. Simultaneously, 
the Offload Preparation Party (OPP) is flown to the MPSRON to prepare the equipment for offload while 
the ship is underway to the AAA. Following the SLRP is the time phased arrival of the Fly-In-Echelon 
(FIE) of personnel and equipment coordinated with the offload of the MPS ships. The Marine Corps commander 
s objective is to attain a fally operational capability of the MPF within ten days from the time the 
MPS ships can begin offloading (Gerlaugh, 1989). This includes approximately five days for instream offloading 
operation. The ships cranes begin the instream offload cycle by lifting all containers and vehicles overboard 
to floating Iighterage alongside the ship which then transit to the shore. At this point, all rolling 
stock drives or is towed to the CSSA or to other MEB elements located within the AAA. Containers, on 
the other hand, are Material Handling Equipment for Maritime Propositioning Ships MPS SHIPS \ \Navy R.qmnsihility 
$ ~ 1 /=--- 2. LIGHTERAGE t Marine Ccup$ t.sspmsibihty   ~ Ccmtairier Marshaling I Ac+a x -r? ~I 
I RTCH ;RTCH  &#38; ~ . 1 m To CSSA fl I -1 mm LV!4 + 1 Fi-mxi CSSA 3. 4. RTL H LWS Figure 2 MPS Instream 
Contiiiner Offloading Operation irdvidually removed from the lighterage by the Rough Terrain Container 
Handler (RTCH) which is akin to a huge forklift. The RTCH then loads the container on a Logistic Vehicle 
System (LVS) which is similar to a commercial flat bed truck. The LVS then transports each container 
to the CSSA to offload it there and complete the cycle. Container movement is the critical path of the 
operation due to the special handling required. The total offload time begins when the ships start offloading 
and ends when the last container arrives at the CSSA. Figure 2 shows the offloading operation. Once offloaded 
ashore, the materiel must be moved to the location where it will be prepared for issue to the unit that 
will ultimately employ and have accountability for the items. Depending on terrain and distance factors 
within additional two to three In this paper, two instream continuously manned Navy Support operational 
capability the AAA, this will require an days. Maersk class MPS ships offload and concurrently with a 
fully-Element (NSE) to achieve full of the ships. Loaded aboard each ship are 365 8%8%X3 International 
Standards Organization (1S0) containers. The containers are primarily loaded on the weatherdeck of the 
ship and within the lower holds. Vehicles are loaded on the decks in between. The continuous and concurrent 
offload of both vehicles and containers is achieved through effective management of the material handling 
equipment including cranes, lighterages, RTCHS, and LVSS. We now discuss the material handling equipment 
used for instream offloading operations. The model assists the Marine Corps commander in optimally allocating 
and employing those assets over which he has dkect control, 2.1 Crane and Lighterage Each ship is equipped 
with three twin-tandem cargo cranes which service three offload positions. The total offload time begins 
when the first container is lifted off of the weatherdeck of the ship to be lowered overboard. Each ship 
carries eight 75 x21 x5 causeway sections which are configured into three powered barge ferries. Each 
barge is called a lighterage. Although the configuration of the lighterages is flexible, the Center for 
Naval Analysis (CNA) study identified that three lighterages per ship was the most efficient configuration 
of the causeway sections. The model dedicates three lighterages to the container offloading while rest 
of the lighterages are used for vehicle offloading or other purposes (Avitzur et al. 1988). The six available 
cranes offload containers when one of the three lighterages is available. Once it is loaded with a batch 
of 16 contain­ers, the lighterage transits to the shore. Lighterages will achieve about 8 knots and are 
designed to operate in sea condhions of up to sea-state 3, which is defined as five foot waves, 15 knot 
winds, and three knot currents (Brown, 1985). Once its containers are offloaded ashore, the lighterage 
returns to an open position at either ship for another load of containers. 2.2 Rough Terrain Container 
Handler (RTCH) When a lighterage loaded with containers arrives at the beach it is offloaded by the RTCH. 
The RTCH is an enormous, rough terrain, 50,000 pound capacity forklift specially designed to handle containerized 
cargo. It is designed to operate in unimproved beachhead areas and is capable of wading in seawater up 
to 1.52 meters deep in order to board a causeway ferry and sequentially offload the containers (Jane 
s Military Logistics, 1990-1991). Thk capability allows the lighterage to beach anywhere in the vicinity 
of the RTCH. The RTCH is able to either load containers directly on LVS platform trucks, or stack them 
two-Klgh in a marshaling area set up at the beach. A total of five RTCHS from the two ships are available 
for this operation. Typically two RTCHS are dedicated to the CSSA destination for the final offload of 
containers from the LVS trucks, and three RTCHS for beach operations. RTCHS used for beach operations 
are categorized into two classes by task: RTCH-A and RTCH-B. Upon the arrival of a lighterage at the 
beach, RTCH-A boards the lighterage and picks up a container. After backing off the barge with a container, 
RTCH-A checks to see if an LVS is available for loading. If so, it carries the container an approximate 
dktance of 200 feet to the LVS from the lighterage. RTCH-A then releases the container on the LVS. The 
LVS departs and RTCH-A returns to the lighterage to complete the cycle. If an LVS is not available for 
loading, RTCH-A carries the container to a marshaling area. At this point, if additional containers remain 
on a lighterage to be offloaded, RTCH-A returns to expeditiously complete offloading the lighterage thereby 
clearing and releasing it to return to the ship. If there are no lighterages to occupy RTCH-A, RTCH-A 
will assist RTCH-B in the marshaling area. RTCH-B is tasked with clearing the containers from the marshaling 
area. Urdiie RTCH-A which travels a given dktance between the lighterage and LVS or marshaling area, 
RTCH-B travels varying distances depending on the location of the container within the marshaling area. 
RTCH-B is stationed in the marshaling area where it awaits the arrival of an LVS.  2.3 Logistic Vehicle 
System (LVS) The LVS has a flat platform deck with standard container lashing points to carry the 1S0 
container. Its unique design provides superior off-road capability for transporting individual containers 
to an inland destination (Jane s Military Logistics, 1990-1991). The model permits adjustment of the 
quantity of LVSS dedicated to container throughput as well as the distance travelled to the container 
destination at the CSSA. Round trip travel times utilized in the model are based on a speed of 20 kilometers 
per hour. Such an average speed is not an unreasonable assumption for equipment operating over unimproved 
roads in a remote area (Strock, 1985). When the LVS returns to the beach, it checks to see if there is 
a container aboard a tighterage. If so, it waits to be directly loaded by RTCH-A and travels to the CSSA. 
This logic minimizes the double handling and queueing of containers in the marshaling area. If there 
are no containers aboard a lighterage ashore, the LVS checks the status of the marshaling area, If there 
are no containers there, it awaits the next lighterage, If there are containers in the marshaling area, 
the LVS moves to the marshaling area where it is loaded by RTCH-B or sometimes by RTCH-A as described 
 Material Handling Equipment for Maritime Propositioning Ships Table 1: The Effects of LVS Quantity and 
CSSA Location on Offload Time and LVS Utilization LVS QUANTITY RESULTS ROUND-TRIP CSSA DI STANCE 10 KM 
20 KM 40 KM ! 60 KM , , Time I 99.98 I 102.71 I 108.02 I 142.81 20 (3.09) (1.10) (0.08) (0.31) Avg # 
of 6.50 9.87 16.27 17.83 LVSS (0.17) (0.27) (0.22) (0.05) utilized Time 99.98 102.71 104.44 109.40 30 
(3.09) (1.10) (1.21) (0.96) AVG # of 6.50 9.87 17.15 23.21 LVSS (0.17) (0.27) (0.46) (0.26) utilized 
Time 99.98 102.71 106.32 104.38 (3.09) (1.10) (0.66) (1.62) 40 earlier. The total offload time ends 
when the last maintain desirable offload time goals. Table 1 container is brought to the CSSA. illustrates 
thk output data. Indicated-values within the table are the averages of ten replications followed by 3 
ANALYSIS the standard error in parentheses. Common random number technique (see e.g. Law and Kelton, 
1991) was The twofold intent of this section is to promote an applied for variance reduction of simulation 
output. understanding of the simulated offload s characteristics Times are in hours and utilization is 
the average for decision makers, and to investigate possible number of trucks utilized for a given quantity. 
The material handling resource allocation alternatives for RTCH allocation policy in this output is held 
constant various scenarios. A CNA research memorandum at its most likely state with two servicing the 
lighterages (Avitzur, et al. 1988) provided the primary source of (RTCH-A) and one servicing the marshaling 
area data. (RTCH-B). The desired time goal for the instream container 3.1 LVS Quantity and Location 
of CSSA offload is within four and one-half days or 112 hours. The simulation model begins tallying the 
total time Due to the substantial acreage required to establish the from the moment the first container 
is lifted, CSSA, terrain and dispersion factors greatly influence However, the actual offload time begins 
with the the CSSA location decision, Although the AAA is offload and assemblage of the lighterage which 
requires considered a benign area, the dispersion of functional one day preceding the container offload. 
An offload elements within the CSSA is required as a passive time greater than five and one-half days 
then, including defense measure against missile, terrorist, or chemical the preparation of lighterages, 
may impact the ability to attack (Dykstra, 1988). Knowing the approximate dis-achieve the ten day goal 
for the Marine Task Force to tance from the beach within which the CSSA could be be operationally ready. 
located and still achieve the desired time goal provides At a round-trip distance of 20 km or less, the 
flexibility in planning the location of the CSSA, offload time falls within the desired goal and is We 
examine the effects on offload time of various unaffected by the employment of additional LVSS over LVS 
quantities transporting containers over various 20. Beyond 40 km, variations in time and utilization 
are distances to the CSSA, The maximum of 40 LVS are evident with addkional LVSS. These times approach 
available from the two ships. The CSSA distances are the 112 hour limit. When 20 LVSS must travel the 
60 aimed at determining a CSSA location that will km round-trip distance to the CSSA, thk amount is Table 
2: The Effects of RTCH Po :y and LVS Quantity/CSSA Distance Scenarios upon Offload Time and the Container 
Queue in Marsh ling Area POLICY RESULTS 20LVS/ ~ IOKM J--­2 0 TIME QUEUE 99.98 (3.09) o 2 1 TIME 99.98 
(3.09) QUEUE o 3 0 TIME 91.53 (1.40) QUEUE .80 (0.47)  obviously insufficient for the distance. The 
commander must consider either a closer location, or the dedication of additional LVSS to achieve the 
time goal. A quantity of 30 LVSS appears sufficient at 40 km, however, at 60 km, the time is close to 
the 112 hour limit with a high utilization level. The employment of ten additional LVSS achieves an appreciable 
reduction in offload time for that location of the CSSA, but the utilization still remains high enough 
for concern. It appears necessary to employ all 40 LVSS at thk dktance. These output results indicate 
that potential CSSA locations within a 40 km round-trip travel distance from the beach will meet the 
desired time goal without overtaxing the available LVSS. Engineering improve­ments to the road network 
may improve travel times and consequently extend this distance. On the other hand, even though the model 
assumes a conservative 20 km speed, the effect of foul weather on unpaved roads may further delay the 
travel time.  3.2 RTCH Allocation Policy This section examines the effects of three different RTCH 
allocation policies upon offload time and container queueing in the marshaling area. With a maximum of 
three RTCHS possible at the beach, the fmt policy examines whether or not two beach RTCHS are sufficient. 
In the model, this policy labels two RTCHS as RTCH-A, therefore there are no RTCHS in the marshaling 
area. If containers are queued in this policy, the marshaling area queue is serviced only if SCENARIO 
40LVS/ 10KM I 20LVS/ 40KM I I 40LVS/ 40KM 99.98 (3.09) 193.16 (0.40) 128.81 (26.11) o 271.15 (6.83) 126.13 
(14.78) 99.98 (3.09) 108.02 (0.08) 106.32 (0.66) o 4.30 (2.16) 2.29 (0.50) 91.53 (1.40) 146.80 (0.28) 
114.34 (0.84) .80 (0.47) 167.58 (12.47) 69.79 (95.72) the RTCH-A RTCHS are unoccupied with a lighterage. 
When RTCH-A contains two or more RTCHS, they alternate offloading containers from a single Iighterage 
before proceeding to the next lighterage. The second policy is the most intuitively logical employment 
of the three beach RTCHS. Two RTCHS are labeled as RTCH-A, and one is labeled as RTCH- B. Thus, both 
the lighterages and the marshaling area are serviced at the same time. The third policy examines the 
effect of three RTCHS operating as RTCH-A. The CNA study stated that three RTCHS tend to interfere with 
each other somewhat when offloading a lighterage (Avitzur et al, 19S8). The model does not account for 
this, therefore, the offload times resulting from this policy can be considered somewhat optimistic. 
Two specific round-trip distances were chosen as scenarios representing Iiiely close and distant CSSA 
locations of 10 km and 40 km respectively. Additionally, two LVS quantities were selected for evaluation 
at each distance for a given RTCH policy. At 10 km, the 40 LVS quantity results duplicated the 20 LVS 
results. Table 2 displays the effects of RTCH policy. This output suggests the critical importance of 
the RTCH policy to the efficiency of the container system. At 10 km, due to the quick turnaround time 
of the 20 LVSS, RTCH-A is consistently able to directly load the LVS with a container from the lighterage. 
Given this LVS quantity/distance for the CSSA location, employ­ing all three available RTCHS as RTCH-A 
achieves a significant time savings without the use of the Material Handling Equipment for marshaling 
area. Additionally, a total of two RTCHS appears sufficient to comfortably achieve the offload time goal 
with minimal queueing. The third RTCH may be held in reserve or employed elsewhere when the CSSA is closely 
located. Thk indicates that a close CSSA location will not require a RTCH dedicated to the marshaling 
area. In order to achieve the best possible throughput rate in this scenario, all three RTCHS should 
be dedicated as RTCH-A. Thus, this is the preferred RTCH policy for this scenario. The significance of 
container queueing is related to the space constraints imposed by the selected beach site. The smaller 
the area required for beach operations, the greater the planning flexibility in beach site selection. 
The space required for the container marshaling area can be substantial. For example, 100 containers 
stacked two-high and placed end-to-end in a 50 container long row extends 1,000 feet, or greater than 
three football fields! The physical configuration of containers within the marshaling area often parallels 
the beach. This allows sufficient access by the RTCH and maintains a separation between the containers 
and the high-water line on the beach. Container queueing not only limits planning flexibility, but also 
increases offload time due to the double handling required by the RTCHS. For the purpose of thk analysis, 
the acceptable expected average number of containers in the marshaling area is established at ten containers. 
This low limit seeks to avoid the vulnerability to potential attack posed by large numbers of containers 
in a concentrated area. At 40 km, unacceptable offload times and amounts of container queueing result 
from both RTCH policies which do not utilize RTCH-B regardless of either LVS quantity considered. The 
large values of standard errors also indicate high variability of the output results. When the first 
policy is employed, with only two RTCHS total, their slow offload rate keeps them almost continuously 
occupied with the lighterage. Thk reduces the time that they can spend clearing the marshaling area. 
The third policy with three RTCH-A and no RTCH-B is similarly undesirable. Although they offload the 
lighterage more quickly, they also fill the marshaling area quicker as a consequence. Once in the marshaling 
area, containers have a tendency to remain there due to the LVS loading policy which prioritizes the 
direct loading of containers from the lighterage, Considering the interference factor stated in the CNA 
study along with this extreme run value, even greater time and queueing values are likely. Dedicating 
one of the three RTCHS to the marshaling area in the 40 km dist ante scenario achieves the most efficient 
throughput rate which Maritime Propositioning Ships 1093 comfortably meets offload time and average container 
queueing goals. Thus, this is the preferred policy for this scenario. The highest average number of containers 
queued in this scenario occurs when 20 LVSS are employed. 4 CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we develop a simulation 
model for MPS instream container offloading operations to assist the Maine Corps commander in optimally 
allocating his assets. Results indicate that the throughput rate of containers is not only sensitive 
to the quantities of the material handliig equipment and travel distance, but also to the operational 
allocation of the material handling equipment. This paper provides a foundation for understanding possible 
scenarios for future MPF deployment, and promotes a better understanding of system interrelationships. 
APPENDIX LIST OF ACRONYMS Arrival and Assembly Area CNA Center for Naval Analysis CSSA Combat Service 
Support Area FIE Fly-In-Echelon 1S0 International Standards Organization LVS Logistic Vehicle System 
MAGTF Marine Air-Ground-Task-Force MER Marine Expeditionary Brigade MPF Maritime Prepositioning Force 
MPFTF Maritime Prepositioning Task Force MPS Maritime Prepositioning Ship MPSRON Maritime Prepositioning 
Ship Squadron OPP Offload Preparation Party RTCH Rough Terrain Container Handler SLRP Survey Liaison 
and Reconnaissance Party REFERENCES <RefA>Audhor General of the Navy. 1989. Logktics Planning for the Maritime 
Propositioning Ships Program, Audh Report (030-C-89), Department of the Navy. Avitzur, T., P. A. Veling, 
D. Brenner, P.W. Hodes, G. E. Home, J. D. Love, and W. F. Morgan. 1988. Research Memorandum on Analysis 
of Ekercise Freedom Banner 87, Contract Study, Center for Naval Analysis, Alexandria, VA. Brown, D. 
B. 1985. MPS: The Navy s crucial role, Marine Cops Gazette, March. Dykstra, D. M.. 1988. Five principles 
for survival, Man-ne Corps Gazette, February. Evans, D. 1991. Desert Shield, From the Guf, Naval Institute 
Proceedings. Gerlaugh, R. E. 1989. Doctrine and roles for MPF (Maritime Prepositioning Force): what have 
we learned?, Unpublished Research Paper, U.S. Naval War College, Newport, RI. Jane s Military Logistics 
1990-91, Ilth cd., edited by Foss, C, F., and Gander, T. J., Jane s Information Group, Alexandria, VA, 
Law, A. M. and W. D. Kelton. 1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY. 
Pegden, C. D., R. E. Shannon, and R. P. Sadowski. 1990. Introduction to Simulation: Using SZM4N, McGraw-Hill, 
Inc., Highstown, NJ, Pernini, J. K., and R. G. Eacott. 1988. Commander maritime propositioning force 
-identify yourself, Unpublished Research Paper, U.S. Naval War College, Newport, RI. Strock, J. N. 1985. 
The MPS reception-an analysis, Unpublished Research Paper, Marine Corps Command and Staff College, Marine 
Corps Development and Education Command, Quantico, VA. Sumner, J.D. 1991. An analysis of the maritime 
pro­positioning ships (MPS) instream offload: a decision framework for the Marine Corps com­mander, Master 
s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA.</RefA> AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES JOHN D. SUMNER Captain of the U. 
S. Marine Corps, is the project/logistics officer for the Marine­Air-Ground-Task-Force (MAGTF) decision 
Support System II at the Marine Corps Logistics Base in Albany, Georgia. He hold a B.S. degree in Business 
Administration from University of Utah in 1986, and an M.S. degree in Logistics Management from the Naval 
Postgraduate School, Monterey, California in 1991. Captain Sumner worked closely with MPF program as 
a beach operation group commander in the First Marine Expeditionary Brigade. He is interested in PC­based 
simulation modeling to augment the military commander s leadership decision making. This paper is an 
extract of his master s thesis from the Naval Postgraduate School. KEEBOM KANG is on the faculty of the 
logistics group in the Administrative Sciences Department at the Naval Postgraduate School. He received 
his Ph.D. degree in Industrial Engineering from Purdue University, his M.S. in Operations Research from 
the University of Texas at Austin, and his B.S. in Industrial Engineering from Seoul National University. 
His research interests are in the areas of stochastic modeling, probabilistic and statistical aspects 
of computer simulation, and logistics applications. He teaches various logistics courses. He is a member 
of ORSA, TIMS, IIE, SCS, Sigma Xi, Omega Rho, and ADPA.  
			
