
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G.W. Evans, eds. ANALYSIS OF ELECTRONICS ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS: LONGBOW HELLFIRE MISSILE POWER SUPPLY 
 Kurt G. Springfield John D. Hall Gregg W. Bell TASC, Inc. APT Research, Inc. Northrop Grumman Corporation 
700 Boulevard South, Suite 201 555 Sparkman Drive, Suite 440 915 Explorer Boulevard Huntsville, AL 35802, 
U.S.A. Huntsville, AL 35816, U.S.A. Huntsville, AL 35806, U.S.A. ABSTRACT This paper describes the use 
of discrete event simulation and design of experiments to analyze and improve electronics assembly operations. 
A study was performed to determine if proposed changes to electronics assembly operations could achieve 
higher production throughput. This work supported the U.S. Army s Longbow HELLFIRE Missile program. The 
design of experiment used a modified orthogonal array containing both two and three-level factors. The 
authors describe the use of factor level average analysis to analyze experimental data. The Army used 
study results to assess risks in the program while the manufacturer gained information needed to improve 
the efficiency of its operations. INTRODUCTION The AH-64 Apache is the premier helicopter used by the 
U.S. Army to defeat enemy mechanized forces. The HELLFIRE missile is the primary weapon used by the Apache 
in this role. An upgrade currently under development is designated the AH-64D, Longbow Apache. This upgrade 
will improve the performance, survivability, and reliability of the Apache helicopter. Enhancements include 
a fire-and-forget weapon system, multiple target engagements, and exchange of targeting data with other 
combat elements. An upgraded missile, the Longbow HELLFIRE Modular Missile (LBHMM), is an integral part 
of the AH-64D weapon system. A new seeker with an active radar gives the Longbow HELLFIRE Missile a fire足and-forget 
engagement capability. The Longbow HELLFIRE Missile is produced by a joint venture of Lockheed Martin 
Corporation and Northrop Grumman Corporation. Northrop Grumman produces the Guidance Section (GS) for 
the missile. The Power Supply (PS) is a major component of the Guidance Section and the subject of this 
study. Figure 1 depicts the Longbow HELLFIRE Missile. The Longbow HELLFIRE Missile program will transition 
from Low Rate Initial Production (LRIP) to Full Rate Production (FRP). Northrop Grumman will implement 
planned changes to the GS manufacturing system to achieve the substantially higher production volume 
required in FRP. Both the Army and Northrop Grumman were interested in analyzing selected components 
of the GS manufacturing system to determine if the proposed changes can achieve the higher production 
volumes. One area of interest was the PS assembly operations. The Army commissioned a study of the PS 
assembly operations. Discrete event simulation was the primary tool used to estimate PS throughput and 
other manufacturing characteristics at two Northrop Grumman facilities one facility in College Station, 
Texas, and another in Huntsville, Alabama. This study provided information that the Army needed to make 
a risk assessment of the Longbow HELLFIRE Missile program as it transitions to FRP. It also provided 
information that Northrop Grumman used to refine its proposed changes to the PS system to improve efficiencies 
related to resource utilization and control of work-in-process (WIP). See Springfield and Hall (1998). 
Subsequent to the initial study of the PS assembly operations, Northrop Grumman proposed major changes 
that would move selected PS operations from their Texas facility to the Alabama facility. This paper 
describes the additional simulation analysis employed in the follow-on study used to analyze these proposed 
changes for the Huntsville, Alabama, facility. 2 MANUFACTURING SYSTEM OVERVIEW The new PS assembly operations 
proposed for the Alabama facility includes several assembly and testing operations. At this facility, 
Northrop Grumman will receive a partially assembled PS circuit card assembly (CCA) from the Texas facility 
and build it into a completed  Guidance Section Figure 1: Longbow HELLFIRE Missile CCA. A CCA is the 
lower level component of the final PS. Northrop Grumman will then build the CCA into an electronic circuit 
assembly (ECA). The completed ECA is the end product Power Supply. Operations needed to complete the 
Power Supply CCA include the attachment of cable harness assemblies and other components, conformal coating 
by a subcontractor, circuit testing, and inspection. Assembly operators perform most of these operations 
on the CCA. Test operators build the CCA into a ECAs and conduct testing. The testing includes a bench 
test (circuit testing), vibration test, environmental stress screening (ESS) test, and a final bench 
test. Test operators then affix a final component and weigh each PS before an inspector performs a final 
inspection. Figure 2 depicts the PS assembly, testing, and inspection operations proposed for the Alabama 
facility. This figure also depicts the major resources addressed in this study. 3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT The 
proposed PS operations were modeled using the ARENA simulation software. Operations at the Alabama 
facility begin with the arrival of partially assembled Power Supply CCAs. Receiving operations were represented 
in the model by a series of advanced servers. A batch statement was used in conjunction with the advanced 
servers to limit the number of kits to be loaded on a cart for movement to the assembly area. Assembly 
operators working in parallel complete the CCA build. Each assembly operator retrieves a kit from a storage 
area and performs required assembly operations at their workstation. As an intermediate step, CCAs are 
sent to a subcontractor for conformal coating. An inspector Vibration Tables ESS Test Sets Bench Test 
Sets  Inspectors Inspectors Power Supply Receiving Operations Receiving Kitting Assembly Operators 
Power Supply CCA Assembly Operations CCA Assembly Verification Conformal Coating Inspection  Test Operators 
Power Supply ECA Assembly Operations ECA Assembly Verification Test Operators Power Supply ECA Testing 
Operations Bench Test ESS Test Vibration Test Post Bench Test Assemble/Weigh Inspection   Figure 2: 
Power Supply Operations and Resources reports to the assembly area to inspect completed CCAs. In the 
ARENA model, a CCA is routed from a single station (queue) to an advanced server that represents an assembly 
operator. Since the operators retrieve the kits, the number of kits being routed to the assemblers had 
to be limited. This was accomplished by a scan block checking for a condition in which the number of 
kits routing to the assemblers, in queue for the assemblers, and the number being processed by the assemblers 
was less than the total number of assembly operators. When this condition was met, a kit was released 
to the assembly area and assigned to an idle assembly operator. Test operators perform assembly and test 
operations in the test area. A test operator builds the CCA into a completed Power Supply ECA. A test 
operator then moves each ECA through a sequence of tests that include a bench test for circuit integrity, 
a vibration test, a temperature足cycling ESS test, and a post bench test to recheck circuit integrity. 
Should an ECA fail a test, the test operator performs troubleshooting to determine if it should be reworked 
by an assembly operator or returned to the Texas facility for rework. The final tasks performed by the 
test operator are the installation of a structural part and weighing the PS. The test operator then moves 
the Power Supply ECAs to a storage area to wait for final inspection. The test operator is modeled using 
a guided transporter. This transporter follows a sequence corresponding to the assembly and test operations. 
For assembly and test operations requiring the test operator, the test operator transporter was requested 
and delayed for the required processing time before being freed. The vibration and ESS tests are automated 
and only require the transporter for loading and unloading the ECAs to and from the test equipment. Both 
the vibration and ESS tests have capacities greater than one and are allowed to accumulate the required 
number of ECAs before processing. Final inspection is the last operation performed in the ECA testing 
area. An inspector reports to the area, retrieves a completed Power Supply from storage, and moves it 
to an inspection bench. After passing inspection, the PS is placed in a kit for assembly in the missile 
s Guidance Section. The inspector was modeled with the use of a free path transporter that moves ECAs 
from the storage area to the inspection station. After final inspection, the PS entities depart the model. 
 4 EXPERIMENTATION AND ANALYSIS Experimentation and analysis of the proposed manufacturing system was 
conducted in two phases. Phase 1 analysis sought to determine operating characteristics of the PS assembly 
operations as proposed by the Northrop Grumman engineers and addressed in a facility layout study. Results 
of the Phase 1 analysis suggested that while the system could meet required production volumes (throughput), 
utilization rates for the assembly operators were at unacceptably high levels. Phase 2 analysis sought 
to identify changes needed to address the utilization rates of the assembly operators and determine if 
other system design parameters could be changed to make the system more efficient. This section describes 
the Phase 2 experimentation and analysis. 4.1 Design of Experiment The objective of this experiment 
was to determine the optimal number of operators and items of test equipment needed to satisfy the FRP 
Power Supply delivery rate. Not only was the high utilization rate of the assembly operators of concern, 
but Northrop Grumman also wanted to examine staffing levels of test operators and inspectors. Northrop 
Grumman also planned to procure additional items of test equipment. This experiment examined the need 
for this additional testing capacity. Figure 3 presents the response variables, control factors, and 
levels considered in this experiment. Seven response variables addressed PS throughput and the utilization 
rates of selected operators and items of test equipment. Six control factors addressed the number of 
selected operators and items of test equipment in the PS system. The test equipment ESS chambers and 
test sets (Factor Response Variables (y) y1 = throughput (units/month)    y5 = utilization rate 
vibration test y2 = utilization rate assembly operators y6 = utilization rate ESS test y3 = utilization 
rate test operators ) y7 = utilization rate bench test y4 = utilization rate inspectors Control Factors 
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 A Number of ESS chambers &#38; test sets 2 3 B Number of vibration tables &#38; 
test sets 1 2 C Number of bench test sets 2 3 D Number of assembly operators (1st shift only) 5 6 7 E 
Number of test operators (1st shift/2nd shift) 2/1 2/0 1/1 F Number of inspectors (1st shift only) 1 
2 Figure 3: Response Variables, Control Factors, and Levels 691 A), vibration tables and test sets (Factor 
B), and bench tests sets (Factor C) were each examined at two levels. Level 1 for test equipment corresponded 
to the number of units currently fielded on the shop floor and Level 2 corresponded to the number of 
items that Northrop Grumman planned to add to the PS system. The assembly operators (Factor D) and test 
operators (Factor E) were examined at three levels. Level 1 represents the number of operators currently 
supporting LRIP operations. Since the utilization of assembly operators proved to be high in Phase 1 
analysis, Levels 2 and 3 examine additional operators. Since Phase 1 analysis suggested a lower than 
expected utilization rate for test operators, Levels 2 and 3 examine one fewer operator for either the 
first or second shift. The inspector (Factor F) was examined at two levels. Level 1 represents the current 
number of operators while Level 2 is an increase of one. To accommodate the four two-level factors at 
two three-level factors, a modified L16 orthogonal array (OA) was used as the experimental design. Figure 
4 presents this OA. A standard L16 OA was modified as suggested by Peace (1993) using column building 
to create two four足level columns from selected two-level columns. Since only three levels are needed 
for Factors D and E, a dummy factor level was used in lieu of the fourth level. The factor level chosen 
for the dummy level was one that the authors considered as needing the most additional information. For 
this problem, Level 2 was chosen as the dummy factor level for both Factors D and E. In Figure 4, the 
prime sign (e.g., 2') denotes these dummy factor levels. Trial A Control Factors B C F D E 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 2 3 3 4 1 1 1 2 2' 2' 5 1 2 2 1 3 2' 6 1 2 2 1 2' 3 7 1 2 2 2 1 2 8 1 2 2 2 
2 1 9 2 1 2 1 3 1 10 2 1 2 1 2' 2 11 2 1 2 2 1 3 12 2 1 2 2 2 2' 13 2 2 1 1 1 2' 14 2 2 1 1 2 3 15 2 
2 1 2 3 2 16 2 2 1 2 2' 1 Figure 4: Design of Experiment Modified L16 Orthogonal Array Analysis Five 
replications of the simulation were run for each trial. To ensure the model reached steady state, each 
trial used a 6 month warm-up period followed by a 12 month period for data recording.  4.2 Analysis 
The authors used factor level averaging to analyze the experimental results as described by Peace (1993). 
Response tables and graphs were constructed for each response variable. These tools allow the analyst 
to determine the factor levels that have the strongest effect on the response variable. Acceptable PS 
system parameter settings were judged as those that achieved FRP throughput requirements while maintaining 
utilization rates of operators and test equipment below 80%. Figure 5 presents a response graph for bench 
test utilization (response variable y7). This graph suggests that the number of test operators (Factor 
E) has a strong effect on bench test utilization. The large change in the value of utilization from its 
lowest when Factor E is set at Level 1 to its highest when Factor E is set at Level 3 indicates the strong 
effect of this factor. The number of bench test sets (Factor C) and the number of assembly operators 
(Factor D) are weak factors with respect to bench test utilization. The changes in utilization over the 
levels of these factors are apparent; however, they are much smaller than for Factor E. The remaining 
factors are considered to have no significant effect on the response variable. Analysis sought to determine 
solutions requiring the minimal amount of resources (operators and test equipment) needed to achieve 
the FRP requirements. It is noteworthy that the PS system was robust with respect to unit throughput 
at the FRP production rate for all factors and levels. Recommendations for system modifications were 
driven not by a concern for achieving required throughput, but for resource utilization. The addition 
of one assembly operator solved the utilization problem found earlier. Ample capacity was available using 
the test equipment currently on the shop floor; therefore, the authors recommended that Northrop Grumman 
not procure additional test equipment. A confirmation test was run using these recommendations. Thirty 
replications of the simulation were run for this experiment at the approximate FRP rate. For each replication, 
the simulation used a 6 month warm足up period followed by a 12 month period for data recording. Results 
confirmed that FRP throughput can be achieved with the addition of one assembly operator and without 
additional test equipment.  5 CONCLUSIONS Simulation proved to be an effective tool to analyze projected 
changes in a defense production system. Simulation provided the Army with information needed to Utilization 
- Bench Test 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0  A1A2 B1B2 C1C2 D1D2D3 E1E2E3 F1F2 Bench Assembly Test Figure 5: 
Sample Level Average Analysis Response Graph: Bench Test Utilization make an assessment of programs risks 
associated with the Longbow HELLFIRE Missile. Because simulation suggested that the Power Supply assembly 
system is capable of meeting FRP requirements, the Army assessed this as a low schedule risk. Simulation 
also provided a means for Northrop Grumman to analyze proposed changes to the PS production system. This 
study demonstrated that an additional assembly operator would cause a reduction in utilization rate of 
this resource to an acceptable level. Other improvements suggested in this study focused on improving 
the efficiency of the proposed PS system. Analysis suggests that the FRP rate can be achieved without 
procuring additional test equipment. This recommendation considered only throughput and resource utilization. 
While other factors will impact Northrop Grumman s decision to field this equipment, its management now 
has evidence that suggests that some of this equipment costs could be avoided.   REFERENCES <RefA>Peace, 
G. 1993. Taguchi Methods: A Hands-On Approach. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Springfield, K. and J. Hall. 
1998. Simulation Modeling of Manufacturing Systems: A Component of Simulation Based Acquisition, Proceedings 
of ArenaSphere 98.</RefA> AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES KURT G. SPRINGFIELD is a member of the technical staff for TASC, 
Inc. in Huntsville, AL. He holds a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Tennessee and 
an M.S. in Industrial and Systems Engineering from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. He is a member 
of SCS, RAHMORS, and ASQ. He is a registered professional engineer. JOHN D. HALL is a senior engineer 
for APT Research, Inc. in Huntsville, AL. He holds a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering from the U.S. Military 
Academy, a M.S. in Industrial Engineering from California Polytechnic State University, and a Ph.D. in 
Industrial Engineering from Mississippi State University. Dr. Hall specializes in conducting product 
and process improvement projects for the aerospace and defense industries. He is a member of IIE, INFORMS, 
and ASQ. Dr. Hall is an ASQ Certified Quality Engineer, Quality Manager, and Reliability Engineer. GREGORY 
W. BELL is the Longbow Missile Production Program Manager for Northrop Grumman Land Combat Systems - 
Huntsville. He started with Westinghouse in 1984 after graduating from Loyola College with a B.S. in 
Engineering Science. He has held various manufacturing positions within Westinghouse and Northrop Grumman. 
He moved to Huntsville in 1992 and served as the Lead Production Engineer for the Longbow Missile until 
his promotion to Operations Manager in 1996. Mr. Bell also held positions in test equipment design, test 
engineering, factory supervision, and production systems development and control during his fifteen years 
in manufacturing. 
			
