
 Adaptation in a Ubiquitous Computing Management Architecture* Markus Lauff TecO -University of Karlsruhe 
Vincenz Priessnitz Str. 1 76131 Karlsruhe GERMANY  markus @ teco.edu  ABSTRACT The vision of Ubiquitous 
Computing requires an infras- tructure for heterogeneous communicating appliances. We introduce an architecture 
for the management of ubiquitous computing environments that focuses on the integration of arbitrary 
communication protocols, the functional extension of resources already existing in ev- eryday environments, 
and the provision of a UbiComp API for technology independent application support. Arbitrary Communication 
protocols can be integrated using Network Adaptation Modules. 1. INTRODUCTION Ubiquitous Computing is 
one of the emerging areas in computer science. Research on infrastructure for ubiquitous computing spans 
the development of wireless communication protocols (e.g. IrDA, BlueTooth), the use of proprietary technolo- 
gies for evaluation of specific applications, and the de- velopment of architectures supporting communication 
and management in heterogeneous environments (e.g. JetSend, Salutation, [1]). However these approaches 
generally lack in flexible integration of already existing infrastructures, and provision of abstractions 
for con-struction of ubiquitous computing applications. From our experience with prototyping of ubiquitous 
comput- ing applications, we have arrived at the following re- quirements for an infrastructure to support 
ubiquitous computing: Management of devices and resources in the ubiq- uitous computing environment, 
supporting dynam- ics such as device and resource mobility *Paper presented at the SAC 2000 (Mobile Computing 
Track) in Como, Italy Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and or fee. SAC'00 March 19-21 Como, Italy (c) 2000 ACM 1-58113-239-5/00/003>...>$5.00 Hans-Werner Gellersen 
TecO -University of Karlsruhe Vincenz Priessnitz Str. 1 76131 Karlsruhe GERMANY hwg@teco.edu Integration 
of arbitrary communication protocols, to support heterogeneous devices and resources, to reuse existing 
communication infrastructure  Provision of abstractions for application develop- ment, and of mechanisms 
for adaptations to par- ticular environments  This short paper focuses on then second item. We be- lieve 
it is important for a transition toward ubiquitous computing to integrate for instance standard appliances 
instead of assuming a new generation of ubiquitous com- puting enabled appliances. Another concern is 
to sup- port ad-hoc communication between appliances across heterogeneous networking technologies. To 
achieve this, the architecture defines a Service Layer on top of an Adaptation Layer for communication 
in abstraction of network technology.  2. ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW The architecture is based on three layers 
(Fig. 1). Adaptation Layer (UC-AL): Adaptation and in- tegration of communication protocols and other 
management systems  Service Layer (UC-SL): Service Modules adding functionality to maintain device, 
location, com-munication, and user dependent services  API Layer (UC-API): Application Programming Interface 
providing uniform access to the managed resources  2.1 Adaptation Layer The Adaptation Layer allows 
to integrate other commu- nication protocols or management systems. The focus of this paper is on this 
discussed in section 3.  2.2 Service Layer The modules of Service Layer maintain device, location, communication, 
and user dependent services. These ser- vices are controlled by the appropriate modules. The modular 
structure of the layer allows to extend or to exchange the services or their implementation. More detailed 
information can be found in [2]. 566 Application UbiComp API k,, Services Services k,. Services // 
 x o I ,rDAII,rPCM II ,rPCM Figure h Architecture Overview 2.3 API Layer The Ubicomp API Layer hides 
the internal representa- tion and allows applications to access the system inde- pendent from the actual 
implementation and configura- tion of the current environment. 3. ADAPTATION LAYER The Adaptation Layer 
allows to integrate communica- tion protocols or management systems into the manage- ment architecture. 
Depending on the kind of adaptation the modules are identified as Communication Adaptation Module (CA- 
Module) or System Adaptation Module (SA-Module). The following section is an introduction in the communi- 
cation model used in the UC Management Architecture. 3.1 Communication The UC Management Architecture 
is designed to sup- port messages; where a message is an arbitrary long sequence of bytes. The adaptation 
of different com- munication protocols is handled by the Communication Adaptation Modules. 3.2 Communication 
Adaptation Modules Communication Adaptation Modules axe used to inte- grate communication protocols. 
These communication protocols are used to control or to communicate with other devices or management 
systems. The main functions of these modules are (1) to pack proprietary messages go the general message 
form and reversely to unpack the data into a proprietary data stream, and (2) to route messages. 3.2.1 
Example: XIO CA-Module: RC5 routing X10 is a standard for home automation management. In addition to 
use X10 to control X10 units the X10 CA-Module allows to route other information through the X10 installation. 
RC5 code is used for remote controlling devices using infrared. To route R,C5 information it is packed 
to X10 house, and unit codes and transmitted using the X10 protocol. To allow another X10 CA-Module to 
de- tect that this information is routed RC5 code the CA- Module uses unused X10 function codes to tag 
the X10 commands. 3.2.2 Full-~Partial Service Routing Other CA-Modules located at the Network Adaptation 
Layer are only used to route information from one com- munication protocol to another. In contrast to 
usual network gateways the conversion is done with respect to the kind of information that should be 
converted. The module can define the set of information accepted for processing. Depending on whether 
everything is ac- cepted or not the module is named Full-Service (FS) or Partial Service (PS) CA-Module. 
3.3 System Adaptation Modules System Adaption Modules (SA-Module) are used to in- tegrate other management 
systems. Examples for imaginable management systems for inte- gration are AMX, X10, Salutation, JetSend, 
Jini. To integrate a management system (1) a SA-Module is able to list the devices in the source management 
system and to add the devices to Device Services. Depending on the source system this can be fully automated 
or with some manual work. Changes in the source environment should be recognized by the SA-Module and 
updated using the Device Services. (2) For the communication to the source system it is often necessary 
to add a appropriate CA-Module. 4. CONCLUSIONS This work presents the adaptation of existing standards 
in a Ubiquitous Computing Management Architecture. The Management Architecture allows the flexible inte- 
gration of heterogeneous devices, communication proto- cols or even of different automation standards. 
The architecture uses three layers: the Adaptation Layer, the Service Layer, and the API Layer. Applications 
us- ing this architecture can access the necessary devices through the Ubicomp API without handling special 
com- munication protocols, investigating the dynamic changes in the environment, or the users preferences. 
In this paper we have focussed on the underlying Adap- tation Layer and Modules. Communication protocols 
are integrated using Communication Adaptation (CA) Modules and other Management Systems are integrated 
using System Adaptation (SA) Modules. 5. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] <SinRef><author>M. Lauff</author>. <title>NA3 -networked appliances automation 
architecture</title>. <booktitle>In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Networked Appliances (IWNA)</booktitle>, <location>Kyoto, Japan</location>, <date>Nov. 
1998</date>. </SinRef>[2] <SinRef><author>M. Lauff</author>. <title>A ubiquitous computing communication and management architecture</title>. <booktitle>In Proceedings 
of the 1st International Workshop on Managing In-teractions in Smart Environments 'MANSE) 1999, LNCS</booktitle>. 
<publisher>Springer</publisher>, <date>1999</date>. </SinRef>(to appear). </RefA>567    
			
