
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Siggraph 
76, July 14-16 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania A DIGITAL VIDEO INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL SYSTEM ALLAN 
J. MYERS COMPUTER GRAPHICS RESEARCH GROUP THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY RESEARCH CENTER 1314 KINNEAR ROAD 
COLUMBUS, OHIO 43212 A concept of general purpose systems which gener­ ate, store, retrieve, process 
and display raster­ scan format images is developed. The general purpose nature of such systems allows 
the handling of static and dynamic images from multiple sources as well as system synthesized images 
while pre­ cluding the use of special function hardware. A particular system implementation is described. 
 The implementationwas accomplished with standard digital computer and video hardwarewith the exception 
of one special hybrid subsystem. Most of the equipment belongs to the digital computer class with the 
only video hardwarebeing a stand­ ard broadcast television receiver. The system has application to many 
areas including computer animation,medicine, computerized picture libraries and the study of the mechanisms 
of visual perception. Problems and future develop­ments are discussed. This research was supported in 
part by the National Science Foundation Division of Mathe­matical and Computer Sciences under grant DCR 
74­ 00768A01. 1. INTRODUCTION The Computer Graphics Research Group, of The Ohio State University, has 
long been interested in various uses of computers in conjunctionwith images. In searching for a general 
means with which to create, process, store and view images we have developed the concept of a general 
pur­pose image system. In our concept, such a system has a general purpose nature, a viewing mechanism,image 
storage and computer processing and uses a raster-scanformat image representa­tion. In our concept the 
general purpose nature of such a system consists of the ability to handle static and dynamic (suitable 
for the perception of motion) images of real and synthetic scenes and precludes the use of special function 
hardware. The system viewing mechanism presents static and dynamic images of informationcontent (resolution, 
 color, etc.) sufficient to trigger the desired response from the human visual system. Such a system 
is centered about the storage and retrieval of static and dynamic images to which other system functions 
such as image creation and display are subservient. Computerprocessing is used to tie the various components 
of the system together, to support the general nature of the system and to provide system functions 
which do not require a physical implementation. Raster-format image representationis used as a general 
means of handl­ing both real (digitized) and synthesized (both internal and external to the system) images. 
 Our intendeduse for the system concept described above is as an overall strategy within which to apply 
the tactics of implementating an actual system. The actual system is envisioned as being of sufficient 
generality and power to handle almost any graphical need within our area of interest. Note that our traditional 
area of interest, com­puter synthesized animation, has been expanded to include almost any use of images 
for scientific, technical and medical purposes. Our emphasis on dynamic (as opposed to static) images 
remains. I will refrain from trying to justify the "correct­ ness" of our strategy and tactics, leaving 
the issue to posterity and the usefulness (or lack thereof) of the system we build. With the above 
motivation,we are creating a digitalvideo informationstorage and retrieval system. Currentlywe are using 
a standard broad­ cast television as the viewing mechanism,a large capacity digital disk for image storage, 
a Digital Equipment CorporationPDP-11/45 minicomputer for computer processing and broadcast video for 
the raster-scan format image representation. Note that the broadcast video is not stored in composite 
NTSC format, but rather is stored as run-lengths of par­ ticular intensity-chromacombinations which 
are converted (in real time) to composite NTSC format for display. The use of run-length encoding is 
our response to the insufficiencyof current com­puter technologyto easily handle the large quan­tities 
of information implied by raster-format representationof dynamic images. Note, for example, that a raster-formatdynamic 
image of 512 by 512 resolution,8 bits per resolvable element information content, 30 frames per second 
display rate and 30 seconds duration requires over 235 millionbytes of storage. Although this formidable 
storage requirement is not prohibitive,the implied data transfer rate (8 million bytes per second) is 
prohibitivewithin our general purpose design strategy. This is due to the fact that although disks of 
over 200 million byte capacity are avail­able, the transferrate available is less than 2 million bytes 
per second. Although we feel that the "ultimate" solution will involve per resovable element (as opposed 
to run-length encoded) storage our perception of the current state of technology has resulted in our 
use of run-length encoding for the present. Since the primary issue in the implementation to date involves 
the handling of dynamic images, the current scheme of run-length encoding is emphasized in the implementationde­ 
scription below. 2. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION The part of the system currently implemented is shown in 
Figure 1. The TV is a standard Sony 19" is read from the disk, simple changes may be made in real-time 
directly to a static image buffered in main memory, etc. Further, the actual setup allows the use of 
other devices for playback, storage and manipulationof digitalvideo images. For example, a 6250 bpi, 
125 ips tape drive would be suitable. A dynamic sequence is transferredfrom the disk to the TV according 
to the following scheme. The 32KB run length buffer in Figure 2a is divided Figure 1. Digital Video 
Information portable. The run-length decoding and analog systems were constructed by Dr. John Standhammer 
and his associates (DIGITEC, Inc.; Box 5486; Raleigh, N.C. 27607). The analog system and rearend of the 
run-length decoding system are similar to an earlier system built under Stand­ hammer's direction. The 
decoding system converts our run-length format to that used in Stand­ hammer's earlier system. The resolution 
of the system is determined by the subpart with the least resolution capability, namely the TV. Thus, 
the resolutionis standard TV resolution and even though the system has 512 PIXELS along a scan line, 
an observer will never see more than about 300. The most general design goal was to allow the flexibilityusually 
associatedwith a general pur­pose digital computer. As an example of a design decisionmade on this basis 
and its consequences, consider the connection of the run-length decoding system to the rest of the computer 
system. The decoding system could have been connected directly to or set up to read directly from the 
disk. This would have avoided some of the data transfers over the UNIBUS producedby the actual setup. 
The actual setup, however, permits all of the flexi­bility usually associated with a general purpose 
peripheral. Thus, under program control a dynamic image may be transferred from the disk a static image 
may be buffered in the internal buffer of the decoding system, a static image may be buf­fered in the 
main memory of the processor,the internal buffer may be used to hold a static image while a new version 
is being calculated in main memory, the internal buffer may be used to hold a static image while another 
randomly accessed one 46 Storage and Retrieval System. into two 16KB buffers for double buffering. A 
 buffer is filled from the disk. While this buffer is being filled, informationto/from the disk controller 
from/to the CPU must be multiplexed with the data from the disk. This multiplexing is automaticallyhandled 
by the UNIBUS priority arbi­ tration unit. Fortunately,the quantity of con­ trol information necessaryto 
run the disk is a small percentage of the quantity of data being transferred. Also fortunate is the 
fact that the dual ported MOS main memory permits the instruc­ tions and associated data of the control 
program to be fetched simultaneouslywith the data being stored from disk. Thus, there are virtuallyno 
memory cycles lost directly to the control program. The buffer that is not being filled from the disk 
is being emptied into the decoding system as shown in Figure 2b. Of course, if the long-term trend of 
the disk is to be "ahead" of the 30 frame/ second rate of the TV (as is typically the case) then one 
buffer will be in the process of being emptied into the decoding system and the other will be full. The 
control program will be waiting for the buffer being emptied to be completely empty at which time it 
will read the next 16K bytes from the disk. The situation with the traffic on the UNIBUS is similar 
to the case of Figure 2a. It should be noted at this point that the situations of Figure 2a and 2b exist 
simultaneously,thus creating an incredible multiplexingproblem. How­ever, the situation will never get 
out of hand as the primary factor limiting the maximum amount of information going to the TV and, thus, 
the amount of information flowing in the various parts of the system, is the disk transfer rate. This 
rate is sufficiently slow (relatively) so that there will  Figure 2. Information Flows Through the System 
when Displaying a Dynamic Sequence. not be a problem. The complexitypermitted by the disk transfer 
rate will be analyzed in the section on dynamic image capability. As is seen in Figure 2c, information 
flowing into the run length decoding system is buffered in an internal 32KB MDS buffer before it is 
decoded. This is the reason that information may be trans­ ferred from the MDS main memorybuffer into 
the de­ coding system with no concern for field or frame boundaries. More explicitly, since field and 
 frame boundary information is contained in the data, putting off decoding the data until after informationtransfer 
permits the data to be treated as a uniform stream. The data flow through the decoding system is as 
shown in Figure 2c although it is not of particular concern here. The details of the run length format 
are given in Figure 3. Overall, this format was designedto achieve display of reasonably complex images 
given the transfer rate capabilities of the disk. The run length data formats have been created as 
"in­ structions" so that the control bits can be separated from the data and thus long strings of "low 
overhead" data have been made possible. A video sequence may be considered to be composed of a sequence 
of alternating fields. A frame is simply the result of the alternation between the two types of field. 
Consequently,there is no need for a run length instruction related to frames but there is one that specifies 
which of two types of field is to start. The format for a field specification consists of a field start 
in­struction followed by zero or more scan line specifications. Zero or more? Yes, because the field 
start instruction causes the rest of the current field to be displayed as the last speci­fied intensity-chromacombination. 
Between two start of field instructions, each scan line of a field continues until an end of line instruction 
is encountered. The rest of the line (if any) after an end of line is displayed as the last specified 
intensity-chroma combination. Intensity-chromacombinations along a scan line are specified by run type 
instructions as "modi­ fied" by previous palette loads. The decoding system contains a 256 x 15 palette. 
Each 15 bit entry may be loaded to specify any one of the 32768 intensity-chromacombinations displayable. 
 For sequences containing fewer than 257 different intensity-chromacombinations, the palette.needbe 
 loaded only once before the start of the first field. For sequences in which every individual field 
contains fewer than 257 different intensity­ chroma combinations,but the sequence as a whole contains 
more, the palette may be completelyor partially reloaded as necessarybetween fields. For fields that 
contain greater than 256 different combinations, the palette may be completely or partially reloadedwithin 
the field, although in some cases, there will be insufficient buffering in the later part of the decoding 
system to with­ stand this. Reloading within a scan line is im­practical as this implies that the average 
run length is less than two and the bufferingwill probablygive out.  3. DYNAMIC IMAGE CAPABILITY The 
calculations below are intended to give a quantative indicationof the capabilitiesof the system. It 
should be noted that these calculations are for best cases insofar as no attempt has been made to account 
for degradation due to palette loads, etc. Further, in order to provide the clearest calculations, minor 
overheads such as start of field instructions are ignored. The following calculations assume an average 
of one byte per run. This case is approached for images with (typically) fewer than 33 intensity-chroma 
 combinationswithin a scan line and fewer than 257 within a field. The disk specifications are those 
 of the manufacturer. Since the RJPO4 disk system is (relatively) the slowest part of the system, it 
 determines the maximum performance level. For con­ tiguously stored files (as video files have to be 
 in this system) the disk can be read continuously at maximum possible speed with the exception that 
 some time (7 milliseconds)is lost when changing cylinders. Since there are 19 tracks per cylinder 
and the disk requires 16.7 milliseconds for one revolution,one cylinder can be read every 317 milliseconds. 
Since 214,016 bytes are stored per cylinder, the average data transfer rate is 675 bytes per millisecond. 
Allowing 10 milliseconds for change of cylinder, 207,266 (214,016minus 6,750) bytes can be obtained 
for every cylinder read. Note that the storage space "passed over" for change of cylinder is best wasted 
as an extra revolutionwould be required to retrieve it. Thus, the average data transfer rate is 654 (207,266 
divided by 317) bytes per millisecond. Since each TV frame lasts about 33 milliseconds,this is 21,582 
bytes per frame. At one byte per run, this is 21,582 runs per frame. Since the disk has 411 cylinders 
and the system is retrieving 207,266 bytes per cylinder, there are 85,186,362 retriev­able bytes. At 
a maximum of 21,582 runs per frame, this represents 3,947 frames. Since the data is contiguous, any reduction 
in runs per frame di­rectly translates into more frames. Thus, at 2,158 runs per frame there are 39,470 
frames. The figures above are for one disk. However, each RJPO4 disk system controller is capable of 
handling eight drives. Further, a PDP-11/45 easily has suf­ficient device register space and unit load 
capa­bility to handle ten controllers. Multiplying the above figures by eighty we get a system capable 
of over 300,000 frames at over 20,000 runs per frame and over 3,000,000 frames at over 2,000 runs per 
 frame. At 30 frames per second, 3,000,000 frames represents over one day (24 hours) of video. Note 
that it is not unusual for a production computer center to have on-line disk storage capacity greater 
than that represented by eighty RPO4 drives. Unfortunately,calculations such as those above do not 
give a clear idea of the subjective image com­plexity that can be achievedby a given number of runs. 
Further, static images, as might be repro­duced with this paper, simply do not convey the proper idea. 
Consequently,all visual results have been relegated to the videotape to be shown with the presentation 
of this paper.  4. APPLICATIONS The uses of this system are many and varied. Entire libraries of static 
and/or dynamic sequences  Where: Each rectangle represents one byte Numbers are the number of bits 
assigned to the fields X = Unused Field OP = Operation Code F = Field (0 or 1, even or odd) to be displayed 
 L = Value Indicating a Run Length NIC = Value Indicating Number of Intensity-Chroma Combinations to 
Follow NR = Value Indicating Number of Runs to Follow PA = Palette Address Bits Since the palette contains 
256 entries, 8 bits are required for a complete PA specification. In instruction types 1 and 2 the high 
order bits (3 or 5 bits for types 1 or 2 respectively) of the PA are specified once for the number of 
runs indicated in the instruction. The low order PA bits (5 or 3 bits) are specified as part of each 
 run. Instructiontype 3 specifies only the low order 3 bits of the PA. The remaining bits are the same 
as for the most recent full PA specified. Figure 3. Run Length "Instruction Set". may be developed. 
The graphical results of a computer animation sequences may be created and series of experiments may 
 be stored for later re-edited all within a digital computer system. trieval of the results for study 
and comparison. Perhaps more important than its use as a storage In addition to the motive mentioned 
in the intro­ system is the fact that the video data may be read duction, we had a particular application 
in mind back and calculations done on it. Thus, computer­ for the video system. A visible surface algorithm 
 ized comparisons and manipulations are possible. previouslydeveloped by the author permits very There 
are applications to research into visual rapid calculation of 3-D color dynamic sequences perception. 
For example, if two sequences are (detailed information about this algorithm is interleaved such that 
alternating fields are taken available from the author). We are currently from two different sequences,what 
will be per-using a second algorithm of the same general type ceived? What might this reveal about how 
the to generatethe visible surface calculated images mechanisms of vision operate? In another area, 
shown in the videotape presented with this paper. We have proposedto develop a third algorithm of the 
same generaltype which will be capable of visible surface calculating scenes of at least one million 
edges. This visible surface algorithm and the digital video informationstorage and re­trieval system 
are to be two major components of our complete system. Eventuallyour entire system concept will be 
implemented (and run length encoding replaced by per resolvable element storage). With such a system 
it should be possible to replace every piece of equipment currentlyused by the broadcast TV industry 
with the exception of cameras, trans­mitters, monitors and other real world interfaces. Video recorders, 
playback units and editors will all be able to be replacedby a general purpose system capable of all 
of the old operations plus any new ones that are programmed into the system. Perhaps most important is 
the potential improve­ment in quality. Currently, every copy (genera­tion) made of any video material 
results in degradation of the image due to noise and repli­cation inaccuracies. With a digital system 
a copy can be made exactly. Further, image enhancement may be programmed into the system to produce a 
copy of greater quality than the original  5. PROBLEMSAND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS The system implementation 
described above has the problem that for some purposes the image com­ plexity achievable is insufficient. 
For example, digitized data of natural scenes essentiallyre­ quires per resolvable element storage. 
Since the lack of capability in this area violates our system concept we intend to correct the problem 
 eventually. However, this will occur only when the technologyexists to use a per resolvable element 
storage scheme. Note that we do not con­ sider the use of digitized composite video to be a solution 
as the composite format is not amenable to a general purpose system. This is due to the desire, in a 
general purpose system, to easily create and modify an image without violating the rules of the image 
format. With composite video, care must be taken to insure the integrity of the relationshipsbetween 
phase and amplitude modu­lated carriers and subcarriers and synchronization and reference signals. This 
is, at best, diffi­cult. Eventually,of course, we intend to implement our entire system concept as 
described in the intro­ duction and application sections. In regard to this it should be noted that 
we have requested major research support from the National Science Foundation. The support requested, 
if funded, will result in an essentially complete implementa­ tion of our system concept as well as the 
use of the complete system for other research. 
			
