
 A MICROCOMPUTER BASED AUTOMATED SPECIMEN WEIGHING AND RECORDING SYSTEM Mark Mills Battelle Small Systems 
Group Columbus, Ohio INTRODUCTION This paper will discuss a portable microcomputer based data acquisition 
system for toxicology research. The data acquisition system and the companion data base were designed 
and built by a team of individuals at Battelle, which consisted of Barry Brownstein, Jack Webb, Robert 
Weiner, and myself. The remainder of this paper will describe the factors which affected the design of 
the system, as well as details regarding the system's implementation. We will first examine the motivation 
for such a system. Battelle's Animal Research facility utilizes approximately 55,000 laboratory animals 
for its toxicology and cancer research. Because of this large animal population, manual data collection 
is too slow and error-prone. This is especially true during animal weighing sessions. In some toxicology 
studies, animals are weighed to determine their net weight loss or gain since the previous weighing session, 
as a function of their food intake or treatment. The required data form each animal includes its cage 
number, animal number, animal weight, and the weight of the unconsumed food. Since a single research 
study might require 800 animals a day to be weighed, manual data collection was becoming an impossible 
task and an automated weighing system was desired. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS The design for the weighing 
system had to satisfy five requirements: The system must work with any weighing protocol.* The automated 
system descri- bed below allows three different proto- cols: animal weight only, food weight only, or 
both anumal and food weight together. This arrangement allows the weighing station to be used by all 
studies regardless of their weighing protocol. * A study protocol is a record of when and how animals 
are treated, fed and weighed.  Animal deaths that occur between weighing sessions need to be recorded 
so that only the most current animal data is used for subsequent weighing sessions.  Statistical information 
must be produced using a link to a set of statistical programs.  The system should be portable and 
easy to use.  The system must accurately record the required weight data.  To best meet these requirements, 
a data base con- taining information concerning each study and its animals was developed. This data base 
resides on a large general-purpose computer, and allows on- line entry of animal deaths, easy update 
with the data collected by the weighing stations, and a link to a statistical package. Figure i shows 
the relationship of the animal weighing station to the data base. All of the weighing station components 
were mount- ed on a stainless steel lab cart with wheels in order to make the system portable. Its size 
allows easy passage through doorways and eleva- tors. To make it simple to use, the machine uses a microprocessor 
to prompt the technician for all the required information in the proper order. The system is also flexible 
enough to allow for special circumstances or unusual conditions via the use of special function keys. 
These special keys will be discussed below. To meet the accu- racy requirement, an electronic balance 
is inter- faced to and is under the control of the micro- processor. This allows only stable and correct 
weights to be recorded. DATABASE INTERFACE AND CONFIGURATION The special purpose data base designed 
for the toxicology application uses several different file structures to store the required information 
and generate the reports required by the researchers. The primary storage type is the animal record, 
which contains all the pertinent information about each animal in a study. Such information as the animal's 
number, sex, status, location, body weights, food weights, pathology, and urin-  &#38;#169;1979-ACM 
0-89791-007-9/79/1000-0053 $00.75 see ii 53 #PROMPT~ PROMPTTAPE ~ " ~ LINK _ i~ -----~ ~  J"c~~~ y~o 
| WEIGHING I I ON I PACi,AGE I STATION I I LARGE COMPUTER l TAPE J UPDATE "~"2' ' ! ON-L,NE I ENT:~Y 
OF DEATHS I  OCCURRING I  DURING OFF J WEIGHING I TIr'4ES I FIGURE I. RELATIONSHIP OF WEIGHING STATION 
TO THE DATA BASE 54 analysis can be stored in these records. These records are stored in such a manner 
that storage device capacity is maximized. At present, only food and body weights are stored; the other 
 features are for future enhancements. The large computer database is a convenient way to maintain records 
on the large animal population in the animal facility. It provides high speed data tape entry, update 
processing, ~and prompt tape generation. A brief discussion of the data base follows and is pictorially 
represented in Figure 2" The database is initially created by a database file building program from 
card input containing animal number, study number, and cage number. Each animal record is created with 
pointers to special records which contain animal and food weights. Prompt tapes can then be generated 
from the database by study groups. These prompt tapes are used by the microcomputer-based weighing 
sta- tions in the data collection process. The col- lected data, which was placed on a cassette tape 
 by the weighing system, is fed to an update pro- gram which maintains the database. Two other modes 
complete the database system. The first mode allows interactive entry of animal deaths. This capability 
is needed so that only the most current animal data is used for weighing sessions. The second mode generates 
temporary data files from the database to be used as input to a statistical package. This gives the re- 
searcher the ability to select data without constraint to the basic animal record type. WEIGHING STATION 
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION The portable weighing station is made up of the following devices: CRT terminal, 
control panel, electronic balance, cassette drive, microproces- sor unit, and a small printer. The 
physical lay- out of the unit is shown in Figure 3.  Its straightforward internal architecture  The 
ability to utilize relocatable code  Our existing in-house programming tools  Our familiarity with 
it from other projects  Figure4 illustrates the basic architecture of the weighing station. The weighing 
system centers around the M6802 microcomputer board, which con- tains iK bytes RAM, 6K bytes of ROM, 
two asynchro- nous serial I/O ports, two 8 bit parallel I/0 ports and a software programmable timer, 
all of which communicate to the rest of the system via an 86 pin bus. One serial port is used to inter- 
 face the cassette drive and printer to the micro- processor. The parallel ports interface the special 
purpose control panel to the microproces- sor. The electronic scale is interfaced to the system by 
using a 32 input/32 output module. The scale itself has a 50 pin connector from which status information 
can be obtained and request informa- tion can be sent. In addition, the current weight on the scale is 
also available in BCD format from the connector. By using the outputs form the scale, a simple handshake 
type arrangement can be set up between the scale and the microcomputer. This arrangement will allow only 
stable, correct weights to be read by the microcomputer. This is an important feature when the object 
to be weighed is a curious laboratory animal. The animal, through its movement, may cause the scale 
reading to fluctuate considerably. The final two circuit boards were added to in- crease the available 
memory space. The available RAM is increased an additional 16K and the space available for firmware 
program storage is also increased to 16K. OPERATOR INTERFACE HARDWARE DESIGN Our approach to hardware 
design has been to use proven off the shelf microcomputer boards when- ever possible. There are several 
reasons for this, among them are:  Hardware development time is reduced  Standard boards are easy 
to replace should failure occur  Software testing on actual system equipment can begin earlier thereby 
decreasing total system design time  With this criterion in mind, we selected a microcomputer board 
utilizing the Motorola M6802 microprocessor. The selection of the M6800 family of microprocessors was 
based on several reasons, including: Special function buttons are a useful technique in tailoring a 
system to a particular applica- tion. Through the use of a parallel digital input/output card and a 
specially-designed operator's panel, the operator is able to inter- act with the system without using 
the CRT termi- nal. The panel contains two lights which the processor uses to inform the operator that 
the last weight has been captured and that the next animal or food container can be weighed. Since the 
majority of the operator's responses are indications that he is ready for the system to perform some 
action, these responses are made via push button. Examples of this type of input include: "weigh this 
specimen" "the animal is missing" "the animal is dead"  55 -4 ~=1 I ~ A cO 8~ I cD r   / °1 I rtl 
 o 56 i" I Control CRT Panel Termina! ~ I ~Z~ZZ~Z~ U~J [--,~ El~ctro'~ic I 7)iF IY -~ Processor e V(~--~'I---{/ 
IViI "rapelllJ ' ~ ' ~ 11 li Drive Figure 3. In some cases, the operator's response does not lend itself 
to short answers or is not predi- ctable. In such cases, the CRT terminal is a better vehicle for system 
communication. An example is the processor's reaction to the "missing animal" button. Since the processor 
has access to data concerning the particular study involved via the cassette drive, the software can 
determine if more than one animal should be in the cage. Based on this determination, the operator can 
be asked to supply further identi- fication data on the missing animal only if it is required. SOFTWARE 
DESIGN  Much attention has recently been given to the increasing cost of software development and program 
maintenance. As the cost of hardware continues to decrease, program design and imple- mentation plays 
the major role in developing any new system. Because of these two factors and the anticipated size of 
the control program, the decision was made to use a high-level language for microcomputers to implement 
the software. The language chosen was PL/W 1 a PL/i-like language which allowed the large control program 
for the weighing station to be coded and debugged in a much shorter time than if assembly language had 
been used. The use of the high level language also results in a structured, well-documented, easy-to-follow 
program. iPL/W is a copyrighted product of the Wintek Corporation, Lafayette, Indiana  The actual design 
of the weighing station software was done using a high-level requirements language. The choice of the 
requirements language for program design instead of conventional flowcharts was made to allow a smoother 
and more rapid transition to the actual high-level programming language. Because of the size and complexity 
of the software, the use of this design methodology significantly reduced the software development and 
debugging time. A macro-preprocessor was also developed to be used with the high level language. This 
macro- preprocessor works in the same manner as macro expanders for assembly language do. Sections of 
high level "canned" code can be used to set up and initialize input/output ports, programmable timers, 
and other support devices by one state- ment macro calls. In addition, a logical input/ output structure 
can be defined with "sysgen-like" macros. The result of these commands are data structures which are 
manipulated by standard run-time routines to implement physical I/O. When the preprocessor finishes, 
the source program then goes through the normal cycle of compilation and linking. The macro preprocessor 
has two sources of input for macro definitions. The first is a standard macro library which contains 
generalized routines that are useable in many applications. The second is a set of macros that are application 
specific and not of general use. In this way, standard routines may be mixed with routines for special 
one time applications thereby preserving the permanent library. This is a very powerful and useful technique, 
because most of the macros are 57 I r.A 61:6,2 ) MiCnO PP, O(:t.SS OR SYSTEM F,I~S CAS_ETTE DIGITAL 
CONTROL DATA PROGRAM [)RIVE SCALE "PANEL MEMORY MEMORY i CRT TERMINAL FIGURE 4 PRIN1ER standard. They 
may be used on several projects. This reuseability increases the life-time of the software and prevents 
the "reinventing" of the same code from project to project. PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION The weighing station 
is ready to use when the power is turned on. The processor leads the technician through the weighing 
sequence via a question and answer session conducted using the CRT terminal. Any time a simple "yes" 
or "no" is not a sufficient answer, the system displays all possible choices for the response. This allows 
the technician to choose rather than remember or be forced to look up the proper response. The system 
allows any weighing protocol to be chosen via a switch on the control panel. Dead or missing animals 
are also reported with push buttons on the control panels, as described above. The break button on 
the panel allows the technician to interrupt the weighing process and enter the comland level. At this 
level, it is possible to use the CRT terminal in order to change the amount of prompting information, 
enter a comment on the data tape about unusual circum- stances, display the last several weighing opera- 
 tions, and end the weighing session. The ability to display the last several weighing operations allows 
the technician to catch mistakes and correct them before continuing. The system also does limit checking 
on the body and food weights. This feature prevents the technician from in- advertantly leaving his 
hand on the scale or otherwise causing a grossly inaccurate weight to be recorded. This error checking 
is an attempt to catch errors while they can easily be cor- rected--while the animal or food is still 
on the scale--and to prevent errors from being recorded. Depending on the particular type of study, 
the weighing system can hold enough information in memory to process between 1500 and 2500 animals. This 
limit could be easily increased in the future by adding additional memory cards. CONCLUSION The above 
approach has been used to build three functioning data acquisition weighing systems for Battelle's Animal 
Research facility. These units have:  Significantly increased data accuracy  Eliminated manual data 
transcription  Reduced manpower requirements  Reduced weighing times  Future enhancements include 
using the weighing station to capture blood data as well as the other data types mentioned.  58  
			
