
 ADMINISTRATIVE WORKSTATION PROJECT: COMPUTER TRAINING FOR THE VICE Rita Pavolka, Faculty Education 
and Instructor Specialist, University Corn uting Sm ces 1000 East 17th &#38;reet Bloomin ton, IN 47405 
(812) 85$3457 lnternet: PAVOLK#l@UCS.lNDDINA.EDU Bifnef: PAVOLKA@IUBACS Susan Sfager, University Direcfor, 
Policy and Planning forStudent Compufing Universif Compufin Services Indiana d niversity B oomingfon 
f Poplars 811 Bloomin font IN 47405 (812) 85&#38;870 Internef: STAGERWKS.INDIANA. EDU Bifnef: STAGERW.IBACS 
THE PROJECT SUMMARY In July 1990, the Dean and Executive Director of University Computing Services, (UCS) 
the Associate Director of the Workstations Division, and the Manager of the Center for Innovative Computer 
Applications created the Administrative Workstation Project. Administrators were defined as the Vice 
President for Finance and Administration, the university staff who are part of his regular staff meetings, 
and their support staff. The project included extensive instruction about both hardware and software 
components of a Macintosh, on site/day-to-day support and resource management, access to UCS technical 
expertise, implementation of both basic and advanced computing applications in administrative offices, 
and restructuring of the existing office environment to incorporate a LAN­based work group concept. Permission 
to copy wifhout f% all or parf of fhis maferial  PRESIDENT S OFFICE The project was undertaken to enhance 
the administrative computing environment at Indiana University, to use technology to effectively alter 
the intra-group working style, to increase administrative knowledge about the technology, to increase 
use of the technology, and to promote a distributed computing environment. Judging from the evaluations 
provided by the project participants, the project has been successful. Several other indicators suggest 
growth of computer knowledge, increased productivity, and increased creativity have been achieved. A 
number of these participants were computer illiterate and are now enthusiastic about the use of their 
Macintoshes. The formal project concluded on June 30,1991. CHRONOLOGY Indiana University is experiencing 
an information explosion similar to that experienced at other colleges and universities. This information 
explosion, co;pled with the physical growth of its eight campuses, has created a growing need to apply 
computing technology to administrative problems. To meet this need, Indiana University administrators 
in the Finance and Administration division chose to take a holistic approach to integrating technology 
into the daily routine of their administrative offices. As part of this holistic approach, University 
Computing Services and Management Advisory Services divisions at Indiana University were charged by the 
Vice President of Finance and Administration with developing a project that would enhance the administrative 
computing environment of the entire division, increase isgrantedprovidedthaf fhecopiesarenofmadeor distributedfordirecfcommercialadvanfage,fheACA4copyrightnoticeandfhetitleofthepublicatwn 
andifsdate appwr, and notice is p.ven fhaf copying 13by permission of fhe Association of Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise,orforepublish, requiresafeeandlor speczficpermission. Copyright 1991 ACM 0-89791 -454-6/91 
/0010/0275... $1.50 Figure 1-Class Satisfaction Rating knowledge and use of the technology by all By 
August, a technical and financial analysis of administrators in the division, result in greater the proposals 
had been completed, a functional creativity and productivity in the management analysis of the computing 
needs of the function, and improve attitudes toward administrative offices in l%ance and technology. 
Administration had been completed, Apple Corporation s proposal was accepted, a project The original 
project team met for the first time proposal had been reviewed by senior in August 1990, and the Dean 
and Executive management, and 29 administrators and their Director outlined roIes for the team members. 
The assistants had been selected to partiapate in the original core team included UCS staff from Support 
project. The Partiapants ranged from the Systems (including the Education Program), technically sophisticated 
to self-described Information Systems, Networks, and Workstations computer phobics with two-finger typing 
skills. staff, but was purposely kept small for more flexibility. The project team was instructed to 
By November, the hourly support personnel include other staff members on an as needed basis. had been 
hired and had placed Macintoshes and a The original team met with vendors, and ultimately suite of wftware 
on the desks of the 29 Fimnce and received three proposals for the project. Administration executives 
and their assistants. Throughout the fall and spring, the project 00 276 ACM SKWCCS XIX 1991 0 e . 
c c Looking @r Answers participants attended the computing education series. The emphasis during this 
period was on basic skills acquisition and providing the participants with previously existing functionality 
on the new hardware platform. In January, an update on the project was distributed to senior management. 
The update indicated that the original human resource estimates were accurate to date and outlined the 
next phase of the project. During the early spring of 1991, the focus of th[e project was on providing 
more advanced functionality and innovation to the participants. In the late spring, the focus shifted 
to transitioning thle participants from the intensive support environment of the project to the mainstream 
support mechanisms provided by University Computing Services. The focus during the early summer has 
been on evaluating the project and considering the appropriateness of repeating the project with another 
group of administrators. The formal project concluded June 30,1991. This rest of this paper will focus 
on those aspects of the project most affected by the education and training series developed for this 
project by the UCS Education Program team. INCREMENTAL SPECIALIZED INSTRUCTION AND SUPPORT General 
functional requirements to be achieved by the project included ease of use, consistency, access, support, 
and security. The education and training series had great impact on the ease of use and support requirements. 
Ease of use dictated an intuitive interface combined with incremental, specialized instruction. Ease 
of use also dictated that ergonomic principles be employed in the design of the environment. Apple Macintoshes 
provided the intuitive interface. The incremental, specialized instruction was provided through an Administrative 
Workstation Series developed by the UCS Education Program staff. Throughout the late fall and spring, 
project participants attended a variety of these sessions. Hourly support personnel, UCS Departmental 
Consulting and Workstation Division representatives, provided supplementary, individualized instruction 
on both routine and office-specific computing applications, as time permitted. The Information Services 
representative provided individualized training sessions and trouble shooting for accessing the IBM 3090. 
Without exception, those attending the classes rated them as satisfactory, with the majority rating them 
as outstanding, as shown in the figure below. Sufficient support required that project participants have 
access to qualified technicians during the transition period between the old technology environment and 
the new. As part of the grant, Apple Corporation provided funding for 40/hour per week, part time support 
personnel to assist the 29 administrators. Every effort was made to hire support staff who were critical 
thinkers, could verbalize technical problems at a level appropriate for a wide range of users, were thoughtful, 
saw things in the proper perspective, were aware of technological alternatives, and allowed the project 
participants to make their own decisions. In addition to the hourly support, the Departmental Consultant 
for the participating administrative units, the Workstation representative, and the Education Program 
representative maintained constant contact on support issues.  PROGRESS TOWARD GOAL OF INCREASED KNOWLEDGE 
Theproject was undertaken for five primary reasons: to enhance the administrative computing environment, 
to use technology to positively change the way administrative office functions were performed, to increase 
administrative knowledge about the technology, to increase use of the technology, and to promote a distributed 
computing environment. The project placed mid-range Macintosh computers and a suite of software on the 
desks of 29 Finance and Administration executives and their assistants, replacing in many instances a 
mixture of aging microcomputers and terminals or non­supported hardware and software. In other cases, 
the Macintosh replaced mid-range or low-end DOS systems that had won the loyalty of the office staff. 
On their new computers desired functionality was achieved in the following categories: communications 
(e-mail), on line referenct..s, text editing, graphics, spreadsheet, database, project management, desk 
tools and printing. 20 10 0 Figure 2-Participation PROGRESS TOWARD GOAL OF MORE KNOWLEDGE AND COMFORT 
WITH TECHNOLOGY Without exception, the participants reported that they were more knowledgeable about 
computing and information technology as a result of the project. Commented one executive, I feel like 
we re on the cutting edge of administrative computing now. The Administrative Education Series was the 
primary vehicle for assisting project participants to acquire more knowledge about the technology. 278* 
ACM SICUCCSXlX1991* ******0000000 in Classes The graph below details participation in recommended classes 
on Macintosh basics, Mac WordPerfect, utilities, file sharing on the server, Excel, and optional classes 
on Persuasion, MacDraw, FileMaker Pro, Online seMces, project management software, and VAX mail. Note 
that attendance was low at the VAX mail cksses because of anticipation of a new mail system. Participants 
did not want to learn one mail system and then learn another within three months. The project sought 
to create a technological environment utilizing LAN-based technologies which would change the way that 
university business was conducted and provide a stimulating environment in which to work. No direct measures 
of creativity and productivity were employed. Not oo Looking for Answers surprisingly, the application 
that made project participants feel most creative was graphics. Another application that piqued the interest 
of several project participants was presentation graphics. One office advanced from hand-drafted overheads 
to overheads created with specialized software. To evaluate progress toward this goal, the project participants 
were interviewed. With few exceptions, interviews revealed that the participants style of completing 
daily work and interacting with each other had changed, often resulting in greater efficiency. The project 
reduced barriers. By providing the project participants with the same tools to do their work, the office 
environments no longer created a barrier to the exchange of information. An administrative assistance 
said it best, perhaps, Before the project, we shared documents within this office. We now can share documents 
with other units. The project has broadened our community, For some project participants with minimal 
previous exposure to computing technology, the project changed their focus. Commented one administrator, 
I m glad I went through the program. It has changed the way I work. I use my Mac as my desktop now. I 
come in the morning, set up my desktop with mail and applications, jump in and out of applications. I 
ve shifted my focus from paper to the workstation. We share documents and I seldom print anything. A 
reduction in the number of documents printed was a common theme in the interviews. However, none of the 
offices were naive enough to believe that they were moving toward a paperers office concept. Another 
common theme was that executives were creating more of their own memos, which they characterized as a 
productivity gain. An interesting phenomenon has occurred over the course of the project. Some of the 
project participants became more independent computists, contrary to our predictions. A number of the 
project participants now report that they are less likely to call a UCS support service than in the past 
because they are more confident in their own skills to solve the problem and more confident in the ability 
of others in their office to help them with their problems. Even administrators from offices that already 
were heavy users of technology reported work style changes. One executive noted that although his style 
of work hadn t changed, the sty le of those around him did, indirectly affecting him. Another technically 
proficient administrator admitted that in spite of a technical background, the project had made a difference. 
We use the server to get access to the documents we re using. My assistant notifies me of the name of 
the document, and it atmyconvenience.  I accessWe really have changed the way we do business. Only two 
project participants noted productivity gains related to the ability to communicate with physically distant 
staff or colleagues. Perhaps few gains were made in this area because the project participants were located 
in just two campus buildings. Two project participants, both heavy users of technology prior to the project, 
concludwl that they did not achieve any productivity or creativity gains. Summarized one executive, Basically, 
I have achieved equivalency with the functionality I had in my previous computing environments. These 
executives did note that they were using some new technologies that were beneficial. Many of the project 
participants commented that they felt more at ease with computing technology since the project. Unfortunately, 
not all project participants feIt comfortable with the technology. One office experienced frequent server/software 
compatibility problems not encounterwl by the other offices participating in the project. Attempts by 
the computer center staff to isolate the problem were relatively unsuccessful. As a result, frustration 
was expressed by members of the affected office. The problems have since been resolved. There is some 
evidence that the project participants used more diverse technologies and used technology more frequently 
as a result of the project. Using specialized software that counted the number of times an application 
was launched, it was determined that the project participants used more applications after the first 
nineteen weeks of the project than previously. Not surprisingly, electronic mail was the most frequently 
used application prior to the project, followed by word processing. The most frequently used application 
software during the project was WordPerfect, followed by TN3270, which was used to access institutional 
data and thee-mail system. By the conclusion of the project, participants used a wider range of computing 
applications. OBSTACLES TO ACHIEVING PROJECT GOALS There were two major obstacles preventing project 
participants from fully benefiting from the technology, the task of unlearning technology and the mixed 
platform environment within an office that the project created.  UNLEARNING Several of the offices already 
had very sophisticated computing environments. In order to participate in the project, these offices 
chose to switch to the computing platform adopt~ by the project. The switch amounted to taking one step 
backward to go two steps forward. The one step backward was extremely frustrating. While some project 
participants were unlearning computer technology, others were struggling to unlearn other technologies. 
I m still using electronic communication infrequently. My first instinct is still to pickup the phone, 
admitted one executive. File transfer software was evaluated that would allow project participants to 
share documents with other staff in the Finance and Administration division or outside of the division 
who were not using the Macintosh platform, File sharing was not completely seamless in the eyes of the 
project participants. In pre-project interviews, participants expressed alarm about moving from a satisfactory 
computing environment to the unknown. Post­project interviews revealed similar sentiments with a new 
twist. Now the project participants were concerned that the staff outside the project learn how to communicate 
effectively with their new computing environment. COMPETING PRIORITIES OF PROJECT PARTKXPANTS The project 
did not take place in a vacuum. Project participants hold key positions in a Big Ten research university. 
Business as usual was the prevailing theme of the project. As a result, project participants did not 
always take full advantage of the training opportunities. Consequently, many project participants either 
could not fully participate in the training program or could not find time to experiment with and practice 
new computing skills learned at the training session. Complained one administrative assistant, The biggest 
draw back to the instructional program was that we didn t have time to play with the technology after 
class, to reinforce what we ve learned. It was impossible to schedule the training sessions to please 
everyone participating in the project. Some participants requested that the cIasses be held earlier in 
the morning, minimizing interference with daily activities. Other project participants with family responsibilities 
in the morning hours found the early morning classes disrupted their family routine. Some project participants 
preferred to work for an hour or so at their regular job before they escaped to the computer cIasses. 
Quoting one participant, 1 would have preferred that the classes were spaced more closely. I think I 
would have retained more. And I prefer mid-morning classes. It gives me time to handle routine office 
functions before I leave for class. OTHER OUTCOMES: KNOWLEDGE OF HOW ADMINISTRATORS LIKE TO LEARN AND 
IMPETUS FOR OTHER INNOVATIONS The project provided UCS with knowledge about how top administrators like 
to learn. Evaluations completed after every training session revealed near unanimous satisfaction with 
the class series (see graph). The administrators did have suggestions abOut how the education program 
could be restructured for the next group of administrators, however. For every administrator who told 
us that the classes had been paced too quickly, there was another who was sometimes bored. Some would 
have preferred mass training , that is, a one week computing school, while others wished we had spread 
the training sessions over a longer period of time. The bottom line is that the project participants 
were not an easy group to instruct. They supported the educational component of the project but, in many 
ways, only costly one-on-one training would have pleased everyone. To quote just one candid administrator, 
I m a difficult challenge...I need someone to take me by the hand and show me stepby-step. I don t even 
know where the START key is, and if it isn t labeled START, I m in real trouble.  The project also provided 
increased impetus for a Macintosh classroom.and for developing emergency procedures for classes held 
in public clusters. HUMAN RESOURCE EXPENDITURES UCS originally estimated that the project would require 
1.38FTE in the fall and ,98 FTE in thle spring semester, in addition to the 1 FTE donated by Apple Corporation. 
The final tally revealed that the project required approximately half the human resources originally 
budgeted. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS We have learned a great deal throughout the year. Following is a list 
of recommendations to ensure high quality training in future projects based on this knowledge: THINGS 
TO DO AGAIN WITH TRAINING 1. Draft committed UCS staff to the project. 2. Provide outstanding hourly 
support. 3. Spread the project out over a year. 4. Involve departmental gurus from the beginning. 
5. Stick with supported software.  THINGS TO DO DIFFERENTLY WITH TRAINING 1. Make the project participants 
partners with the project team in setting the goals to help make them more independent computists. 2. 
Change the pace of workshops. The workshops should be biweekly or monthly, rather than weekly. Project 
participants cannot assimilate! the new tools and maintain their current workload if the workshops are 
scheduled too closely. Give classes biweekly for the 2 beginning sessions. After that, all sessions should 
meet once monthly. 3. Achieve basic functionality before exploring special functionality.  4. Involve 
any computing support staff from the participating departments in the project from the beginning. 5. 
Include costs for printing class materials, assistants for the classes and administrative support for 
scheduling classes, equipment, etc. in original cost estimates. 6. Group the participants in the basic 
Mac classes which all participants must attend by past computing experience. (Mac 1 and Mac WordPerfect, 
at least). 7. Provide classes in one dedicated training site. This will make it possible to have more 
stable and effective training in a real classroom environment with less administrative effort on the 
part of the Education Program staff. 8. At the beginning of the project have the project education and 
training coordinator meet with representative/s from the project participants to clarify their preferences, 
and to be sure clear communication and expectations are established for the training series.  eooeoeeeeoe 
 eeeo AcMSIGuccS ~x19910281  
			
