
 SIGGRAPH 2009 Course Advanced Material Appearance Modeling  Julie Dorsey Holly Rushmeier Yale University 
 { julie.dorsey, holly.rushmeier (at) yale.edu}   Table of Contents Course Description   3 Annotated 
Slides    6 Bibliography    126 Course Description For many years appearance models in computer 
graphics focused on general models for reflectance functions coupled with texture maps. Recently it has 
been recognized that even very common materials such as hair, skin, fabric, and rusting metal require 
more sophisticated models to appear realistic. We will begin by briefly reviewing basic reflectance models 
and the use of texture maps. We then describe common themes in advanced material models that include 
combining the effects of layers, groups of particles and/or fibers. We will survey the detailed models 
necessary needed to model materials such as skin (including pigmentation, pores, subsurface scattering), 
plants (including internal structure) and automotive paints (including color flop and sparkle). We will 
then treat the modeling of complex appearance due to aging and weathering processes. A general taxonomy 
of effects will be presented, as well as methods to simulate and to capture these effects. We close with 
a summary of current trends in material appearance research and a discussion of existing and needed resources. 
Prerequisites Knowledge of basic rendering and reflectance functions. Syllabus/Approximate Schedule 
Introduction: 15 min. Background: 50 min. Specialized Material Models: Common Themes: 20 min Natural 
Materials: 30 min. Manufactured/Processed Materials: 25 min. Aging and Weathering Processes: Taxonomy: 
10 min. Simulation: 20 min. Capture Approaches: 15 min. Current Trends and Needs 40 min. Speakers Julie 
Dorsey is a Professor of Computer Science at Yale University, where she teaches computer graphics. She 
came to Yale in 2002 from MIT, where she held tenured appointments in both the Department of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) and the School of Architecture. She received undergraduate degrees 
in Architecture and graduate degrees in Computer Science from Cornell University. With architecture as 
a driving application, she has studied a wide range of problems in computer graphics, including sketch-based 
interfaces for early conceptual design, acceleration methods for real-time rendering, and the creation 
of detailed photorealistic renderings. Her contributions also include algorithms for lighting and acoustical 
design and visualization. She is particularly well known for her research in modeling the appearance 
of materials -- for example, she pioneered techniques to model the visual richness of irregular metal 
patinas and eroded stone. Her current research interests include photorealistic image synthesis, material 
and texture models, illustration techniques, and interactive visualization of complex scenes, with an 
application to urban environments. In addition to serving on numerous conference program committees, 
she has served as an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics and 
The Visual Computer, and was Papers Chair for ACM SIGGRAPH 2006. She has received several professional 
awards, including MIT's Edgerton Faculty Achievement Award, a National Science Foundation CAREER Award, 
and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Research Fellowship. Holly Rushmeier received the BS, MS and PhD degrees 
in Mechanical Engineering from Cornell University in 1977, 1986 and 1988 respectively. Between receiving 
the BS and returning to graduate school in 1983 she worked as an engineer at the Boeing Commercial Airplane 
Company and at Washington Natural Gas Company (now a part of Puget Sound Energy). In 1988 she joined 
the Mechanical Engineering faculty at Georgia Tech. While there she conducted sponsored research in the 
area of computer graphics image synthesis and taught classes heat transfer and numerical methods at both 
the undergraduate and graduate levels. At the end of 1991 Dr. Rushmeier joined the computing and mathematics 
staff of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, focusing on scientific data visualization. 
 From 1996 to early 2004 Dr. Rushmeier was a research staff member at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center. 
At IBM she worked on a variety of data visualization problems in applications ranging from engineering 
to finance. She also worked in the area of acquisition of data required for generating realistic computer 
graphics models, including a project to create a digital model of Michelangelo's Florence Pieta, and 
the development of a scanning system to capture shape and appearance data for presenting Egyptian cultural 
artifacts on the World Wide Web. Dr. Rushmeier was Editor-in-Chief of ACM Transactions on Graphics from 
1996-99. She has also served on the editorial board of IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics. She is currently on the editorial boards of Computer Graphics Forum, IEEE Computer Graphics 
and Applications, ACM Journal of Computing and Cultural Heritage and ACM Transactions on Applied Perception. 
In 1996 she served as the papers chair for the ACM SIGGRAPH conference, in 1998, 2004 and 2005 as the 
papers co-chair for the IEEE Visualization conference and in 2000 as the papers co­chair for the Eurographics 
Rendering Workshop. She has also served in numerous program committees including multiple years on the 
committees for SIGGRAPH, IEEE Visualization, Eurographics, Eurographics Rendering Workshop, and Graphics 
Interface. Additional information The speakers are (along with François Sillion) the authors of Digital 
Modeling of Material Appearance published by Morgan Kaufmann/Elsevier. Further information about the 
speakers can be found at http://graphics.cs.yale.edu/  In these course notes we present principles 
of defining numerical models to be used in rendering realistic imagery of physical materials. Additional 
information can be found at http://graphics.cs.yale.edu/. The in person presentation of this course varies 
from these notes in the interest of timeliness, and considering the fact that fair use materials can 
not be posted for distribution to non-course attendees. These notes are a revised version of the notes 
for the SIGGRAPH 2008 class on Advanced Material Appearance Models. These notes also draw on the text: 
Digital Modeling of Material Appearance (Morgan-Kaufmann/Elsevier. )  The materials here are rendered 
with models. An artist conceived the shape. A purely artistic approach could be used to digitally paint 
the shades of light and dark on the digital shapes to give the illusion of translucent stone or copper 
metal. However, to generate these images material models are expressed numerically and rendered using 
lighting simulations. That is their appearance the colors, shades of light and dark, were computed, 
rather than being digitally painted on the model.  We define a model as taking a physically measurable 
input and producing a predictive output that can be verified by physical measurement. A model of a material 
makes possible the reliable rendering of the appearance of that material in any geometric and lighting 
conditions. An artistic technique as takes an input which is not necessarily measurable, and produces 
an output that may or may not reproduce the appearance of an object under arbitrary circumstances. Human 
judgment is required to use an artistic technique, and to evaluate its success. Our goal is to make 
predictive images that give a view of a scene or object that is the same as if the person were viewing 
it directly. Material modeling is one aspect of this. We need to consider the object s shape, and the 
light incident on it.  Shape is the large scale form or geometry of the object. The shape is needed 
to place the image of the object correctly with respect to other objects in the scene, to determine which 
other objects are occluded by the object, and what areas are cast into shadow by the object. Fine scale 
geometric variations in the object we define as part of the object s material from the point of view 
of creating digital models in computer graphics. For a close view of a tree branch, a leaf is defined 
by a flat shape, with the number of lobes or points depending on the type of tree. In an aerial photograph, 
a leaf is a small facet in a tree canopy material that covers the terrain. Many methods can be used to 
represent shape. The area of computer­aided geometry is devoted to the study of shape representation, 
and extensive descriptions of representations such as NURBs (non-uniformrational B-splines), triangle 
meshes, subdivision surfaces and implicit surface are documented at length in references such as Farin 
Curves and Surfaces for Computer-Aided Geometric Design: A Practical Code. Academic Press, Inc., 1996. 
Many methods can be used to compute the interreflections of light between objects in an environment. 
These methods, referred to as global illumination methods, include ray tracing, radiosity, photon mapping 
and hybrids of these various approaches. Thorough discussions of these methods can be found in Dutre, 
Bekaert and Bala, Advanced Global Illumination. AK Peters Limited, Wellesley, MA, 2003. For rendering 
appearance, the essential feature of a  global illumination method is that for a given ray direction 
the quantity of light from that direction at a particular point can be efficiently computed. An environment 
consists of a set of objects, each defined by a shape and material description, and at least one light 
source. An infinite number of images could be created of such an environment, and to specify a particular 
image a viewpoint, view direction and view frustum (i.e. field of view) need to be specified. The image 
is formed by projecting the objects in the environment seen through the frustum onto an image plane that 
spans the field of view and is perpendicular to the view direction. In a digital image, the image is 
discretized into pixels, and the display values for that pixel are set by determining the light that 
would arrive at the viewer from the object visible through that pixel. There are three important components 
of a material model that allow us to recognize a material spectral, directional and spatial. We notice 
the color of an object (resulting from the spectral composition of light), its directionality (hazy, 
glossy, shiny,) and small spatial variations (textures formed by light and dark, or little bumps.) Example 
of introducing spectral and directional variations   Introducing spatial variations  Spatially varying 
spectral and directional variations to make this look like a worn,dirty metallic object. Examples of 
directionality beyond directional reflectance The most familiar and basic light scattering is regular 
or mirror-like reflection, as shown in the photo at the top. Light rays reflect into one single direction, 
and that direction forms the same angle to the surface normal as the incident direction, as shown on 
the  lower left. Because the reflected rays stay organized as they were when they left the previous 
objects, a sharp image is formed just as though you were looking directly at the objects. This regular, 
or mirror-like reflection is referred to as pure or ideal specular reflection. Many materials are shiny 
or glossy, but not purely specular. In these materials, incident beams of light are distributed into 
a cone or lobe of directions centered around the specular, or mirror direction. The result of this is 
when you are looking at such materials the light reflected from each point of the surface includes light 
from an a range of surfaces in the environment, instead of just reflecting one point. Instead of seeing 
sharp edges reflected, everything looks blurred. By observing the reflections in the paint can in the 
image, you can see that how blurred things look depends on how close the objects being reflected are 
to the glossy surface. If they are relatively close, the cross section of the cone from which a point 
is reflecting light is relatively small, and lines like that between the yellow and blue surfaces above 
are only blurred a bit. As the objects get further away, the cross section of the cone becomes large, 
and can include entire objects which then do not appear with any detail when reflected in the glossy 
surface.  Objects that appear to have the same pattern of light and dark regardless of how you view 
them (as long as you don t block a significant source of light from the environment as you move to another 
view) are diffuse. An ideal diffuse (also referred to as Lambertian) object reflects an incident beam 
of light as light rays of much lower magnitude in all directions. The light coming from any point on 
the object in any direction is a product of light coming from many different sources in the environment. 
The contribution of each source in the environment varies very slowly from point to point on the object, 
so the amount of light varies slowly from point to point, and In addition to the reflectance that depends 
on material microstructure and chemical composition, the appearance depends on small scale geometric 
structure. Just as some materials are characterized primarily by the spatial variations in reflectance, 
other materials are characterized primarily by their small scale geometric structure. Small is defined 
as orders of magnitude smaller than the overall object. The image above shows a piece of plastic with 
a pattern pressed into it that changes the surface from smooth to bumpy. The small scale geometric structure 
shown here is characteristic of leather material, and this fact is used in the production of physical 
materials to make a plastic look like leather. The variation of light and dark in the image of the plastic 
is not due to spatial changes in reflectance, but to the change of surface orientation caused by the 
small scale geometry. Even small indentations can cause large changes in the surface normal. The surface 
normal, rather than the absolute surface position, determines in which direction incident light will 
be reflected.  Some materials don t just reflect light from the surface, or just transmit the light. 
In some cases light penetrates the material and scatters in the interior. This is referred to as subsurface 
scattering, and can occur in dielectrics, not metals. Under normal room illumination, surfaces which 
allow subsurface scattering often do not look dramatically different from completely opaque surfaces. 
The image on the right though shows an extreme example of illumination. A green laser is directed at 
the top of a small piece of stone. Besides being reflected from the top, the light is scattered in the 
material and is visible emerging from the sides of the stone. Terminology and Mathematical Descriptions 
Key quantities: Radiance L Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) fr : An explanation 
of the mathematics of light transport isn t possible in a brief lecture. However, a couple of key points 
are: -- a lot of the notation in light transport is just denoting that quantities vary with color (spectral 
 dependance .), direction (given by angles . and f) and position (x,y) -- there are two quantities that 
are key, but which take some getting used to . One is the quantity of light we want to compute, the radiance 
L. The other is the function telling how a surface scatters light, the BRDF fr. Components of Material 
Model Spectral .: wavelength (color) dependence Directional .,f : direction (Shiny, matte, glossy, hazy) 
Spatial variation x,y: position (texture)   The key quantity we use to define how a surface redirects 
light is the BRDF, which relates incident and reflected radiance for two given directions. The BRDF is 
a distribution function, not a fraction from zero to one. It can take on values from zero to infinity. 
To conserve energy, the integral of the BRDF over all reflected directions must be less then or equal 
to one. Many common reflectance models are named, generally after the people who developed the models. 
NOTE: There are no compliance standards for claiming that a named model is being used, so you can t be 
absolutely sure that giving the same parameters to a particular model in one software package will produce 
the same results in another package.  The directionality of transmission from a smooth surface is a 
bit more complicated that reflection. First, most metals have a high tendency to absorb electromagnetic 
energy, so transmission of visible light is not observed. For dielectrics, the change in the speed of 
light in the material causes a change in the direction. This change in direction is called refraction, 
and is expressed by Snell s Law as shown above. Unlike the direction of reflection, the direction of 
refraction depends on the properties of the materials. Since light is electromagnetic energy, its interaction 
is governed by the properties that quantify the material s interaction with electric and magnetic fields. 
In the solution to Maxwell s equations these properties are expressed as the index of refraction n and 
a coefficient that captures the tendency to absorb electomagnetic waves k . The value of n is the ratio 
of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in the material. The value of k is zero for dielectrics, 
which do not conduct electricity, and greater than zero for metals, which do. Values of k and n are found 
by measurement and can be looked up in handbooks or online resources. Generally understanding and applying 
the results of the smooth surface solution requires only knowing some rough estimates of typical values 
of these constants for common materials.  In addition to giving directionality, the fraction of light 
reflected can also be calculated from the solution of Maxwell s equations, and the results are referred 
to as the Fresnel equations. For a dielectric, the light that is not reflected from the surface is transmitted. 
For a metal, the light that is not reflected is absorbed. The Fresnel equations give complicated algebraic 
expressions for reflectance, but only straightforward number crunching is needed to evaluate given values 
of . , n and k . Since metals have a high reflectance for all angles, the Fresnel effect is less pronounced. 
Although it is rarely included in visual simulations, metals all tend to look white or gray at grazing 
angles.  Lambertian, or ideal diffuse reflectance is in a sense the opposite of specular reflection. 
Instead of all light being reflected in a single direction, it is reflected in all directions with the 
same radiance. Unlike specular reflection, this is not the result of solving Maxwell s equations for 
some particular surface configuration. It is an approximation of the observed behavior of many materials. 
While real materials usually deviate from Lambertian for angles of view or incidence greater than 60 
degrees, the Lambertian model is used for its computational simplicity. For measurement purposes, some 
materials have been designed that are very close to being to Lambertian, such as Spectralon® from Labsphere 
Inc. Materials can be modeled as a combination of Lambertian and mirror-like reflectance. The material 
can also have spectral values that vary with position. Here a scanned object is shown as white Lambertian 
(upper left), spectrally varying with position (upper right), with mirror-like reflection of the light 
source (lower left), and with mirror-like reflection of the entire environment.   As noted in R. L. 
Cook and K. E. Torrance. A reflectance model for computer graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 1(1):7 
24, January 1982. The color of specularly reflected light is white for dielectics, and the color of the 
material for metals. The color is predicted using the Fresnel equation for a smooth surface. The original 
Phong reflectance model is described in the classic paper: Bui Tuong Phong Illumination for computer 
generated pictures Communications of the ACM, v.18 n.6, p.311-317, June 1975 . It was expressed as reflectance 
function for light intensity, rather than as a BRDF for computing radiance. However, it was inspired 
by physical observation. The effect of the model in rendering a sphere is compared to a photograph of 
a real sphere in the paper. The fuzziness of the specular reflection  is computed as a function of the 
angle a between the reflected direction and the mirror reflection angle: reflectance = .d (cos ..) + 
.s (cos .s)n In contrast to diffuse reflection, the specular component concentrates the reflected light. 
The larger the value of n, the smaller the specular highlights formed by the reflection of the light 
source. The specular lobe in the Phong model is taking into account roughness at a very small scale. 
At a small scale parts of a surface are oriented to reflect into directions that aren t the mirror direction 
for the flat surface. H is the half way vector, the direction a surface normal would need to be pointing 
for a mirror reflection to be visible for a given pair of light L and view V directions. Many reflectance 
models are computed in terms of this half way vector. Blinn-Phong (using .h instead of .s)  Increasing 
p .d+ .s cosp .h  The specular lobe in the Phong model is taking into account roughness at a very small 
scale. At a small scale parts of a surface are oriented to reflect into directions that aren t the mirror 
direction for the flat surface. H is the half way vector, the direction a surface normal would need 
to be pointing for a mirror reflection to be visible for a given pair of light L and view V directions. 
Many reflectance models are computed in terms of this half way vector.  These image show a macroscopic 
example of the spreading effect of a rough surface. For a surface that is somewhat rough at a microscopic 
level, some portions of the surface are oriented in the direction of the halfway vector even when the 
halfway vector isn t the same as the main surface normal. The Ward reflectance model is similar to the 
Phong model except it is expressed in physical terms it expresses the relationship between incident and 
reflectance radiance and conserves energy. Rather than using the cosine to a power, it uses an exponential 
function, parameterized by an average slope, to express the shape of the specular lobe. Furthermore, 
the lobe can be anisotropic by expressing different slopes for different directions on a surface (e.g. 
for a set of grooves the slope is zero along the grooves, and potentially steep perpendicular to the 
grooves).The model can be applied to regular and diffuse transmission through a thin surface. The model 
is fully described in as described in Ward Larson and Shakespeare, Rendering with radiance: the art and 
science of lighting visualization (Morgan Kaufmann, 1998) Since the Ward model is developed in physical 
terms of incident and reflected radiance, it works (by design) in a system that simulates physically 
accurate global illumination. These variations were rendered using the Radiance software system,  http://radsite.lbl.gov/ 
A point to remember is that physically accurate material models only create realistic appearance when 
used in the context of a physically accurate global illumination system. Another detail to note is that 
a small correction to the original model is available in Arne Duer. An Improved Normalization For The 
Ward Reflectance Model. JOURNAL OF GRAPHICS TOOLS, 11(1):51, 2006. Anisotropic reflection has a significant 
impact on appearance, but for a complicated object its effect is only clear when the effect of isotropic, 
or anisotropic reflection with a different orientation is displayed.  The generalized cosine lobe model 
described in Lafortune, Foo,Torrance, and Greenberg Non-linear approximation of reflectance functions 
In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (1997pp. 
117 126.) Gives a different generalization of the Phong model. Like the Ward model, it is formulated 
in physical terms. It conserves energy. Instead of just describing peaks of reflection around the specular 
direction, it allows the definition of lobes (possibly anisotropic) around any axis defined with respect 
to the surface. Important other axes are just off the specular direction, the normal direction and the 
direction of the source (for backscatter). The general form of the reflectance is fr = C(u) (Cxuxvx+Cyuyvy+Czuzvz)n 
where u and v are vectors in the incident and reflected directions, Cx,Cy are coefficients determining 
the direction and shape of the lobe, n defines how narrow it is, and C(u) is a normalizing function to 
insure the function conserves energy. Sets of functions of An example of a BRDF that the Lafortune model 
can represent that previous models could not is generalized diffuse reflectance. In general, even surfaces 
that appear matte or diffuse don t reflect radiance evenly in all directions the reflection may peak 
in the direction of the surface normal and fall off at near grazing viewing angles. The effects shown 
here are found using Cx=Cy=0, Cz=1, n equal to zero, 0.5 and 2 respectively.  The Lafortune model, unlike 
Phong or Ward, also provides a mechanism for defining back scatter. In this case a sum of two Lafortune 
lobes is used. With summing functions, there become a large number of parameters Cx,Cy,Cz and n to be 
defined for specifying reflectance. This makes the model inconvenient for user interfaces. The Lafortune 
model is useful though for fitting masses of measured BRDF data into a compact representation. The Ashikhmin-Shirley 
modification of Phong reflectance (Ashikhmin and Shirley, An Anisotropic Phong BRDF Model Journal of 
Graphic Tools, 5,2, (2000), pp.25-32) has the feature that it includes an explicit term for the Fresnel 
reflectance. The specular reflectance increases as the angle of incidence increases. The diffuse component 
is appropriately reduced at these angles to maintain energy conservation. The formulation also maintains 
reciprocity, and allows for anisotropy. The Fresnel component is computed with Schlick s approximation 
(see Christophe Schlick. A customizable reflectance model for everyday rendering. Rendering Techniques 
93, pages 73 84. ) In the examples shown, the decrease of the diffuse component with view angle relative 
to the ideal diffuse component used in the Ward model can be observed.  In contrast to empirical methods 
that look for convenient functional forms, first principles methods model the interaction with light 
with a mathematical model of material defined at a microscopic scale. The most frequently used first 
 principles models use as a mathematical model a statistical distribution of surface facets to describe 
the details of the boundary between a material and air. The most popular methods model this interaction 
with geometric optics, which requires that the surface being modeled be large with respect to the wavelength 
of light (which is 0.4 to 0.7 microns) Some more complex models use wave optics to capture of the effects 
of diffraction at the surface. First principles models account for the effects that facets can have 
on one another they may block light incident on another facet, making it appear darker, or they may 
block light leaving the facet before it reaches a viewer, again resulting in a darker appearance. Even 
unblocked, the orientation of the facets results in light being scattered in a much different directional 
pattern than from a smooth surface.  Two popular first principles models are Blinn, Models of light 
reflection for computer synthesized pictures, SIGGRAPH 1977, pp. 192-198. and Cook- Torrance, Cook and 
Torrance A reflectance model for computer graphics . ACM Transactionson Graphics 1, 1 (Jan. 1982), 7 
24 They are both based on specular reflections of distributions of facets. The difference between them 
is the distribution of the facets assumed. The principle feature of the Cook-Torrance model is the prediction 
of off specular peaks, that are the consequences of shadowing and masking causing asymmetries. The principle 
feature of the Oren-Nayar model is the prediction of back scattering, that is a consequence of facets 
oriented towards the light source diffusely reflect some light back to the source. The result in each 
case are BRDF functions with lobes in the specular and backscatter directions that have more complicated 
structure than those used in the empirical models. The BRDF for these models is specified by giving parameters 
for the microscopic surface geometry. However, since the microstructure is rarely known, the facet distribution 
parameters are normally treated as parameters similar to n in the Phong and Lafortune models for controlling 
the shape of these complicated distributions.  For nearly smooth surfaces specular and/or diffuse reflectance 
can not be assumed at each facet. The effects of electromagnetic waves interfering with each other need 
to be accounted for. Methods by Kajiya Anisotropic Reflectance Models, SIGGRAPH 1985, pp15-21 and He 
et al. A Comprehensive Physical Model for Light Reflections, SIGGRAPH 91, pp175-186 account for these 
effects that are important for nearly smooth surfaces. Accounting for wave phenomena on irregular surface 
makes for a more complicated model   These images showing the dramatic effect the He-Torrance model 
can have on near smooth surfaces were produced at and are copyrighted by Westin, Li and Torrance, and 
appear in the technical report cited . Recent work in optics and computer vision have re-examined some 
assumptions made in many graphics first principles models, in particular the form of the shadowing term 
and the effect of interreflections in rough surfaces. For further reading consult: J.J. Koenderink, A.J. 
Van Doorn, K.J. Dana, and S. Nayar. Bidirectional Reflection Distribution Function of Thoroughly Pitted 
Surfaces. International Journal of Computer Vision, 31(2):129 144, 1999. H. Ragheb and E.R. Hancock. 
Testing new variants of the Beckmann Kirchhoff model against radiance data. Computer Vision and Image 
Understanding, 102(2):145 168, 2006. Y. Sun. Self shadowing and local illumination of randomly rough 
surfaces. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004. Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Computer 
Society Conference on, 1. Y. Sun. Statistical ray method for deriving reflection models of rough surfaces. 
Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 24(3):724 744, 2007.  Effects that Require Keeping Track 
of more than just Radiance Polarization  Need to track state of polarization There are some optical 
effects that are important for small classes of materials. One is polarization. General references for 
this include: David C. Tannenbaum, Peter Tannenbaum, and Michael J. Wozny. Polarization and  birefringency 
considerations in rendering. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive 
techniques, pages 221 222. ACM Press, 1994; Alexander Wilkie, Robert F. Tobler, and Werner Purgathofer. 
Combined rendering of polarization and fluorescence effects. In Proceedings of the 12th Eurographics 
Workshop on Rendering, pages 197 204, 2001; Lawrence B. Wolff and David J. Kurlander. Ray tracing with 
polarization parameters. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 10(6):44 55, 1990.  Other Effects Polarization 
scalar values for radiance and BRDF replaced by matrices Wolff and Kurlander IEEE CGA 1990 (complete 
Cook-Torrance model) Tannenbaum SIGGRAPH 1994: birefringent materials  Code available: SCATMECH  http://physics.nist.gov/Divisions/Div844 
/facilities/scatmech/html/  The index of refraction is a function of wavelength, so different wavelengths 
get refracted differently, causing the separation of colors we see.  Another classes of effects is 
interference and diffraction. General references for these phenomena that require modeling the wave nature 
of light include: Brian E. Smits and Gary W. Meyer. Newton s color: Simulating interference phenomena 
in realistic image synthesis. In Kadi Bouatouch and Christian Bouville, editors, Rendering Techniques 
90, Eurographics, pages 185 194. Imprimerie de l universit´e de Rennes, 1990. Proc. 1st Eurographics 
Rendering Workshop, Rennes, France, June 11 13, 1990; Yinlong Sun, F. David Fracchia, ThomasW. Calvert, 
and Mark S. Drew. Deriving spectrum from colors and rendering light interference. IEEE Comput. Graph. 
Appl., 19(4):61 67, 1999.; Jos Stam. Diffraction shaders. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference 
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 101 110. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
1999; Yinlong Sun, F. David Fracchia, Mark S. Drew, and Thomas W. Calvert. Rendering iridescent colors 
of optical disks. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques 2000, pages 341 
352, London, UK, 2000. Springer-Verlag.  A different cause of vibrant color is when light reflects 
and transmits through very thin films. When a layer of transmitting material has a thickness on the order 
of the wavelength of light, wave phenomena have to be accounted for. In particular, light waves can 
reiniforce one another or cancel each other out. Whether light waves will cancel or reinforce after 
traveling some distance through a thin film depends on the wavelength. For a given path through the film, 
some wavelengths will be reinforced and some cancelled, resulting in intense colors appearing. Yinlong 
Sun, F. David Fracchia, Thomas W. Calvert, and Mark S. Drew, "Deriving Spectra from Colors and Rendering 
Light Interference," IEEE Computer Graphics and Application, Vol. 19, No. 4, Jul. 1999, pp. 61-67.  
 This image is from : Sun, Y. 2006. Rendering biological iridescences with RGB­based renderers. ACM Trans. 
Graph. 25, 1 (Jan. 2006), 100-129. In this article a simplified model for accurating predicting these 
reflected colors is presented. As mentioned earlier, when roughness is very small, wavelike phenomena 
need to be accounted for in computing reflectance. When there is regular spacing in the small features, 
there can also be the interference effect similar to the thin film effect. The simulated CD image shown 
here is from: Yinlong Sun, F. David Fracchia, Mark S. Drew, and Thomas W. Calvert, "Rendering Iridescent 
Colors of Optical Disks," the 11th EUROGRAPHICS Workshop on Rendering (EGRW), Brno, Czech Republic, June 
2000, pp. 341­  Andrew Glassner. A model of phosphorescence and fluorescence. In 5th Eurographics Rendering 
Workshop, pages 57 68, 1994.; Alexander Wilkie, Robert F. Tobler, and Werner Purgathofer. Combined rendering 
of polarization and fluorescence effects. In Proceedings of the 12th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering, 
pages 197 204, 2001. The difference in these images is the volumetric properties of the atmosphere. 
On the right particles that absorb and scatter light obscure anything in the distance.  For volumes 
the effect of material along a path needs to be considered, rather than a reflectance that encodes what 
happens when a ray hits a particular point on a surface.  As a ray travels through a volume, the amount 
of light may decrease by absorption or by light being scattered out of the ray path. The amount of light 
may increase by light being scattered into the path, or   For more detail on input data for participating 
media, see the SIGGRAPH 95 course notes Input for Participating Media , that are appended at the end 
of this tutorial. Also see the recent paper: D. Gutierrez, F. Seron, O. Anson, A. Muñoz. Visualizing 
underwater ocean optics. Volume effects are also visible in materials where the particles are tightly 
packed into a solid. The result is subsurface scattering . The only difference between the images on 
the left and right is the addition of subsurface scattering on the right. The top images are lit from 
the front, the bottom images from the back.In solids the scattering can essentially be considered isotropic 
in all cases.   Subsurface scattering is characterized by the BSSDF that accounts for light entering 
a material and emerging at a different angle and noticeably different distance from where it entered. 
This was original defined in F. E. Nicodemus, J. C. For densely packed solids, model as diffusion process 
and use dipole approximation. Jensen, H. W., Marschner, S. R., Levoy, M., and Hanrahan, P.. A practical 
model for subsurface light transport. SIGGRAPH '01..  The same subsurface scattering parameters will 
result in different appearance depending on the thickness of the material. For the same density of material, 
the ratio of scattering to absorption in the material gives a different appearance. The lighting in these 
three images is the same. Reference for computing subsurface scattering: Jensen, H. W., Marschner, S. 
R., Levoy, M., and Hanrahan, P. 2001. A practical model for subsurface light transport. In Proceedings 
of the 28th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and interactive Techniques SIGGRAPH '01. ACM Press, 
New York, NY, 511-518. There have been **many** papers that build on this technique to enable rendering 
of subsurface scattering in real time.   A basic mechanism for representing spatial variations that 
characterize a material is to use images mapped to the surface. Each pixel in the map may store simply 
a diffuse color, or a BRDF, a normal, a displacement, or a BTF (a virtual BRDF that includes the effect 
of small scale geometry). The mapping is done by storing coordinate of a location in an image with each 
vertex used to define a geometric model. Mapping to a geometry requires that the geometry be parameterized 
(i.e. a two dimensional coordinate system must be defined on the surface), a topic which is studied extensively 
in computer aided geometric design. Parameterization is one of the topics considered in the course in 
SIGGRAPH 2005 14. Discrete Differential Geometry: Grinspun Desbrun, Schröder ( in ACM Digital Library) 
 These two renderings were made with Radiance with procedural textures rather than image maps to define 
spatial variations on the surface (e.g. see D. Ebert, Ed. Texturing and Modeling: A Procedural Approach, 
Third Edition. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 2002.) The same spatial frequency has different visual 
impact depending on whether the fraction of light is modulated, or the direction of the surface normals. 
 An alternative to analytic models of reflectance, is to create the small scale microstructure, and simulate 
its scattering effects by shooting rays at it and saving the results in a data structure designed specifically 
for BRDF. Two examples of this are: Gondek, Meyer, and Newman, Wavelength dependent reflectance functions 
In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (1994), 
ACM Press, pp. 213 220. And Westin, Arvo and Torrance, Predicting reflectance functions from complex 
Surfaces In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques 
(1992), ACM Press, pp. 255 264. An advantage of simulation is that it can be used to explore the effects 
of subsurface structure, and effects of interference in thin surface layers. Gondek et al used a simulation 
of thin titanium dioxide mica flakes to simulate an irridescent paint such as   Just a reflectance 
model combined with a spatially varying texture isn t adequate to model all materials. In cases where 
this approach is adequate, it can be difficult to find the right parameters to use. A wide range of models 
have been developed for specialized materials. Some common themes in these models that have evolved 
are developing small scale geometric models, defining layers of materials and using measured or captured 
data. Many materials are composed of bundles of long thin fibers. The appearance of the bulk material 
is modeled by first account for reflection and transmission from individual strands. Hair, textiles and 
finished wood are all examples of materials modeled based on the light interactions of individual fibers. 
  Either naturally or by design many materials have the appearance of sparkles small flecks of material 
that have a high specular reflectance. A challenge is to model where the sparkles appear in a way that 
is consistent frame to frame in animated sequences. Materials in which sparkles appear include automotive 
paint, man-made carpet fibers and snow. Many materials have sense of depth because they are composed 
of multiple layers of material that transmit and reflect light. This effect occurs in materials as diverse 
as paints and the human eye.  With inexpensive digital cameras 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS now widely 
available, many Common themes Natural Materials material models are built around Manufactured/Processed 
Materials data that can readily acquired. See SIGGRAPH 2009 Courses: Acquisition of Optically Complex 
Objects and Phenomena Captured Data Tuesday, 4 August | 8:30 AM - 10:15 AM | Auditorium A and Build 
Your Own 3D Scanner: 3D Photography for Beginners Wednesday, 5 August | 8:30 AM - 12:15 PM | Room 260-262 
We review specialized models that 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS have been developed by organizing Common 
themes Natural Materials them into natural and manufactured Manufactured/Processed Materials materials. 
People/Animals Hair and Fur Skin Eyes -Birda and other Non-mammals Plants Leaves Wood Porous and Wet 
Rocks  3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials 
Hair and Fur: Same stuff, hair on people, fur on other animals. People: vellus and terminal hairs. 
 An individual hair consists of a core medulla, the cortex and exterior cuticle. The cuticle consists 
of lapped cells on the outside of the hair. Coloration: granules of the melanin pigment, either eumelanins 
or pheomelanins . Hair with no pigment granules appears white. There are two different types of hair 
 vellus hairs and terminal hairs. Terminal hairs are those typically found on the scalp. Vellus hairs 
are unpigmented narrow (4 micron diameter), short (1mm) hairs that grow nearly all over the body. Some 
stats: Scalp hairs on humans are 50 micron to 90 micron diameter, may be circular or ellipsoidal, with 
curlier hair more ellipsoidal in cross section. Beard and moustache (rather than scalp) hair may have 
triangular cross section. Eyelashes, are 20 to 120 micron in diameter. A person has about 175 to 300 
terminal hairs per cm2, for a total of on the order of 100,000 hairs on the typical human scalp. Foxes 
and rabbits: average diameter 20 to 30 micron, and approximately 4000 hairs per cm2 Goats and badgers 
:average diameter 70 to 80 micron and approximately 100 to 200 hairs per cm2). General References on 
types of hair and fur: James Robertson. Forensic Examination of Human Hair. CRC Press, 1999. A. A. Blazej, 
J. Galatik, Z. Galatik, Z. Krul, and M. Mladek. Atlas of Microscopic Structures of Fur Skins 1. Elsevier, 
New York, 1989. Database of fur: http://www.furskin.cz/ 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes 
Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Where the common themes come in: Terminal Hair: Fibers 
Vellus Hair: Layer  A volumetric approach for rendering fur was presented in: J. T. Kajiya and T. L. 
Kay. Rendering fur with three dimensional textures. In Proceedings of the 16th annual conference on Computer 
graphics and interactive techniques, pages 271 280. ACM Press, 1989. This is different from pure volume 
rendering because the structure of individual strands must still be visible.  The projected density 
accounts for the number and size of hairs, the frame bundle accounts for their orientation.   Example 
views from the original Kajiya and Kay paper.  An example of modeling with strands (rather than texels): 
Aslan in Narnia Brad Hiebert, Jubin Dave, Tae-Yong Kim, Ivan Neulander, Hans Rijpkema, and Will Telford. 
The chronicles of Narnia: the lion,  the crowds and rhythm and hues. In SIGGRAPH 06: ACMSIGGRAPH 2006 
Courses, page 1, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press. A more detailed reflectance mode for individual 
strands was presented in Stephen R. Marschner , Henrik Wann Jensen , Mike Cammarano , Steve Worley , 
Pat Hanrahan, Light scattering from human hair fibers, ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), v.22 n.3, 
July 2003 Hair growth results in oriented scales on the hair. The orientation of the scales relative 
to the centerline of the hair changes the reflectance distribution relative to what would be expected 
from a smooth cylinder.    The different possible paths through the strand result in different reflectance 
lobes. A comparison shows that the more detailed model predicts effects like secondary highlights Effects 
of shadows and interreflections are studied in Jonathan T. Moon and Stephen R. Marschner. Simulating 
multiple scattering in hair using a photon mapping approach. In SIGGRAPH 06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, 
pages 1067 1074, New York, NY, Tom Lokovic and Eric Veach. Deep shadow maps. In SIGGRAPH 00: Proceedings 
of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 385 392, New York, 
NY, USA, 2000. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.  Multiple scattering is particularly critical 
for blond hair. 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed 
Materials  Vellus Hairs Machine Vision and Applications (2003) 14: 260 268 The secret of velvety skin 
Jan Koenderink, Sylvia Pont Machine Vision andApplications, 14(4):260 268, 2003. Machine Vision and Applications 
(2003) 14: 260 268 The secret of velvety skin Jan Koenderink, Sylvia Pont Asperity scattering: Thin layer 
(. small) of thin (few particles per unit volume) participating medium formed by tiny hairs or dust. 
 The scattering from short vellus hairs on the rest of the body is similar to the scattering of fuzz 
on a peach. A simple function for simulating this effect, which softens the look of a surface is described 
in J. Koenderink and S. Pont. The secret of velvety skin.  The fuzz on a peach is another example of 
asperity scattering. Rather than seeing individual small fibers, we see the effect of the hazy layer, 
and white edges on the silhouette of the peach when it is backlit. Asperity scattering can be modeled 
with a simple expression, with limits on the values of the angles so that the function doesn t go to 
infinity.  Human skin: -- varies in thickness varying from 0.1 to more than 0.5 cm. -- has three layers 
: The epidermis is the thin outside layer, that includes the exterior layer of dead cells (the stratum 
cornuem). The dermis is thicker, and includes the vessels that carry blood. The hypodermis connects 
the skin to the rest of the body. A general reference: Kenneth A. Walters. Dermatological and Transdermal 
Formulations. Marcel Dekker Incorporated, 2002. 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural 
Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Skin Where the common themes come in: --Detailed geometry 
modeling --Layers --Captured data   The need to account for subsurface scattering in skin models was 
first noted in: Pat Hanrahan and Wolfgang Krueger. Reflection from layered surfaces due to subsurface 
scattering. In Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 
pages 165 174. ACM Press, 1993. And more recent methods have estimated a subsurface scattering model 
from measurements: Tim Weyrich, Wojciech Matusik, Hanspeter Pfister, Bernd Bickel, Craig Donner, Chien 
Tu, Janet McAndless, Jinho Lee, Addy Ngan, HenrikWann Jensen, andMarkus Gross. Analysis of human faces 
using a measurement-based skin reflectance model. In SIGGRAPH 06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, pages 1013 
1024, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press. Diagram of scattering in subsurface layers and resulting rendering, 
from scattering.  Surface reflectance models  Skin Model Components --subsurface scattering model 
--surface reflectance model (such as Cook-Torrance) --a model of small scale spatial variations in the 
spectral reflectance ---geometry variations of the skin surface. have been fit to captured data including 
fitting the Lafortune model used in: Stephen R. Marschner, Brian K. Guenter, and Sashi Raghupathy. Modeling 
and rendering for realistic facial animation. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering 
Techniques 2000, pages 231 242, London, UK, 2000. Springer-Verlag. And Cook-Torrance model used in: Athinodoros 
S. Georghiades. Recovering 3-d shape and reflectance from a small number of photographs. In EGRW 03: 
Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, pages 230 240, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, 
Switzerland, 2003. Eurographics Association.  Domes: Measure skin BRDF and facial shape simultaneously 
"Recovering 3-D Shape and Reflectance From a Small Number of Photographs," Eurographics Symposium on 
Rendering, June 2003, pp. 230-240, 315.  Skin Model Components --subsurface scattering model --surface 
reflectance model (such as Cook-Torrance) --a model of small scale spatial variations in the spectral 
reflectance ---geometry variations of the skin surface. Spatial coloring variations are due to freckles 
and age spots, and temporary effects such as blushing. A full first principles model of skin including 
prediction of color due to detailed composition including blood flow is the BioSpec Model: A. Krishnaswamy 
and G.V.G. Baranoski. A Biophysically-Based Spectral Model of Light Interaction with Human Skin. Computer 
Graphics Forum, 23(3):331 340, 2004.   Plots from Krishnaswamy and Baranoski, 2004 for the spectral 
data for various skin model components. Images from Krishnaswam and Baranoski, 2004  Details of pores 
from molding compound used on skin: Stephen R. Marschner, Brian K. Guenter, and Sashi Raghupathy. Modeling 
and rendering for realistic facial animation. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering 
Techniques 2000, pages 231 242, London, UK, 2000. Springer-Verlag. Generic wrinkle patterns are modeled 
in: L. Boissieux, G. Kiss, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, and P. Kalra. Simulation of skinaging and wrinkles 
with cosmetics insight. Computer Animation and Simulation 2000, pages 15 27, 2000. Applying wrinkles 
from scanned data: lovinskiy et al., 2006] Aleksey Golovinskiy, Wojciech Matusik, Hanspeter Pfister, 
Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. A statistical model for synthesis of detailed facial geometry. 
In SIGGRAPH 06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, pages 1025 1034, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press.  Using 
a molding compound to capture skin geometry Real-time, Photo-realistic, Physically Based Rendering of 
Fine Scale Human Skin Structure A. Haro, B. Guenter, and I. Essa, Proceedings 12th Eurographics Workshop 
on Rendering, London, England, June 2001  Using multiple dipoles In thin layers: Light Diffusion in 
Multi-Layered Translucent Materials - Craig Donner Henrik Wann Jensen Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2005, 
An example of combining multiple layers to form a model for skin. Source of excellent discussion of 
detailed modeling and parameter tuning for skin for real time rendering: http://developer.download.nvidia.com/presentations/2007/gdc/Advanced_Skin.pdf 
Comprehensive surveys:: "The Appearance of Human Skin: A Survey," T. Igarashi, K. Nishino, and S. K. 
Nayar, Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision, Vol.3, No.1, pp.1-95, 2007. Baranoski, 
G. V. and Krishnaswamy, A. 2008. Light interaction with human skin: from believable images to predictable 
models. In ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 Courses (Singapore, December 10 ­13, 2008). SIGGRAPH Asia '08. (in 
ACM Digital Library) Relevant SIGGRAPH 2009 Course: The Digital Emily Project: Photoreal Facial Modeling 
and Animation Thursday, 6 August | 1:45 PM -3:30 PM | Auditorium C 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common 
themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials  Eyes Common theme: Layers Eyes have a complex 
appearance due to a complex layered structure. An approximation of this structure based on the manufacture 
of artificial eyes is given by: Aaron Lefohn, Brian Budge, Peter Shirley, Richard Caruso, and Erik Reinhard. 
An ocularist s approach to human iris synthesis. IEEE Comput Graphics Appl, 23(6):70 75, November/ December 
2003. A detailed biological model is described in: Michael W.Y. Lam and Gladimir V.G. Baranoski. A predictive 
light transport model for the human iris. Computer Graphics Forum, 25(3):359 368, 2006.   Simple geometric 
model of eye. Textures for various layers that would be combined in artificial eye that together give 
eyes depth.   Lam and Baranoski present a biologically detailed model of the eye.  The biologically 
accurate model can predict eye appearance.   Detailed geometry is important in the appearance of all 
animals. The details of feathers need to be modeled to render birds.A feather has a main shaft, or rachis. 
At the bottom of the shaft, the calamus, there is nothing attached. The vanes of the feather are formed 
by barbs that are attached to the rachis. Barbs are interlocked with one another by small barbules that 
branch off them. The vanes may be fuzzy, or plumulaceous, such as the lower section shown here or stiff, 
or pennaceous, as in the upper section. A variety of methods have been proposed in graphics to model 
this structure: Wen-Kai Dai, Zen-Chung Shih, and Ruei-Chuan Chang. Synthesizing feather textures in galliformes. 
Computer Graphics Forum, 14(3):407 420, August 1995. Yanyun Chen, Yingqing Xu, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung 
Shum. Modeling and rendering of realistic feathers. In Proceedings of the 29th annual conference on Computer 
graphics and interactive techniques, pages 630 636. L. Streit and W. Heidrich. A biologically-parameterized 
feather model. Computer Graphics Forum, 21(3):565 565, 2002. . 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common 
themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Birds and other Non-Mammals Common themes --Detailed 
geometry modeling  3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS  Birds Structural Color: Applicable to feathers: 
Yinlong Sun. Rendering biological iridescences with rgb­based renderers. ACMTrans. Graph., 25(1):100 
129, 2006. Other parts of birds: R.O. Prum and R. Torres. Structural colouration of avian skin convergent 
evolution of coherently scattering dermal collagen arrays. Journal of Experimental Biology, 206(14):2409 
2429, 2003. 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Other Non-Mammals Simple Voronoi texture generated in Cinema4D 
For other animals, most methods attempt to mimic patterns of color and small scale geometry. In particular 
cellular textures based on: Steven Worley. A cellular texture basis function. In SIGGRAPH 96: Proceedings 
of the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 291 294, A method 
of generating of anisotropic cellular textures with examples on reptiles: Itoh, Kazunori Miyata, and 
Kenji Shimada. Generating organic textures with controlled anisotropy and directionality. IEEE Comput. 
Graph. Appl., 23(3):38 45, 2003.  Physically detailed models of leaves are given in: G. V. G. Baranoski 
and J. G. Rokne. An algorithmic reflectance and transmittance model for plant tissue. Computer Graphics 
Forum, 16(3):141 150, August 1997. ISSN 1067-7055. of light by leaves. The Visual Computer, 17(8):491 
505, 2001. Lifeng Wang, Wenle Wang, Julie Dorsey, Xu Yang, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Real-time 
rendering of plant leaves. In SIGGRAPH 05: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers, pages 712 719, New York, NY, USA, 
2005. ACM Press. The detailed layers of plant tissue can be modeled as thin layers of scattering participating 
media The observations can be encoded in terms of models for reflectance and transmittance.     
    Sample output from appearance modeling  Another feature of plants is that they may be covered 
by systems of small hairs. Fuhrer et al. present a method for placing and rendering such hairs.  While 
it is a single material, wood can have a wide variety of appearance, as noted in these photographs of 
natural and finished wood. Lefebre and Poulin presented a general procedural model for fitting the structure 
of color variation in wood.  Results from Lefebvre and Poulin s work, synthesizing a new piece of wood 
using parameters estimated for the model from a real piece of wood. Light incident on porous materials 
undergoes interreflections within pores causing darkening:S.Merillou, J.- M. Dischler, and D. Ghazanfarpour. 
A BRDF postprocess to integrate porosity on rendered surface. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, 6(4):306 318, October 2000.  Pores may not be visible, but can be seen in a microscopic 
view  This figure from Merillou et al. shows the multiple reflections/absorptions that result in darkening. 
  From Merillou et al., comparisons to physical images. 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes 
Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Wet materials Common Theme:layers captured data 
 A top smooth layer results in specular reflection, the index of refraction of water results in total 
internal reflection, and so more absorption and material darkening. More scattering within the material 
causes more saturated color.   Forward scattering and index of refraction of water result in coherent 
transmission through a thin material.  Observations of geometric variation of wet materials.  Increased 
saturation of material captured with digital photography.   Evaporation and flow in the material contribute 
to drying. This means ambient occlusion (for evaporation) and distance to edge (flow in material) are 
significant parameters for estimating the drying pattern. A wetness map is estimated for an object photographed 
at different times as it dries. Experimental Procedure: Data Analysis  Functions can be fit to the 
drying time as a function of distance to edge and the ambient occlusion (or the accessibility)  The 
parameters for these functions are stored as look up maps.  Examples of using the model compared to 
ground truth.  Applying the model to a synthetic example.   Nishita et al. presented a model of snow 
as a participating medium with embedded particles for sparkle 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common 
themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials  Water Natural waters are colored by scattering 
from suspended particles  We often see particles or other material suspended in water --especially in 
natural settings such as ponds, rivers, lakes and oceans. These effects are discussed in more depth in 
the SIGGRAPH 09 course: Scattering, Thursday, 6 August | 1:45 PM - 5:30 PM | Room 265­266 Approaches: 
First Principles Modeling of Scattering Measurement of Scattering Properties Dilute milk Fat globules 
in suspension  A detailed description of unique underwater scattering effects, including fluorescence 
and Raman scattering is given in: D. Gutierrez, F. Seron, O. Anson, and A. Munoz, Visualizing underwater 
ocean optics, Computer Graphics Forum (EUROGRAPHICS 2008), 27, pp. 547--556. Measurement of suspended 
particles is described in: Srinivasa G. Narasimhan , Mohit Gupta , Craig Donner , Ravi Ramamoorthi , 
Shree K. Nayar , Henrik Wann Jensen, Acquiring scattering properties of participating media by dilution, 
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), v.25 n.3, July 2006  Modelling rocks requires modeling macroscopic 
3D structure.  2D textures are inconvenient for modeling truly 3D materials such as rock/stone.  Solid 
textures allow the separate modeling of material geometry and object geometry. Volume 26 (2007), number 
1 pp. 66 79 COMPUTER GRAPHICS forum Modeling and Rendering of Heterogeneous Granular Materials: Granite 
Application Romain Souli´e, St´ephane M´erillou, Olivier Romain, Terraz Djamchid and Romain Ghazanfarpour 
Modeling process of heterogeneous granular materials using 3DVorono¨ diagrams to obtain a full representation 
of their structure. Rendering process based on photon mapping to simulate subsurface scattering inside 
these materials, presented in  Figures from Soulie et al. modeling granite: the geometry is modelled 
using a 3D Voronoi diagram, and subsurface scattering is modeled for the individual granite components 
of mica, feldspar and quarts.  Figure from Soulie et al., modeling the material 3D structure allows 
modeling of geometry that is consistent with the material.   Texture synthesis such as Heeger and Bergen 
s spectral analysis fail for materials made of discrete particles embedded in a matrix. Stereological 
Techniques for Solid Textures Jagnow, Dorsey, Rushmeier,SIGGRAPH 2004 Stereology is used in the construction 
industry to estimate rock distributions.   Stereology is also used in biology to estimate 3D distributions 
fom 2D slices The distribution of 2D diameters in a slice is related to , but not the same as the 3D 
distribution.  Recent research Volumetric materials Recovering Sphere Distributions How many profiles 
of the smallest size? NA (1) K11 NV (1) K12 NV (2) K13 NV (3) K14NV (4) Kij = Probability that particle 
NV(j) exhibits profile NA(i) Recovering Sphere Distributions Putting it all together  For particles 
that aren t spheres, the relation between 2D and 3D needs to be calculated Recent research Volumetric 
materials   Other Particle Types We cannot classify arbitrary particles by d/dmax Instead, we choose 
to use A / Amax Algorithm inputs: Approach: Collect statistics for 2D profiles and 3D particle Recent 
research Volumetric materials Profile Statistics Segment input image to obtain profile densities NA. 
 Bin profiles according to their area, A/ Amax Recent research Volumetric materials Recovering Particle 
Distributions Just like before, NA = HKNV 1 -1 K NA Solving for the particle densities, NV = H Use 
NV to populate a synthetic volume. Color using mean particle colors from the input image Recent research 
Volumetric materials  Recovering Noise How can we replicate the noisy appearance of the input? Some 
noise is needed, or results look too pristine The noise residual is less structured and responds well 
to Heeger &#38; Bergen s method     Jagnow et al., ACM Transactions on Applied Perception, 2008 There 
is no single way to estimate particle shape from a single slice. A psychophysical test is needed to find 
which estimation technique is best. Recent research Volumetric materials Applied Perception: Do Psychophysical 
Experiment Which is the slice through the same material shown in the center?  An example of one screen 
view from the psychophysical test. Results of test across different particle shapes. Related issues: 
General 3D Texture Synthesis Perception of Materials This study of touches on two areas synthesizing 
3D materials and perceptual experiments . Subsequent work on 3D texture synthesis can be found in: Solid 
texture synthesis from 2d exemplars, Kopf, J. and Fu, C. and Cohen-Or, D. and Deussen, O. and Lischinski, 
D. and Wong, T., ACM transactions on graphics 26(3), 2007. and Lazy Solid Texture Synthesis, Dong, Y. 
and Lefebvre, S. and Tong, X. and Drettakis, G., Computer Graphics Forum, 27(4), pp. 1165 1174, 2008. 
 Studies on the perception of materials: Ganesh Ramanarayanan , James Ferwerda , Bruce Walter Kavita 
Bala, Visual equivalence: towards a new standard for image fidelity, ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 
v.26 n.3, July 2007 Peter Vangorp , Jurgen Laurijssen , Philip Dutré, The influence of shape on the 
perception of material reflectance, ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), v.26 n.3, July 2007 Ganesh Ramanarayanan 
, Kavita Bala , James A. Ferwerda, Perception of complex aggregates, ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 
v.27 n.3, August 2008  3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed 
Materials Finished Wood Textiles Fibers Threads Knitted Woven Automotive Paint Artistic Paint Gems 
 Finished wood can have a lustrous appearance that results from the internal orientation of the wood 
fibers, combined with the reflection and transmission from the smoothed finished top surface. Marschner 
et al. modeled this reflectance as a Gaussian function g that depends on parameters Psi that depend 
on the orientation of the wood fibers and the surface normal. Stephen R. Marschner, Stephen H. Westin, 
Adam Arbree, and Jonathan T. Moon. Measuring and modeling the appearance of finished wood. ACM Trans. 
Graph., 24(3):727 734, 2005.   Figure from Marschner et al 2005, similar to wet surfaces, smooth surface 
from finish layer produces specular refection. Similar to hair analysis, orientation of wood fibers influences 
orientation of reflection.  From Marschner et al.2005, full model for finished wood. 3. SPECIALIZED 
MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Textiles: Individual 
threads Knitted Materials Woven Materials Common theme: Detailed geometry  3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL 
MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials Textiles: Individual threads 
Knitted Materials Woven Materials 36:6388 6392, 1997. The structure of individual threads may be designed 
to give particular optical effects, such as looking a different color from different view angles. B. 
Rubin, H. Kobsa, and S. M. Shearer. Prediction and verification of an iridescent synthetic fiber. Appl. 
Opt., 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials 
Textiles: Individual threads Knitted Materials  Woven Materials Specialized volumetric structures have 
been proposed to model the fuzzy nature of knitwear: Eduard Groeller, Rene T. Rau, and Wolfgang Strasser. 
Modeling and visualization of knitwear. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 1(4):302 
310, 1995. Yarn is loose, fluffy grouping of fibers: Ying-Qing Xu, Yanyun Chen, Stephen Lin, Hua Zhong, 
Enhua Wu, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Photorealistic rendering of knitwear using the lumislice. 
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 391 
398. ACM Press, 2001. Xu et al. model yarn as volume of fibers formed by twisting a scatter diagram in 
2D along a 3D axis.  From Xu et al. 2001, a full knitted fabric is formed from the volumetric model 
applied along a pattern of knitted stiches.  The reflectance of individual threads, effect of light 
going through threads and weaving patterns need to be accounted for in realistically rendering woven 
materials Neeharika Adabala, Guangzheng Fei, and Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann. Visualization of woven cloth. 
Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, Leuven, Belgium, 2003. pages 178 185.  
Figure from Adabla et al. showing complete process for modeling woven cloth. Neeharika Adabala, Guangzheng 
Fei, and Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann. Visualization of woven cloth. Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics 
workshop on Rendering, Leuven, Belgium, 2003. pages 178 185. Figure showing side by side images of photographs 
of real cloth and the simulations performed by Adabala et al.  Slide 14 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS 
Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials  Automotive Paint A first principles 
model for automotive paint, including the depth effect given by multiple layers and sparkles caused by 
reflections off small particles is given in: Sergey Ershov, Konstantin Kolchin, and Karol Myszkowski. 
Rendering pearlescent appearance based on paint-composition modelling. Computer Graphics Forum, 20(3), 
2001. Sergey Ershov, Roman Durikovic, Konstantin Kolchin, and Karol Myszkowski. Reverse engineering approach 
to appearance-based design of metallic and pearlescent paints. Vis. Comput., 20(8-9):586 600, 2004. Roman 
Durikovic and William L. Martens. Simulation of sparkling and depth effect in paints. In SCCG 03: Proceedings 
of the 19th spring conference on Computer graphics, pages 193 198, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM Press 
The change of color with angle for metallic car paints is modeled in a system for automotive finish design 
in: Gary Meyer, Clement Shimizu, Alan Eggly, David Fischer, Jim King, and Allan Rodriguez.Computer aided 
design of automotive finishes. In Proceedings of 10th Congress of the International Colour Association, 
pages 685 688, 2005.  ¨ -Johannes G¨unther, Tongbo Chen, Michael Goesele, Ingo Wald, and Hans-Peter 
Seidel. Efficient acquisition and realistic rendering of car paint. In G¨unther Greiner, Joachim Hornegger, 
Heinrich Niemann, and Marc Stamminger, editors, Proceedings of 10th International Fall Workshop -Vision, 
Modeling, and Visualization (VMV) 2005, pages 487 494. Using captured data to fit a multilobed Cook Torrance 
Model An interface for designing the change in paint color with view. Figure from Guenther et all using 
a paint model based on data capture.   Figure from Ershov showing the detailed paint structure used 
in a first principles model. Figures from Ershov et al. 2001 showing results  Artistic paints, particularly 
water colors, are modeled as particulates carried by a fluid modeled with either a 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL 
MODELS shallow fluid model: Common themes Natural Materials Cassidy J. Curtis, Sean E. Manufactured/Processed 
Materials Anderson, Joshua E. Seims, KurtW. Fleischer,  Artistic Paints  and David H. Salesin. Computer-generated 
watercolor. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 
pages 421 430. ACM Press/Addison- Wesley Publishing Co., 1997. Or a Lattice-Boltzmann model: Nelson 
S.-H. Chu and Chiew-Lan Tai. Moxi: real-time ink dispersion in absorbent paper. ACM Trans. Graph., 24(3):504 
511, 2005. 3. SPECIALIZED MATERIAL MODELS Common themes Natural Materials Manufactured/Processed Materials 
  GEMS Some geometric detailed modeling, Make use of advanced optics effects  Rendering by Yinlong 
Sun showing colors in a diamond produced by accounting for dispersion. Rendering gems with aterism or 
chatoyancy Shigeki Yokoi, Kosuke Kurashige and Jun-ichiro Toriwaki The Visual Computer, Volume 2, Number 
5 / September, 1986 Bright patterns in gems like cat s eyes and sapphires These are caused by ellipsoidal 
inclusions of material in the gem, and are accounted for using a volume rendering method.   Figure 
from from Guy and Soler. For many types of gems polarization effects must be taken into account.  Pseudochromatic 
Color of Crystals Dispersion  Asterism and Chatoyance  Aventurescence  Opalescence  Labradorescence. 
 Chatoyance modeled and rendered by Weidlich  Recently Andrea Weidlich has done a comprehensive study 
of the structural colors in gems and precious stones, that encompasses the phenomena just noted, as well 
as others. A detailed analysis is avialable in her dissertation: Pseudochromatic Colourisation of Crystals 
in Predictive Image Synthesis , TU Wien, 2009. http://www.cg.tuwien.ac.at/research/pub lications/2009/weidlich-2009-thesis/ 
 Pseudochromatic Color of Crystals Aventurescence Aventurescence: glittering crystalline metallic inclusions 
 WEIDLICH, A. and WILKIE, A. 2008: Modeling Aventurescent Gems with Procedural Textures. In: Proceedings 
of the Spring Conference on Computer Graphics (SCCG), pp. 1 8. ACM Modeled and rendered by Weidlich 
  Pseudochromatic Color of Crystals Opalescence diffraction phenomena  Labradorescence interference 
from multiple pairs of thin layers  IEEE TR VISUALIZ GRAPHIC DECEMBER 19 Modeling for a Pearl-Noriko 
Na Yoshitsugu Teruo Usami  See Pseudochromatic Colourisation of Crystals in Predictive Image Synthesis 
, TU Wien, 2009 for multiple images of each effect, both photographed and simulated. .. Andrea Weidlich, 
Alexander Wilkie. Rendering the Effect of Labradorescenc In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2009, May 
2009.  Pearls are produced organically, unlike the other gems discussed. These figures are from Nagata 
et al. 1997, showing the results of modeling pearls using different layers to model diffuse reflectance, 
interference effects, specular reflection, and spatial variations. 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES 
 Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches Taxonomy Chemical Reactions Mechanical Processes  
The area of aging and weathering processes is critical in modeling natural variations in materials. Many 
very detailed models have been developed. A general view of the area is given by organizing the detailed 
models into three general categories. -Chemical Reactions like rusting or patination - Mechanical Processes 
like paint crackling and peeling -Biological Growth like algae, moss or mold growing Biological Growth 
 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches Metallic patinas 
naturalartificial natural artificial  Metals often develop a characteristic patina over time. The patination 
process, which develops in a series of thin surface layers, is due to the chemical alteration of a surface 
and results in changes in color. Patination may be the result of deliberately applied craft processes 
or natural corrosion. The flow of water is one of the most pervasive and important natural forces involved 
in the weathering of materials producing a distinctive set of patterns of washes and stains. These photographs 
show the weathering of various buildings. Water may wash dirt from some areas and clean them; in other 
areas dirt and other materials are deposited, creating stains. The result is a visually rich set of patterns 
that are difficult to model with most texturing techniques. 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy 
  Simulation Methods Capture Approaches   Stephane Merillou, Jean-Michel Dischler, and Djamchid Ghazanfarpour. 
Corrosion: Simulating and rendering. In GI 2001, pages 167 174, June 2001. , Julie Dorsey, Alan Edelman, 
Henrik Wann Jensen, Justin Legakis, and Hans Kohling Pedersen. Modeling and rendering of weathered stone. 
In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 225 
234. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1999. Koichi Hirota, Yasuyuki Tanoue, and Toyohisa Kaneko. 
Generation of crack patterns with a physical model. The Visual Computer, 14(3):126 137, 1998. Koichi 
Hirota, Yasuyuki Tanoue, and Toyohisa Kaneko. Simulation of three-dimensional cracks. The Visual Computer, 
16(7):371 378, 2000. 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches 
Oxides &#38; water Erosion 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Cracking 4. 
AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches Peeling 4. AGING AND WEATHERING 
PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches Scratching  S. Gobron and N. Chiba. Simulation 
of peeling using 3d­surface cellular automata. In 9th Pacific Graphics Conference on Computer Graphics 
and Applications, pages 338 347, Tokyo Japan, Oct 2001. IEEE.  Eric Paquette, Pierre Poulin, and George 
Drettakis. The simulation of paint cracking and peeling. In Graphics Interface 2002, pages 59 68, May 
2002. S. Merillou, J.M. Dischler, and D. Ghazanfarpour. Surface scratches: measuring, modeling and rendering. 
The Visual Computer, 17(1):30 45, 2001. C. Bosch, X. Pueyo, S. M´erillou, and D. Ghazanfarpour. A physically­based 
model for rendering realistic scratches. Computer Graphics Forum, 23(3):361 370, 2004. 4. AGING AND 
WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches  George Drettakis Eric Paquette, 
Pierre Poulin. Surface aging by impacts. In Graphics Interface 2001, pages 175 182, June 2001.  Siu-Chi 
Hsu and Tien-Tsin Wong. Simulating dust accumulation. IEEE Comput Graphics Appl, 15(1):18 22, January 
1995. Brett Desbenoit, Eric Galin, and Samir Akkouche. Simulating and modeling lichen growth. Computer 
Graphics Forum, 23(3):341 350, 2004. 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES 
Taxonomy Simulation Methods Capture Approaches  Lichen Growth  Summary table from Jianye Lu, Athinodoros 
S. Georghiades, Andreas Glaser, Hongzhi Wu, Li-YiWei, Baining Guo, Julie Dorsey, and Holly Rushmeier. 
Context-aware textures. ACM Trans. Graph., 26(1):3, 2007. Another recent survey is A survey of aging 
and weathering phenomena in computer graphic, S Merillou and D. Ghazanfarpour, Computers &#38; Graphics 
32 (2) pp 159 174, 2008. A general simulation method for many effects: Y. Chen, L. Xia, T.T. Wong, X. 
Tong, H. Bao and B. Guo et al., Visual simulation of weathering by gamma-ton tracing, ACM Transactions 
on Graphics 24 (3) (2005), pp. 1127 1133. 4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods 
 Capture Approaches Capture in Context --appearance ---agent causing change --geometry Observing and 
Transferring Material Histories  First-principles simulations are time-consuming or impossible  New 
approach:  Capture time variations from real shapes, transfer them to generate synthetic objects  
Shapes can be rendered at different times in their histories  While simulating aging effects produces 
good results, first­principles simulations are time consuming or, in some cases, impossible because the 
underlying physics and chemistry are not completely understood. Rather than simulating aging effects, 
time variations from real shapes can be captured. This example shows effects captured from a copper bowl. 
We applied an artificial patination treatment to the bowl over a two week period and captured the shape 
and texture variations a frequent time intervals.  4. AGING AND WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation 
Methods Capture Approaches  Time Varying Additional efforts have capture time series of BRDF data Jianye 
Lu, Athinodoros S. Georghiades, Andreas Glaser, Hongzhi Wu, Li-YiWei, Baining Guo, Julie Dorsey, and 
Holly Rushmeier. Context-aware textures. ACM Trans. Graph., 26(1):3, 2007. Additional time varying capture: 
 Jinwei Gu, Chien-I Tu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Peter Belhumeur, Wojciech Matusik, and Shree Nayar. Time-varying 
surface appearance: acquisition, modeling and rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 25(3):762 771, 2006. Sun, 
B.; Kalyan Sunkavalli; Ravi Ramamoorthi; Belhumeur, P.N.; Nayar, S.K., "Time-Varying BRDFs," Visualization 
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on , vol.13, no.3, pp.595-609, May-June 2007  4. AGING AND 
WEATHERING PROCESSES Taxonomy Simulation Methods  Capture Approaches From Single Example  In some cases 
weathering effects can be captured by taking data from a single image of a material that has been marked 
with fully aged and fully new regions. Jiaping Wang, Xin Tong, Stephen Lin, Minghao Pan, Chao Wang, Hujun 
Bao, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Appearance manifolds for modeling time-variant appearance of 
materials. ACM Trans. Graph., 25(3):754 761, 2006. Su Xue, Jiaping Wang, Xin Tong, Qionghai Dai, Baining 
Guo Image-based Material Weathering. Computer Graphics Forum 27( 2):617-626, 2008. 5. CURRENT TRENDS 
AND NEEDS TRENDS Design of Physical Materials Editable Captured Data Simulated Microstructure Aging Inverse 
Aging Shape and Appearance NEEDS INTERFACES DATA!!!    Design of Physical Materials Paints Milled 
Facets The trends discussed here are really mini (micro?) trends some instances of new work that may 
grow into sub areas of material appearance research. The needs in materials continue to be large unsolved 
problems interfaces for the convenient specification of materials, and data for the full range of materials 
we see everyday. Digital modeling of material appearance isn t just for image generation. Computer simulation 
can be used to formulate paints and to design surface microstructure to attain desired effects. Paint 
design: Ershov, S., Durikovic, R., Kolchin, K., and Myszkowski, K. 2004. Reverse engineering approach 
to appearance-based design of metallic and pearlescent paints. Vis. Comput. 20, 8-9 (Nov. 2004), 586-600. 
 Gary Meyer Computer Graphic Tools for Automotive Paint Engineering in Book Title - Service Life Prediction 
of Polymeric Materials, pp 273-282, 2009. Milled Facets: Tim Weyrich ,Pieter Peers, Wojciech Matusik 
and Szymon Rusinkiewicz , Fabricating Microgeometry for Custom Surface Reflectance SIGGRAPH 2009 (ACM 
TOG).   Editable captured data SVBRDF s (Spatially Varying BRDF) Subsurface scattering (BSSRDF) Captured 
data is of limited usefulness if a user can not edit it to suit a new purpose: Lawrence, J., Ben-Artzi, 
A., DeCoro, C., Matusik, W., Pfister, H., Ramamoorthi, R., and Rusinkiewicz, S. 2006. Inverse shade trees 
for non-parametric material representation and editing. ACM Trans. Graph. 25, 3 (Jul. 2006), Ying Song, 
Xin Tong, Fabio Pellacini, Pieter Peers, SubEdit: A Representation for Editing Measured Heterogeneous 
Subsurface Scattering SIGGRAPH 2009, (ACM TOG)   Inverse aging If we can simulate material aging, 
can we de-age models of existing objects? Within images Virtual painting restoration The availability 
of high end computing using clusters of machines coupled with progress in understanding surface microstructure 
makes first principles simulation of coatings and their change with time feasible for appearance applications. 
Surface structure changes and binders weaken. Surface color changes as binders yellow with exposure to 
sunlight. Hunt, F.Y., Galler M.A., and Martin J.W., Microstructure of Weathered Paint and Its Relation 
to Gloss Loss: Computer Simulation and Modelling, J. COAT. TECHNOL., 70, No. 880, 45 (1998). Jenny Faucheu, 
Kurt A. Wood, Li-Piin Sung, Jonathan W. Martin, Relating gloss loss to topographical features of a PVDF 
coating, Journal of Coatings Technology and Research 3(1) pages 29- 39, 2006. De-aging or cleaning objects 
in an image is demonstrated in: Su Xue, Jiaping Wang, Xin Tong, Qionghai Dai, Baining Gu, Image-based 
Material Weathering Computer Graphics Forum ( 27) 2, 617-626, 2008. Using a combination of spectral imaging 
and pigment mapping, RIT researchers have successfully rejuvenated paintings such as van Gogh s Starry 
night Y. Zhao, Image Segmentation and Pigment Mapping of Cultural Shape and Appearance Materials take 
on characteristic shapes Characteristic shapes particularly visible in weathered materials From Dorsey 
et al. 1999 Heritage Based on Spectral Imaging, Ph.D. Dssertation, R.I.T., Rochester, NY, 2008. http://www.art­si.org/PDFs/Processing/Zhao­PhD2008.pdf 
 As noted by Adelson, materials take on particular shapes, that is, we don t expect to see cream with 
sharp facets, or fluffy metals. E. Adelson, "On seeing stuff: The perception of materials by humans and 
machines," Proceedings of the SPIE 4299, pp. 1--12, 2001. The relationship between shape and material 
is particularly apparent in aged materials. Papers that deal with shape change during aging processes 
include: Beardal M, Farley M, Ouderkirk D, Smith J, Rheimschussel C, Jones M, et al. Goblins by spheroidal 
weathering. In: Eurographics workshop on natural phenomena, 2007. Wojtan C., Carlson M., MuchaP. J., 
Turk G.: Animating corrosion and erosion. In: Eurographics workshop on natural phenomena, 2007. 5. CURRENT 
TRENDS AND NEEDS TRENDS Design of Physical Materials Editable Captured Data Simulated Microstructure 
Aging Inverse Aging Shape and Appearance NEEDS INTERFACES DATA!!!  Most interfaces in use in modeling 
packages still require user to understand details of computer graphics representations, rather than allowing 
natural specification of material appearance.  DATA Isolated databases exist in a variety of formats: 
 Rutgers Skin database,  Columbia Databases: BTF ,Time Varying materials  Bonn BTF  Matusik BRDF 
 CornellMeasurements  NIST/NEFDS  Lightworks  Yale Context Aware Textures  Can we build a materials 
search engine? Yale Context Aware Textures database, http://graphics.cs.yale.edu/CAT Rutgers Skin database, 
http : //www.caip.rutgers.edu/rutgerste xture/  Columbia Databases: BTF http : //www1.cs.columbia.edu/CAV 
E/projects/btf/, Time Varying materials: http : //www1.cs.columbia.edu/CAV E//databases/staf/staf.php 
 Bonn BTF data base http : //btf.cs.uni - bonn.de/  Matusik BRDF: http : //www.merl.com/brdf/  CornellMeasurements 
http : //www.graphics.cornell.edu/onlin e/measurements/reflectance/  NIST/NEFDS http : //math.nist.gov/ 
FHunt/appearance/nefds.html  Lightworksmaterials for a variety of building supplymanufacturers http 
: //www.lightworks- user.com/ (proprietary) Currently available data is in many diverse formats   
  Bibliography Advanced Material Appearance Models General BRDF s, BSSRDF s, and Textures [Phong, 
1975],[Ward, 1992],[Lafortune et al., 1997],[Ashikhmin and Shirley, 2000],[Blinn, 1977],[Cook and Torrance, 
1982], [Oren and Nayar, 1994], [Jensen et al., 2001]  Specialized Material Models Natural Materials 
 Organic * skin: wrinkles and pores, pigmentation, subsurface scattering, surface oils [Walters, 2002], 
[Marschner et al., 2000],[Hanrahan and Krueger, 1993] [Stam, 2001] [Krishnaswamy and Baranoski, 2004], 
[De­bevec et al., 2000], [Georghiades, 2003] [Fuchs et al., 2005] [Weyrich et al., 2006] [Boissieux et 
al., 2000], [Koenderink and Pont, 2003] * hair and fur: scattering from individual strands, interre.ections, 
self-shadowing, [Robertson, 1999], [Blazej et al., 1989],[Kajiya and Kay, 1989],[Hiebert et al., 2006], 
[Marschner et al., 2003],[Zinke and Weber, 2007],[Lokovic and Veach, 2000], [Moon and Marschner, 2006] 
 * eyes: pigmentation, creating sense of depth, [Lefohn et al., 2003],[Lam and Baranoski, 2006] * plants: 
internal structure, pigments, hairy features, growth patterns, including leaves, bark, wood, [Bloomenthal, 
1985], [Prusinkiewicz et al., 1988],[Vogelmann, 1993], [Baranoski and Rokne, 1997],[Bara­noski and Rokne, 
2001], [Franzke and Deussen, 2003], [Wang et al., 2005], [Fowler et al., 1989; 1992], [Fuhrer et al., 
], [Lefebvre and Neyret, 2002], [Buchanan, 1998], [Lefebvre and Poulin, 2000], [Terraz et al., 2009] 
 * birds: structure of feathers, forming coats, [Dai et al., 1995], [Streit and Heidrich, 2002] [Chen 
et al., 2002] * insects: iridescence, [Sun, 2006]  Natural Materials Inorganic * porous : modi.cation 
of re.ectance, [Merillou et al., 2000] * wet: darkening and transparency effects for water or oil permeated 
materials, [Jensen et al., 1999], [Nakamae et al., 1990] * snow:internal scattering, visual particles, 
[Nishita et al., 1997] * water: scattering from suspended particles, [Gutierrez et al., 2008], [Narasimhan 
et al., 2006]  Manufactured/Processed Materials * .nished wood: sense of depth, [Marschner et al., 
2005]  * textiles: individual .bers, threads and formation of fabrics, [Rubin, 1998],[Groeller et al., 
1995],[Xu et al., 2001],[Adabala et al., 2003] * automotive paint: color .op, depth, sparkle, orange 
peel, [Takagi et al., 1990], [G¨unther et al., 2005], [Dumont-B`ecle et al., 2001],[Shimizu et al., 2003], 
[Ershov et al., 2001] [Rump et al., 2008] * artistic paints and inks: pigmentation and .ow effects, 
[Cockshott et al., 1992],[1997], [Chu and Tai, 2005] * gems: light phenomena requiring simulation of 
wave effects, [Yuan et al., 1988] , [Sun et al., 2001],[Guy and Soler, 2004],[Nagata et al., 1997], [Weidlich 
and Wilkie, 2008b],[Weidlich and Wilkie, 2008a], [Weidlich and Wilkie, 2009],[Weidlich, 2009]   Aging 
and Weathering Processes  Simulation Methods: * patination: [Dorsey and Hanrahan, 1996],[Chang and 
Shih, 2000] * rust: [Merillou et al., 2001b], [Chang and Shih, 2003]  * erosion: [Dorsey et al., 1999],[Wojtan 
et al., 2007][Beardall et al., 2007] * cracking: [Hirota et al., 1998],[Hirota et al., 2000], [Gobron 
and Chiba, 2001b] ,[Aoki et al., 2002][Pa­quette et al., 2002] * peeling: [Gobron and Chiba, 2001a] 
 * scratching:[Merillou et al., 2001a], [Bosch et al., 2004] * denting and impacts: [Eric Paquette, 
2001] * dust accumulation: [chi Hsu and tsin Wong, 1995] * lichen growth: [Desbenoit et al., 2004] 
 * general effects and survey: [Chen et al., 2005],[M´erillou and Ghazanfarpour, 2008]  Capture Approaches: 
Methods that use photography and/or 3D scanning to capture instances of aging effects that can be generalized 
* capturing context [Lu et al., 2005],[Lu et al., 2007]  * temporal variation of BTF s and BRDF s [Koudelka, 
2004] [Gu et al., 2006], [Sun et al., 2007] * models from single examples of materials: [Wang et al., 
2006] [Xuey et al., 2008]   [Adabala et al., 2003] Neeharika Adabala, Guangzheng Fei, and Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann. 
Visualization of woven cloth. In Philip Dutr´e, Frank Suykens, Per H. Christensen, and Daniel Cohen-Or, 
editors, Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, pages 178 185, Leuven, Belgium, 
2003. Eurographics Association. [Aoki et al., 2002] K. Aoki, Ngo Hai Dong, T. Kaneko, and S. Kuriyama. 
Physically-based simulation of cracks on drying 3d solid. In 10th Paci.c Graphics Conference on Computer 
Graphics and Applications, pages 467 468, Beijing China, Oct 2002. IEEE. [Ashikhmin and Shirley, 2000] 
Michael Ashikhmin and Peter Shirley. An anisotropic Phong BRDF model. Journal of Graphic Tools, 5(2):25 
32, 2000. [Baranoski and Rokne, 1997] G. V. G. Baranoski and J. G. Rokne. An algorithmic re.ectance and 
transmittance model for plant tissue. Computer Graphics Forum, 16(3):141 150, August 1997. ISSN 1067-7055. 
[Baranoski and Rokne, 2001] Gladimir V. G. Baranoski and Jon G. Rokne. Ef.ciently simulating scattering 
of light by leaves. The Visual Computer, 17(8):491 505, 2001. [Beardall et al., 2007] M. Beardall, M. 
Farley, D. Ouderkirk, J. Smith, M. Jones, and P. Egbert. Goblins by spheroidal weathering. In Eurographics 
workshop on natural phenomena, pages 7 14, 2007. [Blazej et al., 1989] A. A. Blazej, J. Galatik, Z. Galatik, 
Z. Krul, and M. Mladek. Atlas of Microscopic Struc­tures of Fur Skins 1. Elsevier, New York, 1989. [Blinn, 
1977] James F. Blinn. Models of light re.ection for computer synthesized pictures. In Proceedings of 
the 4th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 192 198. ACM Press, 
1977. [Bloomenthal, 1985] Jules Bloomenthal. Modeling the mighty maple. In Proceedings of the 12th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 305 311. ACM Press, 1985. [Boissieux 
et al., 2000] L. Boissieux, G. Kiss, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, and P. Kalra. Simulation of skin aging and 
wrinkles with cosmetics insight. Computer Animation and Simulation 2000, pages 15 27, 2000. [Bosch et 
al., 2004] C. Bosch, X. Pueyo, S. M´erillou, and D. Ghazanfarpour. A physically-based model for rendering 
realistic scratches. Computer Graphics Forum, 23(3):361 370, 2004. [Buchanan, 1998] John W. Buchanan. 
Simulating wood using a voxel approach. Computer Graphics Forum, 17(3):105 112, 1998. ISSN 1067-7055. 
[Chang and Shih, 2000] Yao-Xun Chang and Zen-Chung Shih. Physically-based patination for underground 
objects. Computer Graphics Forum, 19(3), August 2000. ISSN 1067-7055. [Chang and Shih, 2003] Yao-Xun 
Chang and Zen-Chung Shih. The synthesis of rust in seawater. The Visual Computer, 19(1):50 66, 2003. 
[Chen et al., 2002] Yanyun Chen, Yingqing Xu, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Modeling and render­ing 
of realistic feathers. In Proceedings of the 29th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive 
techniques, pages 630 636. ACM Press, 2002. [Chen et al., 2005] Y. Chen, L. Xia, T.T. Wong, X. Tong, 
H. Bao, B. Guo, and H.Y. Shum. Visual simulation of weathering by . -ton tracing. Proceedings of ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2005, 24(3):1127 1133, 2005. [chi Hsu and tsin Wong, 1995] Siu chi Hsu and Tien tsin Wong. Simulating 
dust accumulation. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 15(1):18 22, 1995. [Chu and Tai, 2005] Nelson S.-H. Chu 
and Chiew-Lan Tai. Moxi: real-time ink dispersion in absorbent paper. ACM Trans. Graph., 24(3):504 511, 
2005. [Cockshott et al., 1992] T. Cockshott, J. Patterson, and D. England. Modelling the texture of paint. 
Computer Graphics Forum, 11(3):C217 C226, C476, 1992. [Cook and Torrance, 1982] R. L. Cook and K. E. 
Torrance. A re.ectance model for computer graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 1(1):7 24, January 
1982. [Curtis et al., 1997] Cassidy J. Curtis, Sean E. Anderson, Joshua E. Seims, Kurt W. Fleischer, 
and David H. Salesin. Computer-generated watercolor. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on 
Computer graph­ics and interactive techniques, pages 421 430. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
1997.  [Dai et al., 1995] Wen-Kai Dai, Zen-Chung Shih, and Ruei-Chuan Chang. Synthesizing feather textures 
in galliformes. Computer Graphics Forum, 14(3):407 420, August 1995. ISSN 1067-7055. [Debevec et al., 
2000] Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and Mark Sagar. Acquiring 
the re.ectance .eld of a human face. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics 
and interactive techniques, pages 145 156. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 2000. [Desbenoit 
et al., 2004] Brett Desbenoit, Eric Galin, and Samir Akkouche. Simulating and modeling lichen growth. 
Computer Graphics Forum, 23(3):341 350, 2004. [Dorsey and Hanrahan, 1996] Julie Dorsey and Pat Hanrahan. 
Modeling and rendering of metallic patinas. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference on Computer 
graphics and interactive techniques, pages 387 396. ACM Press, 1996. [Dorsey et al., 1999] Julie Dorsey, 
Alan Edelman, Henrik Wann Jensen, Justin Legakis, and Hans Kohling Pedersen. Modeling and rendering of 
weathered stone. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 
pages 225 234. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1999. [Dumont-B`ecle et al., 2001] P. Dumont-B`ecle, 
A. Kemeny, S. Michelin, and D. Arqu`es. Multi-texturing ap­proach for paint appearance simulation on 
virtual vehicles. Proceedings of the Driving Simulation Conference 2001, 213, 2001. [Eric Paquette, 2001] 
George Drettakis Eric Paquette, Pierre Poulin. Surface aging by impacts. In Graphics Interface 2001, 
pages 175 182, June 2001. [Ershov et al., 2001] Sergey Ershov, Konstantin Kolchin, and Karol Myszkowski. 
Rendering pearlescent ap­pearance based on paint-composition modelling. Computer Graphics Forum, 20(3), 
2001. ISSN 1067-7055. [Fowler et al., 1989] Deborah R. Fowler, James Hanan, and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz. 
Modelling spiral phyl­lotaxis. Computers and Graphics, 13(3):291 296, 1989. [Fowler et al., 1992] Deborah 
R. Fowler, Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz, and Johannes Battjes. A collision-based model of spiral phyllotaxis. 
In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on Computer graphics and inter­active techniques, pages 
361 368. ACM Press, 1992. [Franzke and Deussen, 2003] Oliver Franzke and Oliver Deussen. Rendering plant 
leaves faithfully. In Pro­ceedings of the SIGGRAPH 2003 conference on Sketches &#38; applications, pages 
1 1. ACM Press, 2003. [Fuchs et al., 2005] Martin Fuchs, Hendrik Lensch, and Hans-Peter Seidel. Re.ectance 
from images: A model­based approach for human faces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics, 11(3):296 305, 2005. Member-Volker Blanz. [Fuhrer et al., ] Martin Fuhrer, Henrik Wann Jensen, 
and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz. Modeling hairy plants. Graphical Models, 68(4), July. [Georghiades, 2003] 
Athinodoros S. Georghiades. Recovering 3-d shape and re.ectance from a small number of photographs. In 
EGRW 03: Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, pages 230 240, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, 
Switzerland, 2003. Eurographics Association. [Gobron and Chiba, 2001a] S. Gobron and N. Chiba. Simulation 
of peeling using 3d-surface cellular automata. In 9th Paci.c Graphics Conference on Computer Graphics 
and Applications, pages 338 347, Tokyo Japan, Oct 2001. IEEE. [Gobron and Chiba, 2001b] St´ephane Gobron 
and Norishige Chiba. Crack pattern simulation based on 3d sur­face cellular automata. The Visual Computer, 
17(5):287 309, 2001. [Groeller et al., 1995] Eduard Groeller, Rene T. Rau, and Wolfgang Strasser. Modeling 
and visualization of knitwear. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 1(4):302 310, 
1995. [Gu et al., 2006] Jinwei Gu, Chien-I Tu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Peter Belhumeur, Wojciech Matusik, and 
Shree Nayar. Time-varying surface appearance: acquisition, modeling and rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 
25(3):762 771, 2006.  [G¨unther et al., 2005] Johannes G¨unther, Tongbo Chen, Michael Goesele, Ingo 
Wald, and Hans-Peter Seidel. Ef.cient acquisition and realistic rendering of car paint. In G¨unther Greiner, 
Joachim Hornegger, Hein­rich Niemann, and Marc Stamminger, editors, Proceedings of 10th International 
Fall Workshop -Vision, Modeling, and Visualization (VMV) 2005, pages 487 494. Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft 
Aka GmbH, November 2005. [Gutierrez et al., 2008] D. Gutierrez, F.J. Seron, A. Munoz, and O. Anson. Visualizing 
Underwater Ocean Optics. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 27, pages 547 556. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
2008. [Guy and Soler, 2004] Stephane Guy and Cyril Soler. Graphics gems revisited: fast and physically-based 
ren­dering of gemstones. ACM Trans. Graph., 23(3):231 238, 2004. [Hanrahan and Krueger, 1993] Pat Hanrahan 
and Wolfgang Krueger. Re.ection from layered surfaces due to subsurface scattering. In Proceedings of 
the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 165 174. ACM Press, 
1993. [Hiebert et al., 2006] Brad Hiebert, Jubin Dave, Tae-Yong Kim, Ivan Neulander, Hans Rijpkema, and 
Will Telford. The chronicles of Narnia: the lion, the crowds and rhythm and hues. In SIGGRAPH 06: ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2006 Courses, page 1, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press. [Hirota et al., 1998] Koichi Hirota, 
Yasuyuki Tanoue, and Toyohisa Kaneko. Generation of crack patterns with a physical model. The Visual 
Computer, 14(3):126 137, 1998. [Hirota et al., 2000] Koichi Hirota, Yasuyuki Tanoue, and Toyohisa Kaneko. 
Simulation of three-dimensional cracks. The Visual Computer, 16(7):371 378, 2000. [Jensen et al., 1999] 
Henrik Wann Jensen, Justin Legakis, and Julie Dorsey. Rendering of wet material. In Dani Lischinski and 
Greg Ward Larson, editors, Rendering Techniques 99, Eurographics, pages 273 282. Springer-Verlag Wien 
New York, 1999. Proc. 10th Eurographics Rendering Workshop, Granada, Spain, June 21 23, 1999. [Jensen 
et al., 2001] Henrik Wann Jensen, Stephen R. Marschner, Marc Levoy, and Pat Hanrahan. A practical model 
for subsurface light transport. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and 
interactive techniques, pages 511 518. ACM Press, 2001. [Kajiya and Kay, 1989] J. T. Kajiya and T. L. 
Kay. Rendering fur with three dimensional textures. In Proceed­ings of the 16th annual conference on 
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 271 280. ACM Press, 1989. [Koenderink and Pont, 2003] 
J. Koenderink and S. Pont. The secret of velvety skin. Machine Vision and Applications, 14(4):260 268, 
2003. [Koudelka, 2004] M.L. Koudelka. Capture, analysis and synthesis of textured surfaces with variation 
in illu­mination, viewpoint, and time. Yale University New Haven, CT, USA, 2004. [Krishnaswamy and Baranoski, 
2004] A. Krishnaswamy and G.V.G. Baranoski. A Biophysically-Based Spec­tral Model of Light Interaction 
with Human Skin. Computer Graphics Forum, 23(3):331 340, 2004. [Lafortune et al., 1997] Eric P. F. Lafortune, 
Sing-Choong Foo, Kenneth E. Torrance, and Donald P. Green­berg. Non-linear approximation of re.ectance 
functions. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 
pages 117 126. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1997. [Lam and Baranoski, 2006] Michael W.Y. 
Lam and Gladimir V.G. Baranoski. A predictive light transport model for the human iris. Computer Graphics 
Forum, 25(3):359 368, 2006. [Lefebvre and Neyret, 2002] Sylvain Lefebvre and Fabrice Neyret. Synthesizing 
bark. In P. Debevec and S. Gibson, editors, 13th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering, Pisa, Italy, 2002. 
Eurographics Association. [Lefebvre and Poulin, 2000] Laurent Lefebvre and Pierre Poulin. Analysis and 
synthesis of structural textures. In Graphics Interface 2000, pages 77 86, May 2000. [Lefohn et al., 
2003] Aaron Lefohn, Brian Budge, Peter Shirley, Richard Caruso, and Erik Reinhard. An ocu­ larist s approach 
to human iris synthesis. IEEE Comput Graphics Appl, 23(6):70 75, November/December 2003.  [Lokovic and 
Veach, 2000] Tom Lokovic and Eric Veach. Deep shadow maps. In SIGGRAPH 00: Proceedings of the 27th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 385 392, New York, NY, USA, 2000. ACM 
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. [Lu et al., 2005] Jianye Lu, Athinodoros S. Georghiades, Holly Rushmeier, 
Julie Dorsey, and Chen Xu. Syn­thesis of material drying history: Phenomenon modeling, transferring and 
rendering. In proceedings of Eurographics Workshop on Natural Phenomena, pages 7 16, 2005. [Lu et al., 
2007] Jianye Lu, Athinodoros S. Georghiades, Andreas Glaser, Hongzhi Wu, Li-Yi Wei, Baining Guo, Julie 
Dorsey, and Holly Rushmeier. Context-aware textures. ACM Trans. Graph., 26(1):3, 2007. [Marschner et 
al., 2000] Stephen R. Marschner, Brian K. Guenter, and Sashi Raghupathy. Modeling and ren­dering for 
realistic facial animation. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques 2000, 
pages 231 242, London, UK, 2000. Springer-Verlag. [Marschner et al., 2003] Stephen R. Marschner, Henrik 
Wann Jensen, Mike Cammarano, Steve Worley, and Pat Hanrahan. Light scattering from human hair .bers. 
ACM Trans. Graph., 22(3):780 791, 2003. [Marschner et al., 2005] Stephen R. Marschner, Stephen H. Westin, 
Adam Arbree, and Jonathan T. Moon. Mea­suring and modeling the appearance of .nished wood. ACM Trans. 
Graph., 24(3):727 734, 2005. [M´erillou and Ghazanfarpour, 2008] S. M´erillou and D. Ghazanfarpour. A 
survey of aging and weathering phenomena in computer graphics. Computers &#38; Graphics, 32(2):159 174, 
2008. [Merillou et al., 2000] S. Merillou, J.-M. Dischler, and D. Ghazanfarpour. A BRDF postprocess to 
integrate porosity on rendered surface. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6(4):306 
318, October 2000. [Merillou et al., 2001a] S. Merillou, J.M. Dischler, and D. Ghazanfarpour. Surface 
scratches: measuring, mod­eling and rendering. The Visual Computer, 17(1):30 45, 2001. [Merillou et 
al., 2001b] Stephane Merillou, Jean-Michel Dischler, and Djamchid Ghazanfarpour. Corrosion: Simulating 
and rendering. In GI 2001, pages 167 174, June 2001. [Moon and Marschner, 2006] Jonathan T. Moon and 
Stephen R. Marschner. Simulating multiple scattering in hair using a photon mapping approach. In SIGGRAPH 
06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, pages 1067 1074, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press. [Nagata et al., 1997] 
Noriko Nagata, Toshimasa Dobashi, Yoshitsugu Manabe, Teruo Usami, and Seiji Inokuchi. Modeling and Visualization 
for a Pearl-Quality Evaluation Simulator. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 3(4):307 
315, October 1997. [Nakamae et al., 1990] E. Nakamae, K. Kaneda, T. Okamoto, and T. Nishita. A lighting 
model aiming at drive simulators. In Proceedings of Siggraph 1990, pages 395 404. ACM SIGGRAPH, 1990. 
[Narasimhan et al., 2006] S.G. Narasimhan, M. Gupta, C. Donner, R. Ramamoorthi, S.K. Nayar, and H.W. 
Jensen. Acquiring scattering properties of participating media by dilution. Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 
2006, 25(3):1003 1012, 2006. [Nishita et al., 1997] T. Nishita, H. Iwasaki, Y. Dobashi, and E. Nakamae. 
A modeling and rendering method for snow by using metaballs. Computer Graphics Forum, 16(3):357 364, 
August 1997. ISSN 1067-7055. [Oren and Nayar, 1994] Michael Oren and Shree K. Nayar. Generalization of 
lambert s re.ectance model. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive 
techniques, pages 239 246. ACM Press, 1994. [Paquette et al., 2002] Eric Paquette, Pierre Poulin, and 
George Drettakis. The simulation of paint cracking and peeling. In Graphics Interface 2002, pages 59 
68, May 2002. [Phong, 1975] Bui Tuong Phong. Illumination for computer generated pictures. Commun. ACM, 
18(6):311 317, 1975. [Prusinkiewicz et al., 1988] Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz, Aristid Lindenmayer, and 
James Hanan. Development models of herbaceous plants for computer imagery purposes. In SIGGRAPH 88: Proceedings 
of the 15th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 141 150, New York, 
NY, USA, 1988. ACM Press.  [Robertson, 1999] James Robertson. Forensic Examination of Human Hair. CRC 
Press, 1999. [Rubin, 1998] Barry Rubin. Tailored Fiber Cross Sections. Advanced Materials, 10(15):1225 
1227, 1998. [Rump et al., 2008] M. Rump, G. Muller, R. Sarlette, D. Koch, and R. Klein. Photo-realistic 
rendering of metallic car paint from image-based measurements. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 27, 
pages 527 536. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2008. [Shimizu et al., 2003] Clement Shimizu, Gary W. Meyer, 
and Joseph P. Wingard. Interactive goniochromatic color design. In Eleventh Color Imaging Conference, 
pages 16 22, 2003. [Stam, 2001] Jos Stam. An illumination model for a skin layer bounded by rough surfaces. 
In Proceedings of the 12th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques, pages 39 52, London, UK, 2001. 
Springer-Verlag. [Streit and Heidrich, 2002] L. Streit and W. Heidrich. A biologically-parameterized 
feather model. Computer Graphics Forum, 21(3):565 565, 2002. [Sun et al., 2001] Yinlong Sun, F. David 
Fracchia, Mark S. Drew, and Thomas W. Calvert. A spectrally based framework for realistic image synthesis. 
The Visual Computer, 17(7):429 444, 2001. [Sun et al., 2007] B. Sun, K. Sunkavalli, R. Ramamoorthi, PN 
Belhumeur, and SK Nayar. Time-Varying BRDFs. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 
13(3):595 609, 2007. [Sun, 2006] Yinlong Sun. Rendering biological iridescences with rgb-based renderers. 
ACM Trans. Graph., 25(1):100 129, 2006. [Takagi et al., 1990] Atsushi Takagi, Hitoshi Takaoka, Tetsuya 
Oshima, and Yoshinori Ogata. Accurate render­ing technique based on colorimetric conception. In Proceedings 
of the 17th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 263 272. ACM Press, 
1990. [Terraz et al., 2009] O. Terraz, G. Guimberteau, S. M´erillou, D. Plemenos, and D. Ghazanfarpour. 
3Gmap L-systems: an application to the modelling of wood. The Visual Computer, 25(2):165 180, 2009. [Vogelmann, 
1993] C. Vogelmann. Plant tissue optics. Annual review of plant physiol. plant mol. biol., 44:231 251, 
1993. [Walters, 2002] Kenneth A. Walters. Dermatological and Transdermal Formulations. Marcel Dekker 
Incorpo­rated, 2002. [Wang et al., 2005] Lifeng Wang, Wenle Wang, Julie Dorsey, Xu Yang, Baining Guo, 
and Heung-Yeung Shum. Real-time rendering of plant leaves. In SIGGRAPH 05: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers, 
pages 712 719, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM Press. [Wang et al., 2006] Jiaping Wang, Xin Tong, Stephen 
Lin, Minghao Pan, Chao Wang, Hujun Bao, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Appearance manifolds for modeling 
time-variant appearance of materials. ACM Trans. Graph., 25(3):754 761, 2006. [Ward, 1992] Gregory J. 
Ward. Measuring and modeling anisotropic re.ection. In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on Computer 
graphics and interactive techniques, pages 265 272. ACM Press, 1992. [Weidlich and Wilkie, 2008a] Andrea 
Weidlich and Alexander Wilkie. Modeling aventurescent gems with pro­cedural textures. In Proceedings 
of the Spring Conference on Computer Graphics (SCCG), pages [Weidlich and Wilkie, 2008b] Andrea Weidlich 
and Alexander Wilkie. Realistic rendering of birefringency in uniaxial crystals. ACM Transactions on 
Graphics, 27(1):6:1 6:12, March 2008. [Weidlich and Wilkie, 2009] Andrea Weidlich and Alexander Wilkie. 
Rendering the effect of labradorescence. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2009, pages [Weidlich, 
2009] Andrea Weidlich. Pseudochromatic Colourisation of Crystals in Predictive Image Synthesis. PhD thesis, 
Institute of Computer Graphics and Algorithms, Vienna University of Technology, Favoriten­strasse 9-11/186, 
A-1040 Vienna, Austria, January 2009. [Weyrich et al., 2006] Tim Weyrich, Wojciech Matusik, Hanspeter 
P.ster, Bernd Bickel, Craig Donner, Chien Tu, Janet McAndless, Jinho Lee, Addy Ngan, Henrik Wann Jensen, 
and Markus Gross. Analysis of human faces using a measurement-based skin re.ectance model. In SIGGRAPH 
06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, pages 1013 1024, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press.  [Wojtan et al., 
2007] Chris Wojtan, Mark Carlson, Peter J. Mucha, and Greg Turk. Animating Corrosion and Erosion. In 
D. Ebert and S. Merillou, editors, Eurographics Workshop on Natural Phenomena, pages 15 22, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 2007. Eurographics Association. [Xu et al., 2001] Ying-Qing Xu, Yanyun Chen, Stephen Lin, Hua 
Zhong, Enhua Wu, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Photorealistic rendering of knitwear using the lumislice. 
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 391 
398. ACM Press, 2001. [Xuey et al., 2008] S. Xuey, J. Wang, X. Tong, Q. Dai, and B. Guo. Image-based 
Material Weathering. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 27, pages 617 626. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
2008. [Yuan et al., 1988] Ying Yuan, Tosiyasu L. Kunii, Naota Inamato, and Lining Sun. Gemstone .re: 
Adaptive dispersive ray tracing of polyhedrons. The Visual Computer, 4(5):259 70, November 1988. [Zinke 
and Weber, 2007] Arno Zinke and Andreas Weber. Light scattering from .laments. IEEE Trans. on Vis. and 
Comp. Graphics, 13(2):342 356, March/April 2007.   
			
