
 AGAINST TAYLOR-MADE SOLUTIONS: INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGY IN A LEARNING ORGANISATION Joan Ballantine 
Margi Levy Philip Powell Information Systems Research Unit, Warwick Business School University of Warwick, 
CoventryCV47AL Tel: 01203524460, Fax: 01203524539 Email: orsml@razor.wbs.warwick.ac.uk ABSTRACT Information 
Systems Strategy (1SS) has had difficulties in gaining management acceptance as a key means of harnessing 
the power of information in organisations. One major reason for this is the difficulty in determining 
the value of 1SS to the organisation. This paper argues that 1SS cannot be evaluated according to strict 
financial criteria. The main argument is that evaluation has been linked to the tenets of scientific 
management. This is no longer appropriate as organisational structures have changed to reflect a more 
dynamic learning environment. The argument is that evaluation of 1SS must also reflect this change. The 
paper describes the dynamic nature of 1SS. It presents an example of a major UK retail bank to highlight 
discussion of evaluation in the learning organisation. INTRODUCTION Despite the widespread acceptance 
that information is now a pivotal issue for business, there is still skepticism among business managers 
of the benefits of effective information systems strategy (1SS). While there are numerous reasons to 
explain this skepticism, perhaps paramount is the difficulty in demonstrating a clear link between expenditure 
on 1SS and unambiguous and quantifiable outputs. Clearly no organisation can ignore the impact on profit 
of all activities in the business. The costs of information technology (IT), information systems (IS) 
and 1SS are significant, however their impact on overall performance is not easily captured in traditional 
measures. For this reason advocates of 1SS often find it difficult to rebuff the argument that 1SS is 
nice to have rather than mandatory for competitiveness. Permissionto makedigital/hard copiesof all or 
part of this makxial for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that [he copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copy­right notice, the title of the publication 
anditsdateappear,andnoticeis given that copyright is hy permissionOYthe ACM, Inc. To copy olherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific pennisaion and/or fee. 
SIGCPR/ SIGMIS 96, Denver Colorado USA C)1996 ACM ()-89791:782-0/96/()4. ,$3.50 This paper argues that 
evaluation is ultimately bound up with prevailing management culture. For this reason, perceptions of 
the potential benefits of 1SS have been derived mainly from the traditional command and control approach 
to management in organisations. The chief characteristic of this is a rationalist assumption that ultimate 
success is founded on ensuring the quantifiable efficiency of each individual component within an enterprise. 
Geared to wider strategic dimensions as well as the integration of internal and external environments, 
1SS has not fared well when evaluated as a stand-alone activity. Impelled by changing markets and technologies, 
organisations have been forced to take a wider view and have often grafted increasingly sophisticated 
modes of measurement onto their existing evaluation methods. This paper examines management attitudes 
to the evaluation of 1SS. It draws on a model developed by Sinclair (1986) who identified three eras 
of 1SS: efficiency, effectiveness and competitiveness, In the ef%ciency era the emphasis was instrumentalist; 
providing managers could create the right environment and incentives for task completion, optimal performance 
would ensure. Information systems benefits were seen exclusively in terms of short term financial benefits. 
In the era of effectiveness, short term financial measures were still in their ascendancy and management 
was concerned with controlling task completion. But there was also an interest in non-financial measures 
as the power of integrated IS as decision aids was recognised, Only in the third era was the potential 
for IS to contribute to competitiveness appreciated. Performance measurement of IS was now based on concepts 
of value-added to the business. However, the measures used to assess IS, in 36 essence, provided snapshots 
of the business at a single point in time and, critically, lacked feedback mechanisms. This paper proposes 
that organisations are now in a fourth era, termed here integration . This era is impelled by the recognition 
that only a capability to continuously learn from the business and its markets can sustain competitiveness. 
The emphasis is now on dynamics and on double loop learning (Argyris 1987) -not just what but why . Evaluation 
in the fourth era needs to take into account the imperatives of dynamism and learning. However, to apply 
this mode of thinking to 1SS requires that IS be conceptualised also as a dynamic and learning phenomena 
that facilitates the effective operation of the whole organisation. Recently, various evaluation models 
have been developed in an attempt to include the concepts of learning and dynamic organisations. This 
paper suggests one of these approaches, the Balanced Business Scorecard (Kaplan and Norton 1992), as 
an approach to evaluation for 1SS in the fourth era. The experiences of a major retail bank are analysed 
to illustrate the key issues. LIMITATIONS OF EVALUATION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGY The development 
of 1SS and consequently its evaluation can be conceptualised, as noted above, as occurring in three distinct 
eras (Sinclair, 1986). In the first two the preoccupation with issues of efficiency and effectiveness 
was reflected in 1SS. In the third era, organisations realised that IS could aid competitiveness and 
grappled with ways to utilise it effectively. Yet, the tradition of command and control is still detectable. 
However, competition highlighted the critical role of feedback mechanisms and organisational learning 
in achieving sustainable competitiveness. This section argues that these conditions herald the fourth 
era and constitute ideal circumstances for realising the full potential of 1SS. The paper argues that 
the fourth era emphasises the integration of business strategy and 1SS and that this era requires a radically 
different approach to the evaluation of 1SS. THE FIRST ERA: EFFICIENCY In the first era 1SS were primarily 
oriented to enabling the IS manager to balance competing demands from the business for computer-based 
information systems (Galliers, 1987). Organisations focused mainly on completing routine tasks more efficiently 
and faster through automation. 1SS was regarded as, at best, peripheral to business strategy (Johnston 
and Carrico, 1988; Synnott, 1987). In this era 1SS was seen as a simple, rational process of prioritizing 
systems. As such, the evaluation of 1SS to the organisation could be measured by unambiguous outputs, 
that is by evaluating the performance of individual IS in terms of increased efficiency within pre-set 
cost, budget and time constraints. Yet, achievement of these clear-cut criteria has proved elusive over 
the years (Keen, 1991; Farbey et al, 1993; Willcocks, 1990). This narrow focus reflected the persistence 
of Taylorism in managerial cultures. Taylor argued that each task can be broken down into components 
enabling performance to be measured and to ensure that appropriate work procedures are followed and that 
appropriate results are achieved (Morgan, 1986, p30). Taylor further suggested that it was the role of 
managers to set and oversee the conditions in which production would take place and the targets that 
production workers were expected to achieve. For 1SS, Taylorism was manifested by an exclusive pre-occupation 
with quantifiable and narrowly focused measures of success. This approach to management works effectively 
in stable environments where there are limited changes in the nature of the job (Handy, 1985; Morgan, 
1986), where precision is at a premium iind where the workers do not deviate from set tasks (Morgan, 
1986). It is interesting to note that Taylorism focuses totally on the internal functioning of an organisation 
creating a closed systems model which has a bureaucratic structure, with a strong hierarchy, rules and 
procedures (Butler et al, 1991, p5). Such an approach reflects the division between management and 
operations in organisations. The function of the 1SS was only to support this closed system. In an efficiency-focused 
organisation, performance is measured against standards developed through work studies, and the focus 
of the workforce is predominantly on material incentives (Wilson, 1992). This leads to a single­loop 
learning ~situation as identified by Argyris (1987) where systems are designed to control rather than 
to improve effective working. This focus was also reflected in performance measures for 1SS in the first 
era, which were orientated towards short­term control. The primary objective was to satisfy the targets 
set and results were reported up a chain of command, underlining the controlling role of management. 
Financial measures were seen as the best way of reflecting performance for the organisation: return on 
investment, cost-benefit analysis, being among the most common (Willcocks, 1992). Most organisations 
judged the success of 1SS by judging the value of each IS independent y, through an evaluation of the 
costs compared to the savings usually in terms of staff resources and consumables. THE SECOND ERA: EFFECTIVENESS 
As experience of the use of IS increased, IS managers were able to show that computer-based IS could 
use the same data for several different purposes, for example, the use of corporate databases and integrated 
systems began to be implemented. As a consequence information was now seen to offer managers a powerful 
tool for decision making. Using technology, data sets in one department could be quickly combined with 
data developed in other departments and applied to organisation wide issues. Nonetheless, the focus of 
1SS remained internal and reactive to business strategy. Information systems managers sought to develop 
systems to support the business strategies as they became clear, though it is debatable that IS developers 
were in receipt of organisational strategy (Lederer and Mendelow, 1986). In other words, the overall 
approach to IS reflected a continuation of the Taylorist management role of task definition and ensuring 
the optimum environment for efficiency and effectiveness. However, the link between IS inputs and overall 
organisational effectiveness proved elusive. The performance of 1SS was still measured by the successful 
implementation of individual systems rather than based on the strategy as a whole. While financial measures 
were still the primary means of justifying IS expenditure, non­financial measures were beginning to be 
included in business cases. However, these measures were mainly short-term (e.g. number of clients seen 
in a social security office; number of parts made in a shift) and tended to he self-serving as staff 
realised that their performance was judged on these criteria (Argyris, 1987). THE THIRD ERA: COMPETITIVENESS 
The gradual recognition that IS could contribute to market competitiveness heralded the third era. The 
competitive focus demanded that there be a lead from IS in driving the organisation s strategy. Organisations 
looked to IS to provide competitive edge. For example, communication technologies became an integral 
part of many strategies. Organisations also recognised that they needed to augment internal management 
information with external information about competitors and markets (Porter and Millar, 1985). A strategic 
approach to 1SS was required to respond to these demands. Effective use of IS was now seen to add value 
to the activities of the company, This is the position that many organisations have now reached (Farbey 
et al, 1993) Yet, researchers have begun to explore mechanisms for measuring the value adding components 
of information systems and technology (Farbey et al, 1993). One response to this challenge has been information 
economics (Parker and Benson, 1988) which draws heavily on Porter s value chain analysis to identify 
the economic benefits from IS accruing to the organisation. The process involves establishing commercial 
benefits (e.g. ROI) which can offset the costs of the technology. While this approach provides the hard 
quantified approach demanded by many financial controllers, it ignores the complexity of issues that 
typically surround investment in IS and seriously understates the full range of gains that an individual 
project may generate (Farbey et al, 1993). Commercial methods, such as Navigator (Ernst and Young), have 
made an attempt to capture the full range of gains while retaining the hard quantifiable element. However, 
these methods are weakened by their failure to integrate project benefits with system changes and work 
practice changes implied by the project. As Farbey et al (1993) make clear, it is this total impact analysis 
which has proven so elusive for IS evaluation studies and has consequently undermined their usefulness 
and credibility. Recognition that the impacts of changes in one part of a total system cannot be isolated 
from the rest of the organisation has inaugurated a search for new evaluative tools based on the wider 
benefits arising from expenditure on IS. For example, Farbey et al (1993) develop an evaluative framework; 
adapting Mintzberg s Structure in Fives, in which they propose that IS benefits may be assessed under 
five key headings: strategic objectives; specialist services; tactical objectives; service provision; 
and operational objectives. This model, characteristic of the third era, represents a sharp break with 
management s traditional preoccupation with IS task definition and the subsequent attempts to nominate 
appropriate performance measures. Instead, the emphasis is now firmly on a holistic approach to 1SS. 
However, there appears to be no natural feedback or feedforward mechanisms in the model. Instead, it 
provides snapshots of current and possible futures -organisational learning is incidental to the process 
of evaluation. Venkatraman s (1990) work on business process redesign shows that IS can only be used 
for competitive advantage successfully if business activities are reviewed to reduce obsolete and unnecessary 
practices. While business process re-design is not itself a new concept (Galliers, 1993), it has only 
recently caught the imagination of organisations faced with a need to become more competitive. Combined 
with the change in management styles and organisational structures it is clear that 1SS develops symbiotically 
with business strategy. Changes to the business will affect the 1SS and vice versa. What becomes clear 
is that cost control and measurement to corttrol performance is not appropriate. Rather an approach which 
will facilitate learning is required. As a result of these changes the focus of 1SS is on integration 
of business and IS. Hence the approaches commonly used in the preceding three eras do not reflect the 
richness required in evaluating 1SS holistically. THE FOURTH ERA: INTEGRATION In the fourth, and emerging 
era, IS and information assets of an organisation are, ultimately, only fully intelligible in the context 
of a learning and rapidly evolving context. This was the background condition of the first two eras and 
has become more prominent in the third. However, in the fourth era, the need to develop and implement 
IS plans within a learning organisation requires that a dynamic and evolving response is essential. Morgan 
(1986) speculates that Taylor may have been ahead of his time as his approach is entirely appropriate 
to a machine-based production culture. This has led to the situation in which most unskilled work is 
automated and in consequence the relevance of traditional mechanisms for organisational control is gradually 
atrophying. Indeed many organisations are now project-oriented as opposed to the traditional focus on 
functional activities, and there is more emphasis on getting the required people and resources to implement 
projects. Influence is based on power rather than position (Handy, 1994). Teams change when projects 
are completed. Critically 1SS are developed by multi-disciplinary teams (Ormerod, 1993). Mintzberg (1991) 
identifies the concept of the innovative organisation . This type of organisation is intended to manage 
skilled specialists. The objective is to co-ordinate the different project teams through a number of 
liaison devices such as steering committees, task forces, and liaison managers. Power to make decisions 
is based on the knowledge of the manager rather than position. This leads to line management becoming 
irrelevant and the role of top management becoming less clear as strategic decisions are made by project 
teams. Furthermore, as Argyris (1987) points out, the concept of a learning organisation builds on the 
work of Argyris and Schon, especially the distinction between single loop and double loop learning. Argyris 
and Schon argue that organisational learning involves the detection and correction of error. When such 
detection and correction enables the organisation to continue with current policies and objectives, the 
result is single loop learning. Double loop learning on the other hand is generated by detection-correction 
activities which challenge the organisation s fundamental norms and values whilst recognizing the need 
to address inherent conflict in managing change. As Senge (1990) argues, and as major corporations such 
as Ford (Handy, 1994) and British Airways have begun to grasp, the ability to learn faster than competitors 
is a way to sustainable competitive advantage. Successful organisations are those that can learn from 
their experience and develop systemic responses which can aid organisational development and success. 
Figure 1 illustrates how 1SS may be integrated as part of a learning organisation. The model is inherently 
dynamic and driven by feed-back and feedforward mechanisms. Thus, there is no question as to how the 
model is triggered into action -it simply never stops operating. There are three major dimensions which 
must all be in place for the successful organisation. The future strategic dimension is forward-looking 
and externally directed. The company will only survive if change in the market-place is recognised and 
strategy changed according y. The business activity dimension monitors current strategy and business 
activities in the short term. Last, there is the information systems strategy dimension, and central 
to this is the role of information an{d IS which support and enable the activities of the business to 
take place (e.g. processing of customer orders, production planning and stock control). FIGURE 1 HERE 
The dynamic interaction between the three dimensions is vital. The purpose of the model is not merely 
to alert management tct the multi-dimensional nature of business activities. It goes beyond the third 
era perspective. In the fourth era organisations needs to constantly manage in an integrated and multi-dimensional 
context. In other words in a learning environment information is the means by which organisations can 
receive signals from markets which continually trigger evolutionary change (Metcalfe and Boden, 1990). 
Information systems could be said to act as the heart of the organisation, a pump which pushes information 
out in one form and receives it back used, to renew and push out again. To continue the analogy, the 
business activities are the limbs and the strategies are the brain, but without any one part functioning 
as efficiently as the other the c~rganisation will not survive in a healthy manner. Evaluation of 1SS 
in a learning organisation must acknowledge that it is not appropriate to evaluate the performance of 
IS in any one department independently of the wider organisational context. Sustainable competitiveness 
is not simply about present market share or present levels of profitability. An effective 1SS should 
enable the business to simultaneously maintain a balance between different imperatives in order to sustain 
competitiveness, Success is indicated by wider measures such as increased market share, growth, and speed 
of organisational learning. Given that 1SS is an integral part of business strategy, its success can 
only be measured in terms of wider business success measures. The methodology of evaluation must also 
take into account this balance. AN APPROACH TO EVALUATION IN THE FOURTH ERA As discussed, organisations 
in the fourth era need to be able tocontinually monitor andreact to their environment. This change has, 
in turn, altered the focus of evaluation in a number of literatures, including strategy, management accounting 
and operations management, It is now recognised that in order to compete in the type of environment exhibited 
in the fourth era, a range of performance dimensions should be measured and monitored, for example, quality, 
innovation, flexibility and competitiveness. Recently, a number of evaluation models have been developed 
in an attempt to overcome the criticisms of traditional models. These include the Balanced Business Scorecard 
(BBS) (Kaplan and Norton, 1992), the Performance Pyramid (Lynch and Cross, 1991) and the Results and 
Determinants Framework (Fitzgerald et al, 1991). The next section outlines the experiences of one company 
which adopted and used the BBS to develop an 1SS to support their service delivery process to demonstrate 
evaluation in the fourth era. BACKGROUND TO THE BALANCED BUSINESS SCORECARD AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGY 
 The BBS (Kaplan and Norton, 1992) was developed to help deal with the challenges of the fourth era and 
as a method of evaluation can be applied to 1SS. FIGURE 2: BBS The BBS comprises four perspectives: internal 
business, customer, financial and the innovation and learning. These are not independent: each is linked 
and balanced with the others. The BBS represents a fundamental change in the underlying assumptions about 
evaluation. The scorecard cannot be implemented without the involvement of senior strategic business 
unit (SBU) managers who have the most complete picture of the SBUS vision and priorities. The BBS brings 
together in a single management report many of the seemingly disparate elements of an organisation s 
competitive agenda: customer orientation, shortening response time, improving quality, emphasizing team 
work and managing for the long term. By forcing senior managers to consider a range of performance dimensions 
and their inter-relationships, the BBS highlights whether improvements in one area may have been achieved 
at the expense of another (Kourkafas, 1992). Evaluation of the internal business perspective primarily 
focuses on employee satisfaction. The underlying assumption here is that satisfied employees are the 
vital pre-condition of customer satisfaction and organisational learning. For example, service organisations 
depend upon their employees to satisfy customer needs, therefore it is vital that the employees have 
the skills required. Measures are required which reflect the understanding of those skills. As illustrated 
later, IS can be the means of employee empowerment and thus employee satisfaction. It is possible to 
measure the contribution of IS to providing employees with the means to demonstrate and develop those 
skills. The customer perspective is about the value that organisation s products deliver in the market 
place; typical criteria are quality, time, performance, service and cost (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). Therefore, 
1SS measures must reflect the ability of the IS to support the organisation in serving the customer. 
Customers not only have needs for current products or services but are often looking for new ones. For 
example, a change in production techniques led a major car manufacturer to request the development of 
a new precision tool from a precision tool manufacturer, 1SS measures might include how effectively IS 
can be used to detect changes in customer needs and how quickly these can be fed back to internal service 
quality. For example, Tesco, a major UK supermarket chain, have introduced a card system which enables 
them to monitor the purchasing patterns of individual households. As spending profiles become clear over 
time the company will have a better idea of the type of product which they can introduce. The innovation 
and learning perspective requires organisations to recognise competitive change in the market and to 
review their strategy accordingly. This is operationalised as improving value to customers through improving 
existing products and introducing new ones (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). Figure 1 showed the integration 
between the innovation and learning perspective, and 1SS. The financial perspective ensures that sight 
is not lost of financial, economic and shareholder perspectives. 1SS can support the financial perspective 
through effective management information systems (MIS). The quality of reports generated by the MIS can 
form evaluative criteria here. However, no one perspective can be viewed in isolation. The issue is balance 
across the four segments. BALANCE IN THE BBS Another way of visualizing the BBS is as a grid, where the 
relationship between the components is equidistant forming a square. As Figure 3 shows, to ensure that 
the strategic intent is adhered to, the emphasis is on the balance of all factors. An imbalance in any 
one aspect will be quickly observed, Questions can be raised which adjust the strategic intent to bring 
the BBS back in balance. FIGURE 3 HERE: BBS Grid For example, British Airways have introduced the Balanced 
Business Scorecard as the means of ensuring achievement of business goals. They recognised early on that 
imbalance in one quadrant would impact on the other business measures. For example, when they reduced 
the staff training component of their business strategy there was an immediate reduction in benefits 
across the other three BBS quadrants. EXAMPLE OF THE BALANCED BUSINESS SCORECARD APPLIED TO EVALUATION 
IN A RETAIL BANK The following illustration demonstrates how the National Westminster Bank, a major UK 
retail bank, has successfully moved into the fourth era in terms of integrating its business strategy 
and 1SS. Observing major structural changes in the retail banking market, National Westminster Bank undertook 
a comprehensive business strategic review in the late 1980s. As a result of the review, the Bank resolved 
to decentralise as many of the presently centralised functions as it could, and in so doing more discretionary 
power would be pushed down to those working closest to customers. In order to achieve this objective, 
the bank recognised that its existing Personnel Department needed to undergo radical change to enable 
managers to make decisions at a local level, which would result in more responsive service to customers. 
In order to implement change within the Personnel Department the management of the Bank adopted the BBS 
to both aid the development of an 1SS, and the subsequent evaluation of that strategy. The BBS approach 
enabled the identification of new information needs, in addition to appropriate information systems; 
appropriate being suitable and supportive of the BBS objectives. Traditionally, the Personnel Department 
has been the location of all information on employees. There currently exists a main-frame which holds 
basic details of all employees (name, address, date of joining, salary etc,), linked to a payroll system. 
The Department also holds paper-based records detailing training courses undertaken by employees; the 
name of their line manager; holiday arrangements, special leave and appraisal reports. To date all line 
managers have been obliged to inform the Personnel Department of arrangements they make with employees 
on any of the above. This system is not only time consuming to operate, it is unsuited to the vision 
of empowerment in the new strategy. As a result, the Personnel Department underwent a comprehensive review 
and it was resolved that the Personnel Department would be retitled Human Resources (I-JR), with responsibility 
for the strategic aspects of staff planning (e.g. succession planning). I)ay-to-day operations of the 
personnel department would be decentralised to line managers, and in some cases to individuals. An important 
consideration impelling these ideas was that retail banking was changing and becoming more dependent 
on IS. It followed that future strategic planning should reflect the importance of IS. Therefore, the 
central plank of the new strategy for HR management was that IS would give all staff access to human 
resource information. This would allow them to access their own records and those of staff they managed. 
Managers could update staff records directly without having to refer to the HR department. Job opportunities 
could be advertised more quickly, providing greater accessibility of i nformation to staff. At the strategic 
level, succession planning and the overall HR picture could be monitored and reviewed by the central 
I-E? department. The challenge, therefore, was to develop and implement an 1SS which would meet the human 
resource requirements implied by the new strategic vision. An interdepartmental project management team 
was formed to respond to this challenge. This team included representatives from the personnel and IS 
departments. Further, the adoption of the BBS approach to evaluation was another outcome of the Bank 
s strategic review. The implication was that the 1SS for FIR would have to demonstrate congruence with 
BBS objectives. For example, the BBS process had specified the following HR objectives: establish and 
maintain a reputation as a first choice employee; . achieve and sustain high levels of staff morale and 
work satisfaction; . establish core values of team working and encourage a flexible approach. The proposed 
HI? 1SS would need to demonstrate how its benefits supported these objectives. The project management 
team organised a series of workshops to id[entify the business activities required to achieve the new 
I-Ill objectives. These focused on two key issues: the specific processes required for the strategic 
management of HI? (e.g. planning and developing the next generation of senior managers) and local operational 
day­to-day management (e.g. planning for training and annual and maternity leave). This included focusing 
on the policies and procedures required to achieve the HR objectives. In addition, they focused on defining 
the information requirements of the HI? policy. Out of this emerged an understanding of the information 
needs to be met by the HR 1SS. The workshops identified fifteen HR business activities capable of being 
specified in terms of deliverables (i.e. outcomes). The team then took each of the activities and considered 
the different technical changes that could be made to support the deliverable. Each change was then evaluated 
for its benefit impact. For example, a new IS to support the filling of job vacancies within the Bank 
could involve the following changes: . a screen based system to advertise vacancies; . a screen based 
system of advertising which also helped applicants to process applications; . a system which helped departmental 
managers to identify potentially suitable candidates. As Figure 4 illustrates, each of these changes 
generates different benefits for the Bank. FIGURE 4 HERE Finally, each benefit was evaluated for its 
contribution and relevance to BBS objectives (see Figure 5). FIGURE 5 HERE It emerged that the changes 
and benefits associated with automation of the filling of job vacancies overlapped with other HR information 
areas within the Bank. By adopting a holistic view to 1SS, and avoiding duplication, the Bank realised 
they could achieve substantial benefits. Thus the project proposal that was submitted to the Board for 
approval focused on automation of the fill vacancy operation. Although the Board had instigated the introduction 
of BBS for evaluation generally, some Board members were uneasy that the decision to develop and implement 
the HR 1SS had relied on a consideration of wider range of issues than traditional investment criteria. 
In other words, expenditure on automation of the fill vacancy activity would not show the required rate 
of return within a set period. However, supporters of the BBS argued that the proposal to automate the 
fill vacancy activity implied a restructuring of the entire HR operations so as to facilitate the overall 
strategic intent. It was successfully shown that the benefits from the changes wrought by the project 
addressed a number of the BBS objectives in each quadrant and thus, the project would advance overall 
strategic objectives. On this basis the project was approved and the performance of vacancy filling will 
in future be evaluated against the BBS. CONCLUSIONS The above illustration shows how a major UK retail 
bank has adopted the BBS approach for 1SS development and evaluation. What distinguishes this from the 
traditional approaches discussed earlier is the emphasis on management and learning, The case clearly 
shows a company which has moved away from the traditional ideas of Taylorism. Whereas management has 
been primarily concerned with task definition and task completion, this illustrates that in the fourth 
era of the learning organisation, management emphasis is on questioning processes rather than controlling 
people. Finally, only the commitment of the Board and senior managers to implementation of the BBS ensured 
that traditional and culturally embedded attitudes in the Bank were overcome. This paper argues that 
traditional forms of evaluation based upon financial measures were developed for command and control 
management. The emphasis of this type of measurement is atornistic rather than holistic. Further, the 
paper suggests that as organisations have moved towards project base structures these measures are no 
longer appropriate. Primarily, competitiveness in organisations can only be maintained if organisations 
can learn from changes in the market and respond to them. Not only does the business strategy have to 
be dynamic but the 1SS must reflect this dynamism to enable organisations to take advantage of IS opportunities. 
Evaluation approaches need to reflect both elements in the modern competitive organisation, that of learning 
and also dynamism, to ensure that they can identify the benefits which IS can contribute. REFERENCES 
Argyris, C. Some Inner Contradictions in Management Information Systems in Galliers RD (cd) Information 
Analysis Selected Readings, Addison Wesley, 1987. Butler, R., Davies, L., Pike, R., and Sharp, J, Strategic 
Investment Decisions, Roudedge, London, UK, 1991. Earl, M.J. Management Strategies for Information Technology 
, Prentice Hall International Ltd, UK, 1989. Farbey, B., Land, F., and Targett, D. IT Investment: A Study 
of Methods and Practice, Butterworth Heinemann, London, 1993. Fitzgerald, L., Johnston, R., Brignall, 
T., Silvestro, R., and Voss, C. Performance Measurement in Service Businesses, CIMA, London, 1991. Galliers, 
R.D. Information Systems Planning in the (JK and Australia -a comparison of current practice, Oxford 
Surveys in Information Technology ,4, 1987, pp. 223-255. Galliers, R.D. Towards a Flexible Information 
Architecture: Integrating Business Strategies, Information Systems Strategies and Business Process Redesign, 
Journal of Information Systems, 3(3), 1993, pp. 199-213. Handy, C. Understanding Organisations, Penguin 
Books Ltd, UK, 1985. Handy, C. The Empty Raincoat, Hutchinson, London, 1984. Johnston, H. R., and Carrico, 
S.R., Developing Capabilities to Use Information Strategically, MIS CWwterlv, March 1988 pp. 37-48. Kaplan, 
R., and Norton, R. The Balanced Business Scorecard, Harvard Business Review, Jan-Feb, 1992, pp. 71-79. 
Kourkafas, P. The NatWest Benefit Management ~, unpublished MBA dissertation, University of Warwick, 
1992. Keen, P. Shaping the Future, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass, USA, 1991. Lynch, R., 
and Cross, K. Measure Up! Yardsticks for Continuous Improvement, Blackwell, Oxford, 1991. Metcalfe, S, 
and Boden, M. Strategy, Paradigm and Evolutionary Change, paper presented to workshop on Processes of 
Knowledge Accumulation and the Formulation of Technology Strateizy, Rosnaes, Zealand, Denmark, May 1990. 
Morgan, G. Images of Organisation, Sage Publications, London, England, 1986. Mintzberg, H. and Quinn, 
J. The Strategy Process: Concepts contexts and cases, 2nd cd., Prentice Hall, USA, 1991. National Westminster 
Bank, The Proiect Managers Handbook, 1993. Ormerod ,R. On the Nature of Information Systems Strategy 
Development, Journal of Computin g Ad Information Technology , CIT1, 4, 1993, pp. 285-293. Parker, M., 
Benson, M., with Trainor, H. Information Economics, Prentice Hall, 1988. Porter, M. and. Millar, V. How 
Information Gives You Competitive Advantage , Harvard Business Review, July-August 1985, pp. 149-160. 
Senge, P. M Fifth Discipline, Century Business, UK, 1990. Sinclair, S.W. The Three Domains of Information 
Systems Planning, Mnal of Information Svstems Management, Spring 1986, pp. 8-16. Synnott, W. R. The Information 
Weapon, Wiley and Sons Inc, New York, USA, 1987. Venkatraman, N. IT induced Business Reconfiguration 
in Scott-Morton hl (Ed), The Coloration of the Nineties, Oxford University Press Inc, New York, USA, 
1991. Willcocks, L. Evaluating Information Technology investments: research findings and reappraisal, 
Journal of Information SVs~, 2, 1992, pp. 243-268. Wilson, D. Nrategv of Change, Routledge, UK, 1992. 
Figure 1: Dynamic Information Systems Strategy Source: adapted from Kaplan &#38; Norton 1992 I-----T 
Fhancial Perspective Measures How do we look eholders ? I to our How do our Cuqmwxsee MT.7 Customer Perspective 
Internal What must Business we CSFS Measures Innovation i &#38; Perspective CSFS Measures Can we continue 
10 improve and learn ? Figure 2: The Balanced Business Scorecard 45 Financial Perspective . Customer 
Perspective Innovation and Learning Perspective Balance in the BBS with all factors contributing to 
the success of the organisation Unbalance in the BBS: reduction in emphasis in one quadrant leads to 
reduction in the other three Figure 3: Balance and Unbalance in the Balanced Business Scorecard Deliverable 
Change Benefits BBS Objectives ider range Filling of To provide f options Vacancies on-screen action 
guides (h L II To automate ss chance identification f over­of candidates ooking andidates [c Source: 
NWB Project Managers Handboook 1993 Figure 4: Changes to the HR systems and their Concomitant Bernlefita 
Deliverable Change Benefits BBS Objectives To automate Reduced document manual effort Improved cost/income 
ratio Filling of Vacancies action guides \ \ Right skills in the right place Yo automate Less chance 
identification of over­of candidates looking candidates Source: NWB Project Managers Handboook 1993 Figure 
5 Linking Benefits to the Balanced Business Scorecard
			
