
 Proceedings of the 1990 Winter Simulation Conference Osman Balci, Randall P. Sadowski, Richard E. Nanee 
(eds.) ALSS H: THE ADVANCED ASSEMBLY LINE SYSTEM SIMULATOR Marvin S. Seppanen Productive Systems Route 
Five, Box 46 Winona, Minnesota 55987 ABSTRACT This paper introduces ALSS II, the Advanced Assembly Line 
System Simulator, a special purpose simulator used to model and analyze assembly line systems. The ALSS 
I1 model constructs are introduced. An assembly line system example is modeled and selected results are 
presented. I. INTRODUCTION Productive Systems developed ALSS II to quickly model and accurately simulate 
a broad class of assembly line systems. ALSS II is based on Systems Modeling Corporation's SIMAN IV/Cinema@ 
simulation language. Using the interactive ALSS II model development and data analysis programs, the 
Manufacturing Engineer or Production Manager can model and analyze complex assembly line systems, such 
as, automotive body shops and modular paint shops. The ALSS II user skips the tedious simulation language 
details and concentrate on the critical logic and timing which makes their assembly system function. 
A five symbol diagram is used to graphically model the assembly line system (Figure 7). The graphical 
model is entered into the computer using an in- teractive model development program. ALSS 1I examines 
the model structure to eliminate common errors. The ALSS II simulation is performed by SIMAN IV. The 
ALSS II user may choose to view a Cinema animation of the simulation. ALSS II tracks the movement of 
assemblies and special tooling through the model. ALSS II randomly simulates machine downtimes, routings, 
assembly line cycle times, and decision attribute changes. ALSS II halts assembly line cycling for scheduled 
breaks and problems caused by machine downtimes, lack of jobs or tooling, or space to place jobs or tooling. 
ALSS II collects utilization statistics for each model sym- bol. ALSS II reports results on a Simulation 
Run basis. The length of each Simulation Run and the number of Simulation Runs are user options. ALSS 
II automatically conducts statisti- cal analysis of its results. The user can elect to allow ALSS II 
to determine the number of Simulation Runs using its Expert Sys- tem Termination Analysis procedure (Figure 
8). ALSS II generates data files for analysis using an interac- tive data analysis program. The data 
analysis program features both statistical (Figures 9 and 11) and graphical (Figures 10 and 12) displays. 
The performance of up to three alternative assembly line system configurations can be graphically and 
statistically compared. This comparison assures that statistically valid conclusions are drawn from the 
ALSS II results. 2. ALSS !! OBJECTIVES The objective of ALSS II is to test alternative assembly line 
system configurations. Those configuration alternatives include: Assembly line cycle rates Path selection 
rules Accumulator sizes and speeds Machine reliability and maintenance policies Number of carriers and 
other special tooling Break timing plans 3. ALSS I! TEMPORARY ENTITLES " ALSS II tracks the movement 
of Jobs and Carriers through the assembly line system using temporary entities. These tem- porary entities 
are created, moved, and disposed of during the ALSS II simulation. ALSS II can simulate up to 1000 in-process 
temporary entities. No symbol is defined for the ALSS II tem- porary entities. Jobs represent the objects 
being assembled. All jobs carry a Decision Attribute which can be changed at each Operation Entity. The 
Decision Attribute can be used to select Transfer Entities and to control job related timing. The throughput 
time of each job is tracked by ALSS II. Carriers represent the transporters or special tooling used in 
the assembly process. The number of carriers in the assemb- ly line system can be restricted to reflect 
system operating con- ditions. 4. ALSS Ii MODEL PERMANENT ENTITLES ALSS II models the assembly line system 
using five per- manent entities: Assembly Line, Operation, Transfer, Return, and Infinite Capacity Source/Sink. 
Figures 1 through 5 illustrate the five permanent entity symbols designed by Productive Sys- tems to 
construct the ALSS II Assembly Line System Network Diagram (Figure 7). After the Network Diagram has 
been con- structed, the model information in entered into the computer using the interactive model development 
program. ALSS 1I fea- tures context sensitive help screens to guide the user. 4.1 ALSS II Assembly Line 
Entities Assembly line system conveyers which run at the same rate or cycle time and do not involve accumulation 
can be modeled as an ALSS I1 Assembly Line Entity. The ALSS II Assembly Line Entity is a series of connected 
Operation Entities. ALSS II supports up to 100 Assembly Line Entities. The general char- acteristics 
of the ALSS 1I Assembly Line Entities are: M.S. Seppanen Composed of one or more sequentially numbered 
Operation Entities Fixed or Variable Cycle Rate Two Conveyor Types: Linked or Free Two Conveyor Modes: 
Cycle or Wait Three Break Types: None, Halting, or Strip-Out Break Starting Time Offset Can be initially 
filled with Jobs Can force spaces between Jobs Figure 1 illustrates the rectangle symbol definer by Produc- 
tive Systems for the ALSS II Assembly Line Entity. Assembly Line Entity number 7 cycles once each minute 
or 60 times per hour. The simulated cycle time follows the Normal Distribution with a 10% Coefficient 
of Variation. The Free Conveyor Type allows a segment of the assembly line to operate even when other 
segments are blocked. The Wait Conveyor Mode stops cycling whenever no work can take place. The Assembly 
Line Entity halts for all breaks ten minutes after the rest of the as- sembly line system. Conveyor Conveyor 
Type Mode Cycles/Hour 610 F~ee--Wajt ~ Assembly Line IHalt/10 I 7 Entity Number Coefficient Variation 
Break Break Type Offset Figure 1. Assembly Line Entity Symbol 4.2 ALSS I! Operation Entities Assembly 
line system workstations which are subject to machine downtimes and process Jobs and Carriers can be 
modeled as an ALSS II Operation Entity. ALSS II supports up to 200 Operation Entities. The general characteristics 
of the ALSS II Operation Entities are: A sequentially numbered set of Operation Entities form an Assembly 
Line Entity The Operation Entity processing time is determined by the Assembly Line Cycle Time Can contain 
one or more Jobs Can be initially filled with Jobs Can contain any number of Machines subject to downtimes 
May be fed Jobs by one or more Transfer Entities May feed Jobs into one or more Transfer Entities May 
be fed Carriers by one Return Entity May feed Carriers into one Return Entity Can Batch or Bunch Jobs 
Can set or alter the Job Decision Attribute Can alter the Job Cinema Animation Attribute Figure 2 illustrates 
the circle symbol defined by Productive Systems for the Operation Entity. Operation Entity number 4 can 
hold six jobs and initially contains two jobs. Each entering job generates a batch of three identical 
jobs. The Operation Entity contains one machine with an uptime probability of 95%. All jobs originating 
at the Operation Entity are assigned a Decision Attribute of one. Fifty percent of the jobs passing Attribute 
Parameters 1/50%/2/4 Initial ~-~-. Operation Co nti e nts-----~2 !_4@~E ntity Number Max'mumJ~\ 6~ , 
.___Number of Contents 3 95% Machines BatcW \" Bunch Uptime  Factor Probability Figure 2,. Operation 
Entity Symbol through the Operation Entity have their Decision Attribute in- cremented by two. All jobs 
passing through the Operation En- tity have their Cinema Animation Attribute changed to four. 4.3 ALSS 
I1 Transfer Entities Assembly line system accumulators which hold a variable number of jobs for at least 
a fixed minimum time can be modeled as an ALSS II Transfer. All job flows between ALSS II Assembly Line 
Entities must be modeled using ALSS II Transfer Entities. ALSS II supports up to 100 Transfer Entities. 
The general characteristics of the ALSS II Transfer Entities are: Connect Assembly Line Entities Via 
Operation Entities Can Accumulate Jobs Minimum Job Travel Time Job Content Constraints Minimum and Maximum 
Total Job Contents Maximum Available Job Contents Can be initially filled with Jobs Supports a variety 
of Selection Rules Not subject to downtime or breaks Can alter the Job Cinema Animation Attribute Figure 
3 illustrates the square symbol defined by Produc- tive Systems for the Transfer Entity. Transfer Entity 
number 3 can hold up to 25 jobs and initially contains five jobs. Each entering job must spend at least 
4.5 minutes traveling through the Transfer Entity. Fifty percent of the jobs in the FROM Operation Entity 
are selected at random to enter this Transfer Entity. All jobs in the Transfer Entity are placed in the 
INTO Operation Entity. Initial Transfer Contents 5 3 Entity Number FROM Rule 50%ALL INTO Rule Maximum 
i25 4.5 Minimum  Contents Travel Time Figure 3. Transfer Entity Symbol 626 ALSS II: The Advanced Assembly 
Line System Simulator 4A ALSS I! Return Entities 5. ALSS I1 EXAMPLE Assembly line system elements which 
involve a fixed num- ber of tools or carriers can be modeled as an ALSS II Return Entity. The ALSS II 
Return Entity can also be used to control the number of jobs in a portion of the ALSS II model. ALSS 
II supports up to 50 Return Entities. The general characteristics of the ALSS II Return Entities are: 
Connect Assembly Line Entities Via Operation Eat/ties Can Accumulate Carriers Minimum Carrier Travel 
Time Carrier Content Constraints Minimum and Maximum Total Carrier Contents Maximum Available Carrier 
Contents Can be initially filled with Carriers Not subject to downtime or breaks Can alter the Carrier 
Cinema Animation Attribute Figure 4 illustrates the octagon symbol defined by Produc- tive Systems for 
the Return Entity. Return Entity number 8 can hold up to 30 Carriers and initially contains 15 Carriers. 
Each entering Carrier must spend at least 9.0 minutes traveling through the Return Entity. InitialContents 
~0~ ReturnEntity Number Maximum Minimum Contents Travel Time Figure 4, Return Entity Symbol  4.5 ALSS 
I! Infinite Capacity Source/Sink Entities Figure 5 illustrates the cloud symbol defined by Productive 
Systems for the Infinite Capacity Source/Sink Entity. No ex-plicit data are required to define the Infinite 
Capacity Source/Sink Entities. Rather they are automatically in-cluded by ALSS I1 whenever ,\ an Assembly 
Line Entity does not have a feeding Transfer Entity for its first Operation Entity or a removal Transfer 
Entity for its last Operation Entity. No limit exists for the number of Infinite Capacity Source/Sink 
Entities. Figure 5. Infinite Capacity Source Sink/Entity Symbol Figure 6 illustrates the general flow 
of assemblies or jobs through the example assembly line system. The primary as-sembly flow starts at 
the Initial Assembly Line A, continues through either Partial Assembly Line B or C, and concludes with 
Final Assembly Line D. Shortly after jobs enter Initial AS- sembly Line A they are loaded onto a carrier. 
Those carriers are removed near the end of Final Assembly Line D and returned to the Initial Assembly 
Line A, The total number of carriers in the assembly line system is limited. Subassembly jobs are produced 
on Subassembly Line E and merged into the primary jobs on Initial Assembly Line A. A portion of the as- 
sembly is removed on Initial Assembly Line A, further processed on Process Part Subassembly Line F, and 
merged back into the primary jobs on Final Assembly Line D. Jobs found to be defective on Final Assembly 
Line D are routed on to Rework Assembly Line G for rework. The reworked jobs are reintroduced into Final 
Assembly Line D. The square boxes in Figure 6 represent accumulators which transfer the jobs between 
the assembly lines. The hexagon box in Figure 6 represents the return which transports the empty carriers 
from assembly line D and to assembly line A. ~--"~ IN ITIAL AS:SE._M_BLY  LINE A SUBA:S:SEMBLY LINE 
E PRO Pt CARRIERRETURN[" I. T REWORi~SU BAS:SEILiN A:Si_~LY AS?LY. ~ASSEMBLY ~ FINAL ASSEMBLY LINE 13 
 Figure 6. Assembly Line System Diagram Several assembly line system design options are posed by this 
example: 1. At what rate should each assembly line operate? 2. What should be the capacities of the 
accumulators between the assembly lines? 3. How many carriers should be placed in the assembly systems? 
 If all the workstations or operations in the assembly line system work at a constant rate, questions 
1 and 2 can be ad- dressed directly. Because assembly lines A, D, E, and F process all jobs, they should 
all operate at the same rate. Because as- sembly lines B and C share the workload from assembly line 
A, they should operate at one-half the assembly line A rate. As- sembly line G should operate at the 
assembly line D rate times the rework probability. Because the only source of variability in the example 
assembly line system is the selection of jobs for rework, the only required accumulation is at the beginning 
of the Rework Assembly Line G. All the other accumulators need only be large enough to allow the jobs 
to travel through them in an orderly manner. M.S. Seppanen Determining the number of carriers is a separate 
problem. Ideally the number of carders should be as large as the number of possible jobs in the assembly 
line system. Due to the carrier cost constraints, it is sometimes necessary to operate the as-sembly 
line system with fewer carriers. If the workstations or operations are subject to downtimes, the problem 
of setting the assembly line rates and accumulator sizes becomes more complex. This is the point at which 
ALSS II displays its analysis capabilities. For this paper, only some initial starting values will be 
presented. Several alternatives will be suggested based on the simulation results. 5.1 ALSS II Network 
Diagram Figure 7 illustrates the ALSS II Network Diagram for the six assembly lines introduced in Figure 
6. Assembly Line En- tities A, D, E, and F operate at a f'Lxed rate of 60 cycles per hour. Assembly Line 
Entities B and C operate at 30 cycles per hour, with the cycle times being sampled from a normal dis- 
tribution with a mean of 2.0 minutes and standard deviation of 0.2 minutes. Assembly Line Entity G operates 
at a fixed rate of 15 cycles per hour. Each of the Assembly Line Entity is defined in terms of Operation 
Entities. Assembly Line Entities A and D are composed of five Operation Entities. Assembly Line En- tities 
E, F, and G are composed of two Operation Entities. As- sembly Line Entities B and C are composed of 
a single Opera- tion Entity. Seven of the 18 Operation Entities include machines which are subject to 
downtimes. The expected uptime percent is shown to lower right of the Operation Entity Symbol. The capacity 
of each AI_SS II entity is shown in the lower left corner of each symbol. All ALSS II Operation Entity 
have a capacity of one job, except for Operation Entity numbers 13 and 14, which have a capacity of 4 
and 2 respectively. The ALSS Il Transfer Entity capacities and travel times are indi-cated in Figure 
7. Initially all ALSS II Operation and Transfer Entities are empty. The single ALSS II Return Entity 
began the simulation with 20 carriers. These carriers will be consumed as jobs are processed by Operation 
Entity number 2 and replenished by Operation Entity number il. 5.2 ALSS Ii Results A variety of output 
reports and graphs are either automat- ically or optionally generated by the ALSS II. Only a few of those 
results can be presented in this paper. The example ALSS II model was executed for a series of 8-hour 
simulation runs. Statistical data was collected on an hourly basis. Since the assembly line system was 
initial void of jobs, an 8-hour prelimi- nary simulation was executed to fill the system prior to the 
start of statistic collection. Figure 8 illustrates the final screen display generated by the main simulation 
program. This display indicates that the simulation run terminated itself after six 8-hour runs or 48 
hours because the estimated production rate for Key Operation Entity 11-REMOVE CARRIER ASSEMBLY LINE 
D, had a 95% confidence interval of 38.3 to 45.5 jobs per hour. This con- fidence interval is 45.5-38.3 
8 5 . °~o 2x41.9 of its estimated mean value of 41.9 jobs per hour. Figure 8 indi- cates that an additional 
12, 8-hour runs would be required to reduce the 95% confidence interval to within 5% of the es- '- ,=e-Wait 
A /// -lalt ,~ Free'Wait t 30 tFree-Wait C Halt B ,,. 1 Halt 95% 95%  / 9~1/1 °°° 7/ % 60 l Free'wait 
1 / Halt ] D Figure 7. Example ALSS II Network Diagram 628 ALSS Ih The Advanced Assembly Line System 
Simulator or run. The upper left portion RLSS II Expert Sgste~ Slnulation Temination Rnalgsis predicated 
on the of the System Display indi-estimated production rate for Re9 Operation Entit9 ll-RB'IOOE CflR]IIF.B 
@ISSI~IBLY LIME D cates statistics for the entire simulation run. AssemblyBased on 6 Periods of 8,8 ]mars 
each or 4B,O total boars Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY Jobs per tioar averaged of 41.9 jobs per Nean 41,9 
hour. The hourly production Standard Deuiation 3,486 Required fldditianal Periods ranged from 19 to 54 
jobs. 5z lllz 211z The lower portion of the Confidence Interval 39.t 44.7 5 8 O ~. Confidence Interval 
38.3 45.5 12 0 fl System Display indicates 9°~ Confidence Internal 36,3 47,5 37 ~ 6 statistics related 
to the high- lighted Assembly Line andflLSS II Sinulation Ierninated at time 48.1~ Hours Analysis Period, 
in this case Due to sufficient accuracg, The houri9 production rate for Re90peraldon Entit9 ll-BEBOUE 
Cfl~IEB RSSEI1BLY LIBE D Assembly Line A INITIAL Esti~ted to uithin plus or ainas 8,5z < 18z ASSEMBLY 
and AnalysisWith a %z Confidence Leuel Period 1. Thirty-four of the 60 Assembly Line A INITIAL Figure 
8. Final Screen Display Generated by the Main Simulation ASSEMBLY cycles produced a completed job. Thus, 
timated mean value. An additional 37, 8-hour runs would be required to reduce the 99% confidence interval 
to within 5% of 34 o ~=56.7 the estimated mean value. ALSS II automatically generates and prints a summary 
report at the conclusion of the simulation. That summary report indicates the current status and produc- 
of the cycles generated a complete job. The number of null tion statistics for each ALSS II entity. cycles 
is calculated by Figure 9 illustrates the Data Analysis Program System Dis- 60-34 =26 play for the 
example model. The upper right portion of the Sys- tem Display indicates the simulated production by 
period for A total of 31 assembly line cycle problems were observed. each Assembly Line. Assembly Line 
A INITIAL ASSEMBLY Four problems were related to a filled Transfers, seven produces 34 jobs the first 
period, 44 the next, and so on. Data problems were related to a lack of a carrier in the Return, and 
are displayed for 10 periods. Additional periods can be viewed 20 problems were related to a down machine. 
Notice that while by using the cursor keys. The data can also be grouped by shift Assembly Line A INITIAL 
ASSEMBLY had a total of 31 as- Z-B PABTIAL ASSEMBL 19 20,9 9 27 : 29 20 21 23 24 14 22 18 20 2! 3-C PABTIAL 
ASSEMBL 23 21,g 9 26 = 28 2B 21 23 22 16 22 12 19 2! 4-D FIBRL ASSEMBLY 68 tO,5 4 13 = 11 8 10 tZ 11 
8 11 6 9 1: 5-E MAKE SUBASSEMBL 39 41,9 17 53 t 34 43 42 4~ 47 31 41 23 39 5: 6-F PBOCESS PART AS 42 
42,g 18 54 I 43 39 41 48 44 31 43 24 38 4! 7-G REWORK ASSEBBLV 4 8,65 Z 14 : Z Z 9 lO 9 8 9 7 5 1, 60 
34 56,?z 26 31 4 8 8 7 ZI II IJ-m~ n~iik~r.u; ~mL~l~ u~mi [IllI i[~ltlF N'i'ii~=dll~miimlikaa ~LW .... 
rmr,,z.~ ~i~-- ";~1 Figure 9. Data Analysis Program System Display M.S. Seppanen sembly line cycle problems 
only 26 cycles failed to produce a job. This was possible because part of the assembly line can function 
while other parts are blocked by problems. Figure 10 illustrates a graph of the number of jobs per period 
produced by Assembly Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY. Figure l(I illustrates the same information displayed in 
the fourth row of Figure 9. The number produced ranged from 19 to 54 with an average of 41.9 jobs per 
hour. The tic marks on the vertical axis of Figure 10 indicate the mean and the 95% confidence interval 
for the hourly production rate. The 95% confidence interval is 40.0 to 43.8 jobs per hour. These statistics 
are based observations collected each simulation period or hour. Figure 11 illustrates the Data Analysis 
Program Detail Dis- play for Assembly Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY of the ex-ample model. The upper right 
portion of the Detail Display in- dicates the simulated production by period for each of the five Operation 
Entities which comprise Assembly Line A. Opera- tion 2-LOAD CARRIER produced 32 jobs the first period, 
46 the next, and so on. The upper left portion of the Detail Dis- play indicates statistics for the entire 
simulation run. All Opera- tions on Assembly Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY produced an average of 41.9 jobs 
per hour. The lower portion of the Detail Display indicates statistics related to the highlighted Operation 
and Analysis Period, here Operation 2-LOAD CARRIER and Analysis Period 1. This Operation currently contains 
one job and had an average con- tents of 0.860 jobs. Operation 2-LOAD CARRIER is fed car- riers by Return 
Entity number 1. At simulation time 1.00 hours, the Return Entity contained 15 available and 3 enroute 
car-riers. Over the one-hour period it had a mean available content of 3.00 carriers and is empty 63% 
of the time. The return was I-5TRRT ASSEMBLY L qi.9 16 5q 2-LOAD CnBRIEB ASS 41,9 17 54 3-PROCESS ~SEMBLY 
41,9 17 54 4-BEHOVE SUBASSEBB 87.6× 41,9 18 54 5-UHLOAD ASSEHBLY 41,9 19 54 ~sembl9 Live: l-n IHITINL 
~I~]3LY LIKE Jol~/Per lad 6~9.0 46.0 36.0 24.60 12 .O I j I , I i O, 9. 18. 27. 36. 45. ~LSS II Simulation 
Time (Hour¢) .8 Figure 10. Production Graph Assembly Line Entity A never filled to its capacity of 30 
carriers. The return never forced an assembly line to wait for a carrier. However, as seen in Figure 
9 Assembly Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY lacked a carrier 20 during the one hour period. That lack would not 
prevent the assembly line from cycling, but would prevent a job from entering Operation Entity number 
2. This causes blank spaces to be moved along the assembly line. Figure 12 graphically illustrates the 
contents of the Return over the 48-hour simulation period. The three curves are nor- mally displayed 
in three different colors to differentiate be- tween them. The top curve represents Maximum Total Return 
contents observed each simulation period. The Maximum Total Return contents varied from 7 to 18 with 
a mean of about 10. The middle curve represents Mean Available Return contents, which varied from 0 to 
9 with a mean of about 1.5. The bottom I 32 q6 39 48 45 31 41 23 39 5: :lr~ 46 39 48 46 38 41 23 48 51 
: 32 46 4B 47 47 29 41 23 48 5! ~ 33 45 41 46 47 29 41 23 48 51 I 34 44 41 46 48 28 42 23 39 51 Figure 
11. Data Analysis Program Detail Display Assembly Line Entity A INITIAL ASSEMBLY LINE 630 ALSS II: The 
Advanced Assembly Line System Simulator Return: 1-C/IIlR|I~II RgllJ~lq Contonis llax Tot Mean ~lvl Min 
Aul 24 ,B 18. fl 12.e 8. 9. 18. 27. 3~. ~. ALS$ I! SiMulation Time (Hours) Figure 12. Contents Graph 
Carrier Return Entity curve, which in Figure 12 corresponds to the X axis, represents Minimum Available 
Return contents and is always zero. This last curve indicates that additional carriers might improve 
the performance of the assembly system. 6. ALSS il AS A DESIGN TOOL The purpose of ALSS II is to determine 
how to improve the performance of the assembly line system. One critical ele- ment in the example model 
is the number of Return carriers. Initially the assembly line system is loaded with 20 carriers. Fig- 
ure ll indicated that the Return Entity is empty for 63% of the first one-hour period. Figure 9 indicated 
that during period one, Assembly Line A INITIAL ASSEMBLY lack a carrier on 20 occasions. It appears the 
increasing the number of carriers should improve the system performance. This hypothesis was test by 
repeating the original example after increasing the num- ber of carriers from 20 to 25 and 30. Table 
1 indicates the result of the ALSS II experimentation. Table 1. ALSS II Experimentation results Number 
of Assembly Mean Return Carriers in Line A Available Time Return INITIAL Return Empty Entity ASSEMBLY 
Contents Production 20 41.9 1.83 41% 25 42.7 3.35 31% 30 43.3 7.59 0% ALSS 11 uses the Student test to 
determine if the results of the alternative runs produce statistically significant produc- tion estimates. 
As the number of carriers increased from 20 to 25 the hourly production rate for Assembly Line A INITIAL 
ASSEMBLY is found to be to be significantly different at the 95% confidence level. As the number of carriers 
increased from 20 to 30 the hourly production rate is found to be to be significantly different at the 
99% confidence level. As the number of carriers increased from 25 to 30 the hourly produc- tion rate 
is found to be to be significantly different at the 9(1% confidence level. Because the return entity 
was never empty in the 3/) carrier case, it is not likely that 30 carriers would be required. A complete 
cost analysis and additional ALSS 1I simulation runs would be required to determine the most cost effective 
number of carriers in the return entity. The influence of machine downtime, transfer sizes, and assembly 
line cycle time should also be tested using ALSS II. 7. CONCLUDING REMARKS ALSS II has proven to be an 
effective tool for rapidly analyzing complex assembly line systems. Being SIMAN 1V based, if a particular 
system cannot adequately modeled using ALSS 1I, a more detailed model can be developed in SIMAN IV. ALSS 
II is made available by Productive Systems at no ad- ditional charge to its consulting clients. Productive 
Systems provides extensive training in the use of ALSS II. REFERENCES Pegden, C.D. (1982), Introduction 
to SIMAN, Systems Modeling Corporation, State College, PA. Systems Modeling Corporation (1989), SIMAN 
IV Reference Guide, Systems Modeling Corporation, Sewickley, PA. 
			
