
 AN OVERVIEW OF AIRLAND COMBAT MODELING AND SIMULATION Michael W. Garrambone Veda Incorporated Wright 
Point Office Bldg, Suite 200 5200 Springfield Pike Dayton, Ohio 45431 ABSTRACT This document presents 
an overview on one of the moat difficult topics of Operations Research combat modeling and simulation. 
It describes from a team leader standpoint, the requirements which drive the modeling processes used 
to support DOD studies. The paper discusses models, (sources and construc­tion notes), scenarios, data, 
computer concepts, team composition, and many other important considera­tions needed to accomplish the 
analytical study tasks. The reader, novice or seasoned, will find that this ap­proach to the subject 
contains insights rarely found in manuals, covering topics from defining the study environment, to the 
techniques for presenting study results. INTRODUCTION This paper provides an overview of AirLand combat 
modeling and simulation, with an orientation on what a new study team leader needs to know about opera­tions 
research modeling, and how to do studies using combat models. The information presented herein has been 
distilled from some of the best minds in the analytical community, way too many to cite individ­ually, 
but suffice to say the real experts who truly de­serve mentorship credit, This paper is recommended for 
all readers who haven t been in the combat mod­eling world very long. For those with considerable experience, 
I recommend you sit back and enjoy the material, for you will probably read, smile and nod your head, 
and maybe say yep, I ve been there before. The Environment: Well, the first thing a person should know 
walking into this modeling business is that this is no piece of cake kind of job. It s a tough environment, 
there are lots of types of experts out there, many things are happening, the modeling ship is always 
moving, and you re expected to keep things on your project going in the midst of all the changes. I say 
combat modeling is volatile, because one small change in this field can potentially kill your study. 
I think that this is important to know, and just this cir­cumst ante alone makes the whole field controversial. 
At some point the question arises as to who s doing these types of studies. Well, nearly every mother 
s son and daughter is doing combat modeling and sim­ulation somewhere. The total number of agencies involved 
in modeling could not be summarized on any single chart, with practitioners running from the Army Material 
Systems Analysis Agency (AMSAA) to the Navy s special study centers. One thing you may want to know is 
how simulation fits in with the other practicing Operation Research (OR) skills. A survey conducted at 
the Army Logistics Management College (ALMC), Fort Lee, Virginia indicates that from the Army s operational 
standpoint about 28 per­ cent of all OR falls in the category of simulation, and I think it is reasonable 
to say that some percentage of other OR applications such as statistical analysis are probably used in 
support of simulation studies. The future for modeling and simulation also appears to be bright, in that 
modeling and simulation can be found on every chart of projected technology programs with military applications. 
In summary, the field is not go­ing away and it is projected to have widespread future use. Applhtion 
Areas! The specific type of model­ing and simulation addressed in this paper is com­bat modeling and 
simulation, which contains a set of unique types of processes considerably different from say industrial 
modeling. These processes, which are discussed in the lecture notes of the late Profes­sor James K. Hartman, 
Naval Post Graduate School, and can be found less clearly in most model docu­mentation, are quite difficult 
in fact to model. Many of these processes such as intelligence gathering and dissemination, mission assignment, 
force movement, engagement, attrition, are extremely difficult to cap­ture in models. Professor Wayne 
P. Hughes Jr. tells 1130 us in his book, Military Modeling, that models which contain these processes 
are applicable when look­ing at problems in battle planning, wartime opera­tions, weapon procurement, 
force sizing, human re­source planning, logistics planning, and national pol­icy analysis not exactly 
the list of non-controversial subjects in the Department of Defense. The Agenda: This paper begins with 
a brief back­ground/introduction to modeling and simulation, and discusses what the actual study process 
looks like. Af­ter this, models and scenarios are examined, followed by data, everyone s favorite subject. 
The paper iden­tifies how real analysis works, and closes with some lessons learned from the guys in 
the field that sur­vived the great study wars. 2 SOME TERMS Combat modelers must be familiar with a consider­able 
number of modeling terms, or be able to state their own user-controlled definitions. The terms verification, 
validation, certification, corroboration, and accreditation are always test questions and re­quests for 
these definitions always require solid re­sponses. Two less well known definitions pertain to model data 
and define circumstances which you are most likely to run into. Sometimes you are going to have to get 
on the phone and ask someone to help you get data. If they say something like, You can use this information 
but please don t credit me with it. , then you have received what is considered to be the non-attributed 
hack . The second term acknowl­edges that you will have to feed your model the data you currently have 
in order to finish your study on time. Knowing full well others are producing new data which will be 
available in time to confound your results, you must identify the data you are using as best available 
data or BAD data since this is always the type data which goes into combat models. 3 THE PLAYERS As 
in any professional encounter, one must know who the players are. First off, there are the agencies which 
consist of boards, committees, societies, and educa­tional institutions which set policy, identify proce­dures, 
and frequently provide funding for model us­age. Then there are the model proponents, these are agencies 
who own or maybe just oversee the models. Next comes the enhancers and fixers. These are the essential 
people who make models study-ready, but have a tendency to look at the model as an art form which requires 
total revision before being revealed to the public. The most important player in the game Modeling and 
Simulation is the model user or study team leader who must effi­ciently and effectively use this tool 
to assist decision makers. Next on the list are the model advocates and adversaries. Both the advocates 
and adversaries rec­ognize the strengths and shortfalls of the models, and may act ually switch sides 
depending on who is being tasked to do the study. The true winners in the mod­eling community are the 
contractors for they retain institutional knowledge, propriety code, the ability to get smart quickly, 
and can generate numerous unso­licited project proposals. Last, but far from least are the data boys. 
These people are the dependent vari­able in studies. If these people are not on your side, you don t 
have a study, but more about data later. 4 THE STUDY PROCESS Well, what should you know about studies 
in general? Most institutions emphasize the standard study ap­proach consisting of six to ten steps which 
begin with the definition of the problem and end with commu­nicating the results to the decision makers. 
The true combat study game plan actually consists of two on­going processes of analysis and modeling 
efforts. ANALYSIS MODELING Define the study Acquire the computer model Research the field Spin up on 
the model use Determine Feasibilities Acquire and implement scenario Develop the study design Update 
the model data Analyze results Develop software tools Perform sensitivity analysis Enhance model where 
necessary Document &#38; report findings Run the study matrix In theory, one begins on the analysis side 
of the chart and begins to work his or her way down the list of activities until at some point (probably 
after the develop the study design step) it is time to beginning executing the modeling activities on 
the right side. After finishing these modeling act ivities, one then returns to the analysis activities 
to finish up the classic study. While this is typical of how studies are suppose to be done, I believe 
this exam­ple is rarely the case since some activities on both sides can be accomplished in tandem. In 
fact, I have seen people start on the right side of this chart and roll over to the left side in accomplishing 
their stud­ies, but I really wouldn t recommend that. Because study projects must be carefully managed, 
it may be required to prepare a very impressive Gantt chart to show the boss what is going on. A chart 
consist­ing of the activities of front end analysis, study plan development, model building, model revision, 
simu­ lation, documentation and briefings, and final report writing keeps everything in prospective. 
This chart haa the appeal of indicating everything is in the right sequence and accounts for the activities 
which are necessary for finishing the project on time. Unfor­tunately, you can expect most of the activities 
listed on your chart to take fifty percent more time than planned, and that the chart will end up looking 
like seven parallel bars. You will then need to glue an­other sheet of graph paper on the right side 
of the chart to show the additional time required to rerun the simulations, revisit new contingency questions, 
design and perform the additional unforecasted yet required briefings, and to rewrite and publish the 
ti­nal final report . 5 MODELS AND SCENARIOS Having taken on the study task, one must acquire the two 
ingredients required to make the project work. If you are doing a combat study, you will probably need 
a combat model, and in these days of jointness , an AirLand Battle scenario. You, as study leader, are 
responsible for getting these things. If you know your way around the modeling community, you can get 
help provided you have developed your own little network of practitioners. 5.1 Models Fortunately, all 
models look the same. On the left side of model diagrams are the kinds of information which must be fed 
into the models to get them to work properly. This information generally consists of weapon/unit data, 
operational or doctrinal data, environmental data, and finally the model scenario itself. To make life 
easier a preprocessor program (which is always an optional purchase) can assist in constructing, editing, 
screening, and formatting the required information into the proper simulation ready files. After putting 
all the input information together, one merely turns on the simulation pump and grinds out the first 
raw forms of output. These output files could contain key decisions made by the combatants during the 
simulation, status reports over time, and attrition and logistic statistics. Now, pre­pare to spend the 
rest of your life working on the vol­umes of data trying to figure out what all this output means. Fort 
unately again, you can acquire a post pro­cessor program which can help you extract only the pertinent 
data you require within selected boundaries (time of battle, unit specific or weapon specific cate­gories, 
or by supply class etc.) and codify it in various ready-for-presentation formats. On the other hand, 
if you do not have a postprocessor, or the one you do have does not generate or format the data you are 
specifically interested in, you can build, or out­of-house buy one. Be sure to lengthen the analysis 
activity on your Gantt chart for this circumstance. 5.2 Sources for Models Most agencies only modify 
the models they use for studies, that is, very few agencies act ually have the time and resources to 
build new models. Therefore, avoid if you can developing a new model, for it is nearly always better 
to borrow someone else s model (and their data if possible) for you will be able to per­form your study 
faster and will always have someone to sympathize with when things go uncontrollably wrong. Now, the 
question is where do you find out about existing models, and how do you get hold of one with which to 
do your study? Well, the first and most famous place to look for models is in the J-8 Catalog of Wargaming 
and Military Simulation Models. The new twelfth edition catalog published this year con­tains 528 different 
models and their descriptions. You can obtain this catalog through the Defense Technical Information 
Center (DTIC) at (703) 2747633 or call and obtain the information on floppy disks. I recorni~ mend you 
obtain a hard copy of the 1lth edition of the catalog (DTIC number AD-A213970) for it con­tains a model 
classification system worth its weight in gold. The J-8 is not the only place to find mod­els. If you 
really get desperate and you are in the Air Force, you can go to the Air Force Center for Studies &#38; 
Analyses since they have a whole stable of mod­els which are very useful. Down at Wright-Patterson AFB 
is SURVIAC, a model clearing house which dis­penses Air Force and Air Defense type high resolution and 
engineering models. For the Army guys, I rec­ommend scanning the Inventory of TRADOC Mod­els and Simulations 
Catalog for AirLand Battle type models. For those interested in wargames, I suggest getting hold of the 
ABCA Catalog of Wargames pro­vided by Mr. Walter W. Hollis, the DUSA(OR), or the Wargaming Bibliographic 
Series published by the folks at Air University, Maxwell AFB, Alabama.  5.3 Model Schema Now let s assume 
you have found and obtained from the proponent the computer model, or its beta ver­sion. A beta version 
is a new untried version of the model issued by the proponent. This versidn sup­posedly contains the 
new capability you need right now for your study, which you may obtain, provided you are willing to forego 
bad-mouthing the provid­ing agent y should anything go wrong with the code. Within any model s user manual, 
the first thing you will notice in the model diagram, in the center of the page, is a block labeled the 
computer model. This block represents the model s computer code in its gen­eral form. To the left of 
the code block is the input block which contains three special input items. They are: the model run instructions, 
iteration counters and statistical flags, the model data, and last, the particular scenario file which 
drives and character­izes this unique simulation. Users typically refer to the combination of the input 
items and the computer model code as the combat model, The computer programmers look at the same two 
items, raise their noses and say, It is all data, just data as far as we re concerned. , and continue 
to grow their hair. A third block on the rights side of the diagram contains the recorded results of 
exercising the combat model, that is, the results of the model simulation run based on it s unique input 
items.  5.4 Scenario It is clear that in order to get the model to run one will need lots of data, various 
model operating in­structions, and most importantly this thing called scenario. I will forgo at this 
time the issue of how one gets the scenario into the computer model, but as a study leader you may find 
the answer to this ques­tion to be a study show stopper beware! A scenario is basically an outline of 
a hypothetical/conjectured or proj~cted chain of events. The contents of a sce­nario tie meet important 
to the study since they de­fine the combat environment, identify the principle and subordinate forces, 
outline the intentions of the combatants, unveil mission objectives, contain oper­ational , tactical, 
and contingency orders, and shows the pl~ned use of resources, be they maneuver, fire suppo@, or logistical 
in nature. The scenario for a combatant may contain default or standard operat­ing procedures, plans 
of reconstitution for units, and the concept of what may be the force s defeat con­ditions. In short, 
the scenario contains the thought process of what the game plan was suppose to have looked like when 
it was originally designed. It doesn t define exactly what every force is going to do, but contains more 
of a situational awareness of the cir­cumstances of the battlefield and the commander s desire on how 
he wants to fight the battle. The scenarios required for engagements of large or joint forces are relatively 
complex to design. To construct scenarios of this magnitude would require the collec­tive backgrounds, 
experience, and judgement found in only senior battle staffs with complete intelligence and operational 
planning cells (or by any Army major graduating from the US Army Command and Gen­eral Stail College, 
just kidding). At the campaign planning level, scenario designers are expected to por­tray the collective 
thinking of hundreds of combat commanders. This is why large scenarios are typi­cally designed by groups 
of senior officers of various Modeling and Simulation branches and services, and reviewed at the general 
oflicer-level. You can imagine the amount of tacti­cal and technical information that a scenario draws 
upon. Now, if you are sitting in your oflice and you have the ability to portray all the thought processes 
of these many stafb and commanders at one time, you can write your own scenarios. Personally, my experi­ence 
at orchestrating corps, divisions and numbered air forces has been rather limited, and besides I m tired 
at being seconded guessed by all those guys on CNN. Never-thc+ss, in order to get the model to run you 
will need a scenario. My first experience with sce nario problems came when I was assigned to a team 
which had been already running their study matrix with a scenario that came free with the model code. 
Fortunately, when I discovered that the doctrine used in the model was pre-AirLand Battle we only lost 
four months of our study time in analyzing scores of useless runs. 5.5 Scenario Requirements If you 
are the study leader, you must be sure that the scenario fits your study objectives. If you are trying 
to determine if something (like a new weapon sys­tem) makes a difference, then you will have to have 
a scenario that affords an opportunity for that differ­ence to be demonstrated. You would expect a model 
which contains a brief (say 5 minute) battle time sce­nario to provide very little logistics information, 
or an air defensive weapon to show any improvement in rear area survivability when the scenario is lim­ited 
to only battalion-level operations. Regardless of your agency size, you must select a scenario which 
is doable within your resources. This means that the scenario must be either of the correct size, or 
can be shrunk to fit the study. You must be able to acquire, convert, or reformat the scenario in time 
for it to not adversely impact on your study timetable, and that the accompanying systems data be consistent 
with the planned application years of the scenario. Re­member, most scenarios are constructed for applica­tion 
in the out years. This means that someone has to predict what the weapons systems and doctrine will look 
like in ten or fifteen years from now. This requirement alone will make it difficult for you to get scenario 
compatible data. There are a few people to whom you can go to obtain this kind of information, but to 
some degree they too are only guessing. To get a feel for the problem, picture in your mind the engineering 
characteristics and how you will fight the main battle system in the year 2015. You can see, that you 
are only going to get so close with your esti­mate. The best thing to do is to ask some agency to support 
your search and document the information they provide. This in the end, will save your butt. 5.6 Combat 
Factors Now, what should you be looking for in a scenario? Be on the lookout for the basic factors of 
combat power. Besides maneuver and fire support, you might include, electronic warfare, logistical support, 
psy­chological operations, intelligence, battlefield dispo­sition, deception, weather, battlefield mobility, 
engi­neers, and terrain. It would be nice if you could get scenarios with all these factors being played. 
Don t count on finding these types of scenarios yet, but peo­ple are working on them. 5.7 Scenario Sources 
 So where does one get a hold of those ready-made scenarios. In the Army, we just go to TRADOC, the Army 
s Training and Doctrine Command. It is a lit­tle different if you are in the Air Force. I ve asked several 
high ranking people in the Air Force, Where do you get your scenarios? They said, If you want a MAC scenario 
you go to MAC, if you want a TAC scenario you go to TAC. I said, Well shoot, don t these guys ever get 
together on one scenario? They said, No, why should they? At this point I fig­ured that getting an Air 
Force scenario was going to be tough. When I went to the Pentagon and asked, Where do you get your scenarios? 
they said, Well, you tell us first where you get yours. So I told them TRADOC Regulation 71-4 identifies 
who in the army is responsible for scenario development. I said, We have whole general officer study 
groups that make up our scenarios. I mean these scenarios are drawn up, pounded out, and approved at 
every level before they ever get out on the street for agency use. I think this is a good idea to spread 
around so that eventu­ally everybody might begin to do the same thing. I realize ideas like this must 
be shared with our rela­tively junior sister services. 6 DATA Well, we ve talked about scenarios, now 
we have to beat that other demon to death, the model data. You may not know it but data is owned by ogres. 
These people are pocketed all over the country and they hoard the stuff you need to do your study. I 
used to show my ogre slide at general officer meetings un­til and one gentleman pointed to the fellow 
on his left and said, Gee Dan that beast up there looks a lot like you . The fact remains that good data 
is hard to get. What kind of data might you be looking for? Well, the categories may include doctrinal, 
oper­ational, organizational, weapon system, terrain, and equipment data. Data can also be obtained on 
his­torical or projected unit performance, on command, control, communication, intelligence functions, 
or on logistics issues. As a study leader, you have got to find a source from which you can gather this 
type of information. Be aware, you may have to reach quite far to find your data, and it may take a iong 
time before you have in hand. 6.1 Data Sources Now, where can you go to get good data? Here is a list 
of several different agencies which are reposi­tories for both US and threat data. For US data, you should 
try the major operations and personnel staff agencies, combined operation and military inte­grating centers, 
the service s analytical agencies, the service schools, the material commands, world-wide operation research 
cells, and the wargaming centers. The Warrior Preparation Center is a good source for unit basic load 
data which is the need-tc-know stuff because it affects nearly every sustaining issue in bat­tle. When 
units go to the Warrior Preparation Cen­ter, they are required to input basic load information into the 
wargames. If you can get access to these ma­chines, you may be able to get a copy of all these basic 
loads thereby solving one horrendous data gathering problem. Now, what about red or threat data? Here, 
you must go to all the IA s (intelligence agencies), the foreign technology centers, and even material 
and op­erational testing agencies. The mission of these agen­cies is to find out what the other guy should 
look like now and in the future. Those who have beaten the data path have found threat data to be easier 
to ob­tain than blue (US) data. I can only guess why this is true, but unfortunately using threat data 
requires get ting some consensus among these agencies. De­spite the fact they are all in the same business, 
the same question asked of these agencies will rarely get you the same answers. It really makes me wonder. 
I believe that if I could get all the experts from these agencies together in one room, and I said, Look 
up there on the wall, what time is it? , one of those guys would say, Hey, is that an agency approved 
clock?  6.2 Terrain and Human Factor Data Everybody knows that you can get terrain data from DMA, the 
Defense Mapping Agency. Yet, DMA is not the only place out there that has terrain data, besides they 
re terribly overworked and it may take you forever to get it. You can also acquire data from the Engineer 
Topographic Labs, the US Mili­tary Academy, and Rome Air Development Center. I would highly recommend 
WES, the Waterways Ex­periment Station, who work for the Army Corps of Engineers as a good source. Those 
engineers are a hell of a bunch of good guys. If you are inter­ested in what happens underwater or at 
the seashore, NORDA, the Naval Oceanographic Research and De­velopment Center is the place to go, Human 
Fac­tors data can be obtained from several sources in­cluding The Army Research Institute (ARI), The 
Army Human Engineering Laboratory (HEL), and CERIAC, the Crew System Ergonomics Information Analysis 
Center, hosted by the Air Force s Armstrong Aerospace Medical Laboratory. 7 ANALYSIS If at this point 
you ve got the input side of the model nailed down and you have done the simulation, then it is time 
to figure out what happened based on the model output data. You are at the back end of the game now, 
and must assess what you have. Keep in mind, a lot of stuff comes out of those machines, but it needs 
to make sense to general officers who are thinking about the big heavy high-priority topics. Make sure 
that what you are telling them is relevant to what they are interested in. If you want to blow a study 
this is a good place to mess up. You may find that the information you are seeking from the model may 
not even be available. That is, I ve never seen a model that gave me exactly what I wanted. I had a combined 
arms study in which I asked how often requests were made for artillery support during the battle. My 
contractor personnel said they didn t really know. I said, Look, doesn t this model play fire support, 
doesn t it play artillery? They said, Yes it does, but nobody ever wanted to know how often it is requested, 
and so that information is not available as standard output of the model. It cost us about a weeks worth 
of programmer time to find the answer to my question, but it seemed to me to be an important issue if 
you were studying artillery effects in battle. Beware that there will be some new code development aa 
part of your project, fore the models never have exactly what you want in the format you are looking 
for. You will probably pay with some time to get at these answers. 7.1 The Presentation A major issue 
in your project is to determine if the output results are significant. This may be tough to determine, 
but if your analysis passes the so what Modeling and Simulation 1135 test, then you must next try to 
ascertain causality for these results. It is crucial that you understand that you knowing what is going 
on is just not good enough. As an OR analyst, you must pass this in­formation on to someone else and 
it has to be in the form where the other guy says, I can see it, it s clear to me, I know exactly what 
you are talking about. If your transfer of information does not meet this cri­teria, your analysis is 
going down the tube. As Mr. Hollis once said, No significant decision was ever in­fluenced from analysis 
which was never understood. This is one of those important ideaa which you need to focus on during your 
study. 7.2 Measures of Effectiveness Now, what kinds of things do people traditionally look at on the 
output side of models, the measures of effectiveness, or MOE s if you will. Here is a list of the common 
ones, FLOT movement, unit status, and var­ious ratios. I know you re thinking about that black hole up 
on the chart, the killer-victim scoreboard. Everyone thinks they can understand the scoreboard, but in 
reality there are over 15 sand traps in evaluat­ing this type of table that you should be aware of. If 
you call me at (513) 476-3516, I ll send you a copy of these traps. Meanwhile, don t ever show a scoreboard 
in a briefing if you can avoid it, otherwise, prepare for widespread interpretations.  8 MODELING BARRIERS 
If you re going to get into modeling, you need to know about some of the barriers you will run into. 
First off, the models are complex and this alone causes them to be viewed in an atmosphere of rejection. 
You have heard me talk about data already. But occasionally people call you about data. The phone rings, 
some­one says, Hey, you know that data I sent YOU on the tape last week, Well I know you wanted PK data, 
but I gave you the wrong tape, what you have now is the can count at the commissary data. You start thinking, 
Boy am I in trouble, I ve been getting some pretty good results off of that data. Another prob­lem you 
may run into is the perception problem. All models are just models, that is, they only capture so much 
of an actual system s characteristics or op­erat ions. All models have some problems, but if a model 
has a reputation as suspect and is measur­ably improved by all standards, it will still have this bad 
reputation. The model will not be readily ac­cepted for use in studies without considerable adver­tising 
and demonstration of the improved capabilities. This next bullet speaks to the issue of relevance. If 
the model output is perceived as not having an im­pact, the model is dead in the water. And lastly, agencies 
would prefer not to use someone else s model. There is always a hesitancy to take on the tssk of un­derstanding 
other modeler s code, data requirements, and clever work-a-rounds. Not invented here has on occasion 
blocked the use of good existing code, and has produced many new in-house modeling projects. 8.1 The 
TRADOC Inquisition List If you are doing modeling and simulation for TRADOC you are going to get hit 
with this inquisi­tion list. Be ready to describe how your model plays C31 and the doctrinal differences 
between opposing combatants. You will be asked about the attrition phenomena and suppression effects 
as well as how human factors are incorporated into the model. An important factor in studies is the battle 
time to clock time ratio. The bigger combat models require large run times and you may get to the point 
where the model is impractical to be used in a study because it just takes too long to run, or too long 
to run the needed number of iterations. Where did you get the input data is a question you must be ready 
to respond to. You can answer from all the usual suspects , but it is better to have a hit list of agent 
y sources. The last item of interest is documentation. I have found the status of model documentation 
to run from ficti­tious to erroneous. This item of business is tradition­ally financed last, if at all, 
and impacts most, only on the next users study. 9 LESSONS LEARNED What I will discuss now is a series 
of lessons learned. Right off the bat, you will find it takes a long time to learn about and set up the 
computer model, verify the data, and draft up the scenarios. The simulation itself is relatively quick 
to run, but where you start paying bigtime is on the analysis end. These ideaa need to be briefed to 
your study sponsor as well as the circumstance that no two subject area experts will agree 100 percent 
on anything. The document= tion you will use, will usually be at best incomplete, inaccurate, and confusing, 
therefore, you must net­work with user groups to survive. Before you run your study model , you must 
construct a well un­derstood base case which is prepared in an iterative process of quality assessments 
and revision until the time runs out. Be mindful that somebody somewhere will not like your model and 
the only thing you can do is go see that person (what we refer to in the Army as foot coordination) and 
find out their form of un­happiness. If you can make him happy, fine. If you can t, you still have to 
do the study, but you will have created a better peer review, and professional understanding atrqgephere 
for your work. 9.1 Time I mentioned this before, and I think study leaders need to be constantly reminded 
of this, that is, the models are built to the clock s standards. This means that when you hit your ready-t~run 
milestone, that you must go with it. You can always calibrate (tweak is a bad word) and make it better, 
but providing model results after the decision is made is fruitless. Be careful of seeking more realism 
in models. More realism means, more code, more data, more time, and a need for a greater level of analysis 
which you may not be able to live with. You may at times have some outstanding model questions. From 
the Corps of En­gineers perspective, these questions are like tricky land mines, in that beneath every 
one of these ques­tions that you defuse, there is another question just wait ing for you.  9.2 Study 
Performance People have talked a long time about how models operate. The key thought is that stochastic 
models provide variations on how the battle might have oc­curred. Models do not say this is the way things 
are going to be, they say, under the circumstances, this is sort of how this one fell out. You can make 
any model combatant execute a perfect game plan by scripting every single thing that you want to have 
happen in the scenario. This can be accomplished by scripting, running, analyzing, and rescripting un­til 
the unit s performance is as close to being exactly what you want it to be. This process could take a 
very long time to accomplish and therefore models with automated command and control features are nice 
to have. As for battle analysis, this remains a difficult task to accomplish despite the use of post­processors, 
spreadsheet, and sophisticated database managers. If you had to put together a brand new team for a very 
big study, I would say that in order to get your team study ready, tactically prepared, ana­lytically 
smart, and model knowledgeable, and get the study done, could take you up to 3 or 4 years. That is why 
mat agencies have a steadfast cadre of seasoned analysts, programmers, stat ist icians and the like and 
can make the 6 month to 2 year turn around time required of most studies. To create a fully proficient 
combat modeling and simulation analyst takes from one year to forever for most of the large combat sim­ulat 
ion models. Sometimes a model run doesn t seem to be working quite right. Don t jump to conclusions right 
away about the quality of the model. It may not be easy, but it is better to track down the cause of 
your concern and learn quite a bit more about the model. In one instance, I had a unit conducting a battle, 
where for one run, in a period of minutes it lost 60 tanks that it had never lost in runs before. I looked, 
and looked, and looked, but couldn t figure out what happened, or why these tanks were lost. It was sometime 
later when I found out that this run was the only time somebody shot out the ammunit­ion unit that was 
supplying those guys. Essentially what happened is that they stayed alive because con­st ant resupply 
kept them lethal, whereas in this sin­gle case the groceries just didn t arrive an insight as to the 
importance of logistics. In another case, my helicopter attack did not execute although the unit was 
on standby and combat ready. In this run, the headquarters that should of issued the command for the 
helicopters to move was under attack, and was unable to pass the attack order. The lesson here is to 
look at the odd results, for even these weird out­comes do have their special meanings. Remember, you 
are searching for trends not numbers, and ideaa not necessarily answers. 9.3 Practical Thoughts From 
a practical standpoint it is not worthwhile to always second guess the output of a model run, it is faster 
to just go ahead and run it. If you want to check things out, do sensitivity analysis by running small 
scenario vignettes. As the study leader, you will be dependent on you computer support. If the beast 
goes down you are in big trouble. I was st~ tioned in Albuquerque, New Mexico and I was look­ing for 
a corps-level combat model. In my search, this fellow offered me a model which ran with a ra­tio of 1.1, 
computer time to combat time. I asked him if I wss to run a 60 hour battle would it take me 66 hours 
to get the results. He said, That s right . I told him in Albuquerque we don t get continuous electricity 
for 66 hours, and I just couldn t use that model. You can see that combat simulation requires extensive 
military modeling expertise. I caution you at this point that modelers become immersed in their work; 
remember, THE MODEL IS NOT THE WAR! 10 VALIDATION Next, I would like to tell you what decision makers 
have been told are techniques for validating models. You can see that comparing model results with ac­tual 
field data is hard to beat. When the arguments Modeling and Simulation 1137 start, you can say, Well 
here is my data, where is yours? You are bound to win on this one. A eec­ond technique, getting independent 
reviews of your model by peers and subject area experts is proba­bly the best method of gaining some 
appraisal on the model. Asking for expert judgement or comparing model results to historical data are 
considered accept­able techniques in many circles. The last technique, comparing your output to that 
of other models, has been used in the past to validate from validated mod­els, but this fast becomes 
a chicken or the egg issue. The real issue nowadays is accreditation, get Army Regulation 5-11. 11 REALITIES 
Some of the realities of combat modeling and simu­lation are that: it is complex and just plain hard 
to do (remember, we use simulation when all other tech­niques fail), it is done in a competitive environment, 
it consumes enormous hidden technical, administrative and informational resources, even the experts veh~ 
mently argue about everything, it requires personnel of immense and focused dedication, it takes time 
to learn (but depth is career de-enhancing), and it often requires biting the bullet. Unfortunately, 
the bullet is moving, and it is a 155 round. 12 SUGGESTED READING So what can you do to help yourself 
get smart? Well you can start by doing a lot of reading. I suggest you read the three famous GAO reports 
on DOD simulations, They are: GAO Report B 163074, Ad­vantages and Limitations of Computer Simulations 
in Decisionmaking , PAD 80-21, Models Data and War: A Critique of the Foundation for Defense Anal­yses 
, and GAO Report PEMD-88-3, DOD Sim­ulat ions: Improved Assessment Procedures Would Increase the Credibility 
of Results . These docu­ments will tell you what has happened in the past and probably what to avoid 
in the future. Read modeling, simulation and wargaming publications by Battilega and Grange, Wayne Hughes, 
Brewer and Shubik, Callahan and Galiano, Parry, Clark, and Allen. Read anything by Dunnigan, Depuy, SunTzu, 
Napoleon, Clausewitz, Paret, Perla, Manch­ester, Hartman, and Shaw. Get hold of simulation analysis publications 
from Shannon, Law and Kel­ ton, and Pritsker. Strengthen your phenomena un­derstanding with DARCOM Pam 
s 706-101 and 706 102, Army Weapon System Analysis and get your mathematics in check with Taylor, Ancker, 
Bonder and Farrel, Bauer, and Przemieniecki. Better yet, take Garrambone s Combat Modeling and Simulation 
Courses, they will kill you. 13 GARRAMBONE S CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUCCESSFUL COMBAT MODELER Over the 
years I ve come up with a list of charac­teristics of successful combat modelers. These are people with 
in depth tactical, technical, and his­torical combat knowledge. The y are academically sound and professionally 
astute operations research analysts. Despite the rapid changes in the field, they are masters of computer 
science wizardry. They have outstanding communicative and interpersonal skills along with superb artistic 
and graphical talents. Above all, they possess overwhelming quantities of persistence and determination. 
As you might imag­ine, it is quite difficult for any one person to be all of these things. In fact, it 
might be impossible to find these attributes in any forum of single subject area experts. The thought 
here is the same thought that historically created the original operations research groups, that is, 
to group together people of strong but diverse talents to attack complex and difficult problems. As the 
study team leader, you also must develop this team building and team performance ap­proach, for this 
too is your key to success. 14 THE CLOSE This modeling and simulation stuff is a tough gig. I remember 
how I found out I was a combat modeler. It was when I took my son in for a haircut. He said to the barber, 
I want a hair cut just like my Dad, see if you can cut an M into the front like he has. Thank you for 
your time. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY MICHAEL W. GARRAMBONE was the Army Instructor of Operations Research at the 
Air Force In­ st itute of Technology, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, where he taught graduate courses in 
Combat Model­ing and Simulation, and Human Factors Applications in Operations Research. During his career 
he had a number of assignments in which he was involved in both the development and applications of computer 
modeling and simulation. He is currently a Senior Analyst at Veda Incorporated, Dayton, Ohio, and remains 
an active member of MORS, ORSA(MAS), AORS, and Omega Rho.    
			
