
 A Framework for Predicting Droughts in Developing Countries Using Sensor Networks and Mobile Phones 
 Muthoni Masinde Department of Computer Science University of Cape Town Cape Town South Africa +27 21 
650 2663/ +254 721319434 emasinde@cs.uct.ac.za or ABSTRACT Drought is the most complex and least understood 
of all natural disasters and it affects more people than any other hazard. Droughts have become synonymous 
with the developing countries and in particular the Sub-Saharan Africa where the hazard is chronic. Effects 
of droughts can be mitigated if accurate and timely drought predications were to be done. Unfortunately, 
despite the enormous advancements in science, predictions only provide indications of trends. A major 
weakness of the existing tools is the emphasis on macro/international level information. The tools also 
tend to ignore the at risk community who happen to be host to very crucial traditional knowledge on droughts. 
In this paper, we propose an integrated drought predication framework that considers both scientific 
and traditional knowledge and combines the use of mobile phones with wireless sensor networks to be able 
to capture and relay micro drought parameters. The framework is an enhancement of ITU s Ubiquitous Sensor 
Network (USN) Layers. In order to accommodate the diverse roles mobile phones play in our framework, 
Layer 2 (USN Access Networking) is implemented using three sub-layers composed of heterogeneous gateways. 
 Categories and Subject Descriptors C.1.4 [Parallel Architectures]: Mobile Processors. C.2.4 [Distributed 
Systems]: Distributed Applications. H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: User-Centred Design. J.7 [Computers in Other 
Systems]: Early Warning Systems. General Terms Algorithms, Measurement, Documentation, Reliability, 
Human Factors, Standardization, Language Keywords Drought Prediction, Developing Countries, Wireless/Ubiquitous 
Sensor Networks, Middleware, Grid Computing, Mobile Phone Applications, Resilience, Traditional Knowledge 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 
10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, South Africa. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 $10.00. 
 Antoine Bagula Department of Computer Science University of Cape Town Cape Town South Africa +27 21 
650 4315  bagula@cs.uct.ac.za or 1. INTRODUCTION Kazem et al [7] defines a Sensor Network, as an infrastructure 
comprised of sensing, computing, and communication elements that give an administrator the ability to 
instrument, observe, and react to events and phenomena in a specified environment. By the very nature 
of sensor networks (mostly remote), the internetwoking used is mostly wireless-based and hence, the term 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is adopted. WSNs based applications have been successfully deployed for 
weather forecasting/prediction, habitat monitoring, and tsunami warning systems among others. Intensive 
research in this area has resulted in several initiatives aimed at addressing hardware and software challenges 
hampering commercial realization of WSN­based solutions. However, most resulting solutions are still 
out of reach by the developing countries due to their high cost of implementation. Our underlining hypothesis 
is the popularity and processing power1of smartphones many of which support a wide number of wireless 
connectivity options2. With such features, the mobile phone of today can match desktop computers of less 
than a decade ago and therefore presents a fertile potential platform for distributed processing. Further, 
smartphones have increasingly become popular and affordable. For instance, the growth in number of smartphones 
handsets shipped in 2010 is projected to get to 24% compared to 8% of the overall handsets shipment[6]. 
Most smartphones users use the phones for a small fraction of a day and mostly for less power demanding 
applications such making/receiving calls, sending/receiving text/email messages and occasional browsing 
the Internet. With clear legal and regulatory framework in place, this raw power that lay idle can be 
harnessed and put into productive use. One common phenomena in the developing countries is that they 
tend to be predisposed to higher risk from natural disasters related to climate change, have challenged 
budgets and unreliable power supply. The most common disasters in these countries are droughts[1]. Droughts 
tend to make the affected communities very susceptible to other calamities such as disease outbreaks, 
food insecurity, unemployment, inadequate electricity supply, and breakdown of social structures. As 
Mishra and Singh explain in [10], droughts impacts are so complex and span beyond the geographical area 
affected by the drought. On the positive side though, the growth in mobile phones subscription and usage 
in the developing countries is phenomenal. By 2009 for example, the developing world had a mobile phone 
1 Ranging from tens of MHz to 1000MHz (such as the Lenovo LePhone released in April 2010) and RAM/ROM 
capacities of over 512 MiB 2 Multiple GSM Frequencies (850, 900, 1800 and 1900), Bluetooth1, several 
data links (CSD, HSCSD, GPRS, EDGE) and Wireless local-area network (WLAN) subscription of 57.9 per 
100 people[4]. These phones offer a ray of hope for the developing countries if scientists came up with 
relevant mobile phone-based applications. The main contribution of this paper is a framework that harnesses 
the computing power available on mobile phones in to a computing grid and employing it in predicting 
droughts in developing countries. In contrast to conventional drought prediction systems that are based 
on expensive sensing equipment and satellite systems for information dissemination, our framework proposes 
integration of a cheap solution based on off-the-shelf sensor equipments used in a delay tolerant context 
to allow intermittent dissemination of the drought information. Our framework borrows from traditional 
knowledge and is therefore designed with the affected communities in mind. The paper is structured as 
follows; section 2 describes the literature review, section 3 presents the drought prediction framework 
and section 4 is the conclusion and future work.  2. RELATED WORK 2.1 Drought Prediction According 
to Palmer[11], drought means various things to various people depending on their specific interest. To 
the farmer drought means a shortage of moisture in the root zone of his crops. To the hydrologist, it 
suggests below average water levels in the streams, lakes, reservoirs, and the like. To the economist, 
it means a shortage which affects the established economy". Drought prediction can mitigate effects of 
droughts if decision makers both at the grassroots as well national/regional/international levels are 
availed with timely and accurate information about spatial and temporal dimensions of drought. This can 
then be utilized in effective planning and decision-making, all aimed at reducing drought impacts and 
identifying the appropriate indicators for early warning system(s). Drought prediction should provide 
information on 1) the duration of the drought; 2) drought severity; 3) the location of the drought in 
absolute time (initial and termination time points); 4) drought coverage(area); and 5) the magnitude/density 
of the drought - computed by getting the ratio of severity to duration [9] Developing countries, especially 
the Sub-Saharan Africa makes up the core of the global drought problem. Further, agriculture; the first 
natural casualty of drought, drives the economies of most of the countries in the region[12]. Past responses 
to droughts in these countries have not yielded satisfactory results because they mostly involved reacting 
as opposed to pre­emptive approaches. Better results could be attained using people-centred approaches. 
The people, especially the elderly in the affected communities are custodians of crucial information 
related to droughts. They are known to have predicted droughts/rains in the past with such accuracy by 
observing their surroundings. These people also Capability. In order to accommodate the use of mobile 
phones in capturing of traditional knowledge as well disseminating drought-related information, our drought 
prediction framework adapts these components as shown in figure 1. Figure 1: Components of the Drought 
Early Warning System Using mobile phone Capture Drought RiskApplication to collect Knowledge (Traditional) 
Data such as Environmental Observation, Animal And insects behavior, Beliefs and historical facts Analyse 
the knowledge Get real-time readings Monitor and Predict Droughts from wireless sensors Incorporate data 
from satellites SMSs, displays on Disseminate and Communicate Village billboards, Information on Impending 
Websites, IP radio Droughts announcements. Use local language where necessary As shown in figure 2, the 
drought prediction framework harvests the traditional knowledge from the custodians of this knowledge 
(Source-1, Source-2, , Source-n) using a mobile phone application. Since most sources of this knowledge 
may not be literate enough, services of an intermediary will be used. Once collected, the data will be 
sent to the Traditional Knowledge Database Server via the Traditional Knowledge Web Server either directly 
from the phone (via WAP module of the application) or by uploading it using computers found in digital 
villages. Once in the database, the data will then be incorporated to the proposed drought prediction 
framework by first being pre-processed by the Query Optimizer and Data Mining Tools.  2.3 Ubiquitous 
Sensor Networks Ubiquitous Sensor Networks (USNs) are described in [5] as networks of intelligent sensor 
nodes that could be deployed anywhere, anytime, by anyone and anything. Effective and efficient utilization 
of WSNs and eventually realization of USNs (USNs are not a reality yet) still awaits successful development 
and implementation of technical standards for Figure 2: Conserving Traditional Knowledge on Drought 
Using Mobile Phones Source 1 Source n Digital Custodians Intermediary Village Traditional Knowledge have 
great ideas when it comes to planning and preparing for PC for Uploading Data if WAP  droughts. Harnessing 
this knowledge and combining it with Intermediary modern scientific drought predication tools such as 
wireless Not Active sensor networks is a sure way of solving this catastrophe threatening to cripple 
development. Traditional Knowledge Query Optimizer Traditional Knowledge Web Server  2.2 Incorporating 
Traditional Knowledge Data Mining Tools Database Server Drought  into Drought Prediction Drought Parameters 
Prediction In [2], a complete and effective early warning system is Parameters described as one that 
comprises of four components: 1) Risk Drought Prediction Mobi-WSN Drought Application Server Prediction 
Framework each of the main functional components3 of WSNs. In[3], 5 layers of USN have been proposed 
under the heading; Schematic Layers of a Ubiquitous Sensor Network. Figure 3: Schematic Layers of a 
Ubiquitous Sensor Network Layer 1: Sensor Networking this is made up of sensors that collect and transmit 
data from their environment; Layer 2: USN Access Network this act as mediator between the sensors and 
the control centre; Layer 3: Network Infrastructure this should be a Next Generation Network meant to 
carry out networking functions; Layer 4: USN Middleware software and/hardware that supports the development, 
maintenance, deployment, and execution of sensing based applications Layer 5: USN Applications Platform 
 commercial and scientific USN applications  3. THE MOBIWSN FRAMEWORK 3.1 Overview In this paper, an 
extension to the schema in figure 3 is proposed. This is necessary in order to accommodate the following 
salient features of the our drought prediction tool: (a) Heavy reliance on grid computing on mobile phone; 
mobile phones are currently characterized by lower (than a PC) processing power, reliance on insufficient 
battery power, high mobility, highly heterogeneous (vary in terms of their design and capabilities) and 
are personalized (mostly for personal private use); (b) Drought prediction is mostly based on parameters 
that cannot be measured with certainty and droughts are often considered to be random events. This will 
require incorporation of complex computer algorithms; (c) Adoption of people-cantered approach; people 
at the grassroots levels especially farmers will provide the  3 (1) Sensor Network/sensors; (2) Access 
Network- intermediary/sink nodes; (3) Network Infrastructure; (4) Middleware; (5) Application Platform 
traditional knowledge on droughts using their mobile phones. Most of them are not literate and information 
will have to be provided in the local languages as well as in sound format; (d) Use of wildlife to collect 
and transport data. Many developing countries are endowed with wild animals that travel widely; across 
countries borders at times. Such animals (the less hostile ones like elephants) will be fitted with sensors 
to aid in data collection/transportation. This and (e) below are aspects of delay-tolerance; (e) Use 
public transport vehicles to collect and transport data. Road transport is still a famous mode of transportation 
in most developing countries. There are regular fleets of buses transporting people across various towns/cities/rural 
areas both within and without countries borders. For example, buses transport people from Mombasa (in 
Kenya) to Dar-al-Salaam (in Tanzania), from Dar-al-Salaam to Kigali (in Rwanda). Fitted with sensors, 
a lot of climatic data will be collected and transported as the buses transverse borders.   3.2 MobiWSN 
Framework Layers Putting the above factors in to consideration, MobiWSN (Mobile Phone and Wireless Sensor 
Networks Drought Prediction Framework in Figure 4, is envisaged. In this framework, the mobile phone 
will play four roles: as gateways, as data mules, as data processors and as application input/output 
device. Layer 1: Sensor Networking Layer this is made up of both mobile and fixed sensors that will collect 
and relay parameters used in predicting droughts; e.g. soil moisture and/or consumptive use, crop yield, 
leaf index and vegetable growth. Layer 2: Lower Gateway Layer; largely made of android mobile phones 
that act as gateways to receive data from the wireless sensors. These phones act as data stores, data 
processors as well as routers. They pass on semi-processed data to the MULE-aware Layer. Given the challenges 
(discussed earlier) of using mobile phones for computation, a kind of grid will be utilized to increase 
the system s robustness. Layer 3: MULE Aware Layer; the concept of delay tolerance is again implemented 
in this layer as demonstrated by the presence of tagged wild and domestic animal as well public transport 
vehicle in the architecture. As these mobile objects (bus, goat and elephant) passes various locations, 
raw and pre­processed drought data will be exchanged between fixed and the moving network nodes. Layer 
4 High Gateway Layer; this layer is made up of more powerful computing devices such as laptops and workstations 
that receive data from the MULE Aware Layer and processes it further before passing it on to WSN middleware. 
Layer 5: - USN Middleware this is the software layer that acts as an API for developing the drought 
prediction application. It is context aware (has some intelligence) and uses the Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA) to abstract the services offered as mare services that can easily be invoked. The middleware is 
generic; can be modified to work for any other applications (not necessarily drought predication). Layer 
6: - USN Drought Prediction Application: - this is the software that will predict droughts given several 
parameters. These parameters will be retrieved from the data read by the sensors (and pre-processed in 
gateway layers), data retrieved from the TK database as well as external parameters from satellites and 
real-time data passed by selected individuals from the local community using mobile phones.  Figure 
4: MobiWSN Drought Prediction Framework The drought application s scope is to predict duration and severity 
of agricultural droughts. This application will be designed in close collaboration with relevant experts 
such as environmentalists, ecologists, hydrologists, meteorologists, geologist and agronomists. The proposed 
application is ubiquitous[3]. This happens to be a novel (no one known to us has done it before) feature 
that ensures that the application can be used by anyone, anywhere, anytime and using anything. The anything 
here is taken care of any mobile (irrespective of the phone s features), IP radio and billboards. The 
natural language translators and text-to-speech engine support the anyone aspect while mobile phone mobility 
aids in supporting anywhere and anytime aspects of the ubiquitous characteristic.  4. CONCLUSION AND 
FUTURE WORK WSN-based applications have been successfully deployed for; weather forecasting and prediction, 
health-care monitoring, habitat monitoring, tsunami- warning systems among others. Droughts are among 
the most expensive disasters in the world whose negative impacts span economic, social and environmental 
aspects of the affected society. Droughts are common in developing countries; they lead to devastating 
effects one of them being food insecurity. A WNS-based application can be used to accurately predict 
droughts and reduce drought impacts. WSN-based applications are recommended for the developing countries 
because they precipitate desirable features that make them suitable. However, in their current design, 
WSNs are not feasible in the developing countries due to high cost, perceived irrelevance among other 
reasons. In this paper, a viable solution that makes use of readily available mobile phones is presented. 
The solution combines traditional knowledge, natural (African) language translation and text-to-speech 
conversion to provide a relevant solution for predicting droughts in the developing countries. Our solution 
is designed with full knowledge of some serious challenges of using mobile phones as computing devices 
as well the inherent challenges that come with WSNs applications development such as scalability, heterogeneity, 
data integration, security and quality of service. The USN Middleware Layer of our proposed framework 
addresses these challenges. This is an on-going research project. The following is some of the planned 
further work: (a) Identification of appropriate sensors for use in drought prediction; (b) Testing of 
MobiGrid[8]; the middleware that will be used in networking mobile phones for the proposed framework. 
MobiGrid is a prototype that currently runs only on selected Nokia smart phones; (c) A survey (using 
interviews) to determine the structure (if any) of the traditional knowledge on droughts. This will be 
carried out in selected districts in Kenya. The information will then be used to design and develop a 
mobile phone application that will be used in collecting traditional knowledge for purposes of drought 
prediction. (d) Evaluation of the existing scientific drought prediction algorithms. This is to determine 
the necessary  extensions/enhancements/inventions to cater for the traditional knowledge parameter(s) 
in drought prediction.  5. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] Brussels, U. C. d. L. 2010. Top 10 most important Drought 
disasters for the period 1900 to 2010. Retrieved August 1 2010 http://www.emdat.be [2] ISDR. 2006. Developing 
Early Warning Systems: A Checklist Third International Conference on Early Warning: From concept to action 
(Vol. EWC III [3] ITU. 2008. Ubiquitous Sensor Networks (USN) (Vol. 4, pp. 1-18). [4] ITU 2010. [Global 
Telecom Indicators for the World Telecommunication Service Sector]. Web Page. [5] Jin, H., &#38; Jiang, 
W. 2010. Handbook of Research on Developments and Trends in Wireless Sensor Networks: From Principle 
to Practice (Vol. 1st). Information Science Reference: [6] Juniper, R. 2010. [Next Generation Smartphones]. 
Web Page. [7] Kazem, S., Minoli, D., &#38; Taieb, Z. 2007. Introduction and Overview of Wireless Sensor 
Networks. Wiley Interscience: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. [8] Masinde, M., Antoine, B., &#38; Victor, M., 
2010. MobiGrid:A Middleware for Integrating Mobile Phone and Grid Computing. Paper to be presented at 
the 6th International Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM 2010), IEEE Communications Society. 
[9] Me-Bar, Y. M., &#38; Veldez, F., Jr. 2003. Droughts as random events in the Maya lowlands. Journal 
of Archaeological Science, 30(Journal Article), 1599-1606. [10] Mishra, A. K. S., V.P. 2010. A Review 
of Drought Concepts. Journal of Hydrology. [11] Palmer, W. C. 1965. Meteorological drought. Weather Bureau, 
45(Journal Article), 1-58. [12] Szöllösi-Nagy, A. 1999. Integrated Drought Management: Lessons For Sub-Saharan 
Africa (Vol. Summary, pp. 1-18).  </RefA>
			
