
 A MORPHOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE FORM OF NATURE Yoichiro Kawaguchi Department of Art Nippon Electronics 
College Hyakunin-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160 ABSTRACT A process of recreating some forms of nature, 
including shells, horns, tusks, claws, and spiral plants, is herein described. The forms of nature based 
on spirals and ramification are generated not through the use of object data calculated by measurement, 
but through the use of an algorithmic structure based on the laws of nature. Although there are a myriad 
of forms to the shapes of nature, they are rep- resented on the basis of one common principle, which 
can be expressed by means of the same mathematical expres- sions. The graphic software which is called 
"GROWTH" (Growth Rationale Ob- ject Work THeorem) has now been design- ed to create these forms automatically. 
GROWTH incorporates the rational, com- mon principle of geometrical series which are found in the structute 
of biological objects. CR categories: Animation/Dynamics/ Art Key words and phrases: Biological law, 
GROWTH, spiral structure, similarity transformation, computer graphics, computer animation, Raster 
graphics Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
INTRODUCTION We often find various forms which can be regarded as the form of design in the natural 
environment. A form which exhibits such regularity and order at- tracts our interest. The laws under 
which these forms operate are rules. These laws are rules which are physical factors regulating the process 
of form- ation. If these laws are assumed to be the principles whereby forms are created, we can anticipate 
that things having a similar form are the result of a common principle in operation. This program can 
create spiral fig- ures which are composed on a set of sim- ilar, but smaller, units, by entering the 
direction of growth on 3-D coordi- nate axes and accumulating these smaller figures in proportion to 
the growth rate, which is expanding in a series. In the exercise designed to simulate the growth of spiral 
plants, a more cen- tripetal structure is generated by in- creasing the number, the angles, and the length 
of the branches in a series at any branching point. The use of GROWTH to generate natural veins and tendrils 
stemming from various plants can be de- scribed as follows. Shaded images ren- dered by this process 
are included, as are scientific illustrations and animat- ed pictures explaining the morphological organization 
of living things. In 1977, Eichi Izuhara advised me that the growth of shells occurs based upon simple 
and rational principles. In this paper, we will explain the principle of the spiral form mathematically 
and discuss the plants, snails, and horns which are herein used as models. The form of nature will be 
proven not by measuring three-dimensional data of models but by explaining various rules of formation 
mathematically and by re-creating the models based on that explanation. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM 0-89791-076-1/82/007/0223 
$00.75 Shells' Growth Model By observing the forms of fossils and various shells, one can see that shells 
share a common morphological structure and plan, or mechanism. Be- cause they are governed by simple 
math- ematical formula, the explanation of the formation technique by computer graphics became possible. 
 In this paper, emphasis is placed upon shells' morphology starting from the principle of the accumulation 
of shells rather than setting the living object's internal tissue's chemical parameter. Also, the research 
was done without considering genetic factors. There are various formation factors which contribute to 
the growth of shells; however, the purpose of this paper is to focus on the principle of morphological 
formation, which, in natural science, is considered to have a great influence, and to develop that morphological 
fOrm- ation algorithm in computer graphics. Therefore, the research does not end only in a biological 
morphological study -it extends to the application of the research to the exploitation of new techniques 
in the formative arts. The following is a description of shells' growth simulation. Thus, as a model 
for biological growth principle (formula), its application to computer graphics is explained. Tz T_~x 
< Y Figure 1 -Mouth of Shell STRUCTURE ANALYSIS Basically, shells have spiral struc- tures supported 
by numerous small chamb- ers which are arranged regularly. Overall shell structure consists of small 
chambers. Each chamber is similar New chambers are accumulated at the posi- tion of previously accumulated 
old small chambers Accumulation of the small chambers occurs locally. In other words, newly- formed 
small chambers are similar to those just previously formed. Therefore, small chambers are formed in an 
orderly and similar manner, and accumulation be- gins by geometic ratio to form a logari- thmic spiral. 
 In order to determine these shells' overall morphological structure, only the small chambers' morphological 
structure has to be determined. Small chambers are polyhedrons which have similar top and bottom bases. 
 -OVERVIEW - Do' TOP Do -- BOTTOM " i -Qy x Do y SIDE VIEW FRONT VIEW ) < ) Tx Tz Figure 2 - Formation 
of Polyhedron  Algorithm of Three-Dimensional Small Chambers I. Bottom base  Both top and bottom bases 
are polygons, which consist of N number apexes. Formation of Polygons i. Ellipse  The user has the 
option to input in- formation by tablet and/or keyboard to vary the radius of the ellipse (see figure 
i) 2. Non-elliptical configuration  The mouths of the shells which exist in nature have not only the 
shapes of el- lipses but also have unique morphological structures. Through the use of the above inter- 
actively, the concave/convex protuber- ance of the ellipse described above can be modified to construct 
the optimum shape of the shell'S mouth. II. Side View  Construct the mouth form which was constructed 
in a two-dimensional figure into 9 three-dimensional figure. At this point, the determined three-dimensional 
objects influence the overall shape of the shells. This, as I have described above, is composed of polyhedrons, 
which consist of two similar flat surfaces - bottom and top bases. Fi'gure 3 (above) Accumulated structure 
shell Figure 4 (right, top) Horn; views three Figure 5 (right, bottom) Horn, spective view per- Relationship 
Between Two Flat Surfaces I) Identical Ratio Make an identical figure of the en- larged or reduced 
scale of the bottom base, as was done at the top base. Supposing the long diameter of the ellipse to 
be D__oo, and the scaled form of Do (either enlarged or reduced) to be Do'. The ratio can thus be described 
as follows: Do' r - Do This ratio (r) is the growth ratio of accumulation which takes place in each 
small chamber in the process of shell growth. 2) The Width The width is the distance between the top 
and bottom bases. Supposing the thickness to be the value of H,as the figure of H is bigger, the shells 
with a rapid growth rate and a long and slen- der shape are constructed. The age of the shells is indicated 
by the number of small chambers. The relationship between the width and the position is a matter of the 
same level. That is, the width, H, is the distance between the top and bottom bases, and the position 
is nothing but the transferring of axis x and [, which reaches the top and bottom bases. Again, the top 
base is identical to the figure of the bottom base, in identical scale to it.  3) Inclination (Slope) 
 Inclination is indicated by the angle of the top and bottom bases of the shell. On a three-dimensional 
angular axis (x,y,z) , it takes a direction either towards the right, left, hither or yon. Actual shells 
have both right-twist and left-twist; however, they are not limited to either right or left twists. 
To check the twist of shells in the process of data input, besides a three-dimensional picture consisting 
of a front-view picture, a side-view picture, and an overview, a picture done by perspective transformation 
is prepared (see figures 2, 3, 4). The reason for doing so is that there is a change in the direction 
of growth due to a change in the direction of the an- gle between the top and bottom bases. If the angle, 
2, between the top and bottom bases of the shells were small, the shells twirl a gentle, sloped curve 
spiral. On the other hand, if is big, shells twirl rapidly. Q : (Qx,Qy,Qz)  KNOT i?_ .......... TRUNK 
/// BOTTO~I BASE ............. ~ < 4) Positional Relationship If one observes shells in nature, he 
will find that the direction of the position is not necessarily vertical. Suppose the transfer distance 
against each direction of length, width, and depth to be T x, T_~, and T z. The relationship between 
the bottom base and the top base is indicated by the condition in which the distance of the height direction, 
i.e., the width relationship, T z, is fixed and moved in a certain direction. When the positional relationship 
of both bottom and top bases shifts from a vertical position to anoth- er position, each small chamber 
does not adjoin, as in the case of some shells, and it starts to form in the shape of horns of sheep 
or goats (see figure 5) Helght ~\ > DIAMETER D O FIGURE 6 -Branching Structure  Rules of Generating 
Model  Simulation of the spiral growth of a plant is basically similar to the sim- ulation of the growth 
of a horn, fang, nail, etc. The fundamental formation of the simulation contains a theory of the growth 
and some new, additional parameter which are factors in growth. i) A trunk and branches deriving from 
it have diameters ( D ) and heights (H). 2) A top base and a bottom base of a trunk are parallel. 3) 
Two adjacent trunks are connected by a knot. 4) Between the top and bottom base of a knot is a certain 
angle (~) 5) The top and bottom base of a knot always contact each other at one point (K). 6) A branch 
always derives from a knot. 7) The diameter of a branch is always affected by the height of the knot 
from which it derives. 8) When the height of a branch or knot becomes smaller than one pixel, the branch 
stops growing.  i = the number i = 0, i, 2... of n-l, trunks n Ho Do - H1 D1 - Hn Dn S (constant (See 
figure 6) 3.2 Tendril Plants and Their Modification A tendril plant can be generated by the application 
of the principle, which rolls a branch of a plant into a spiral. A tendril of a plant does not grow in 
a certain direction like the shell of a pearly nautilus, but a force which turns the grawth to the other 
direction is gen- erated at a certain rolling angle. We called this phenomenon the "self-adj- ustment 
law which a plant holds within itself" and made a model of a tendril plant by setting a limit to the 
angle of rolling and by operating the force which has the same strength and the op- posite direction 
upon the growth of the plant. We could generate different types of tendril plant models according to 
the number of accumulation of bending. It is not necessary to input data like "twin- ing around" or 
"sunward" of, for in- stance, a morning glory, to this sim- ulation model. A plant itself generates new 
tendrils successively by self-multi- placation. If we shift not only the limitation of the angle for 
changing direction but also the value of the self-adjustment power, we will be able to get a plant which 
has a more complex curve. When we adjust the values at the number of bending to less than those of a 
tendril, a completed model more closely resembles a natural plant. Extension of Generating Model The 
following process is a morpho - genic model by which a plant successive- ly repeats self-adjustment processes 
so as to generate a complex formation. i) The basic structure shall follow the law of a growth of a 
tendril plant. 2) A rolling angle ~ shall gradually be increased or decreased at the rate of a certain 
value @ O((i) = <X(i) ± e 3) A tendril derived from a knot shall receive a force ~ which adjusts the 
rolling angle of a trunk CX  (X(i) = O((i) ± e 7 4) ~ shall have an effect upon C~ only when ~ is out 
of the provided limit- ations.  <d< kl 5) After has been adjusted, will again come out of the provided 
limit- ations  ko <d<kl when accumulation reaches a certain number. Then the self-adjustment force 
 will again operate upon to the opposite direction and try to re- cover a stable balance. 6) If we set 
the provided limitation extremely narrowly, we cannot see the growth of tendrils but will see the growth 
of crowded branches and leaves. Thus we found it possible to gen- erate a model which was very similar 
 to the existing plant by means of intro- ducing a self-adjustment factor and other physical factors 
in addition to the basic principles of a spiral formation. From the research reported this time, it 
is anticipated that, adapting the above result as a common theorem of the branching of plan~s, we will 
be able to construct various systematic models which express the evolution of plants from the past to 
the future, including p|ants existing at present. CONCLUSION Since this program possesses an al- gorithic 
structure based on the similarity growth that takes place in the natural world, it can create shells 
and horns of intended shape. Shapes thus created are formed by curved surfaces obtained not through 
com- plex measurements but by the principles of regular logarithmic spiral. By expanding these principles, 
we have succeeded in freely generating such complex shapes as corals and tendril plants, of which dimension 
is hard to measure by methods currently available. The process to generate these shapes which might 
consist of hundreds of thou- sands, or even millions of faces, is an application of biological and mathemati- 
cal principles by branching. 6. Acknowledgements I started this research in 1977, with the advice of 
Professor Eiichi Izuhara at the Industrial Product Research Institute, and the first step was a growth 
model of a shell by line drawing. At that time, Mr. Tomohiro Ohira, also at the Industrial Research Institute, 
gave me suggestions concerning the design of three-dimension- al curved surfaces. I would like to ex- 
press my sincere thanks to both of them. I would also like to express my apprecia- tion to Mr. Dirk 
Binder and Mr. Osamu Fukuda of Tokyo Foreign Language College for their cooperation in the translation 
of this report, and Mr. Takafumi Okubo of Nippon Electronics College for the oppor- tunity to continue 
my research in this field. 7. References <RefA>[i] Eiichi Izuhara, "A Unified Model for Generative Process 
of Plants," Bulle- tin of the Japanese Society for the Science of Design, September, 1978 [2] Yoichiro 
Kawaguchi, "Spiral Structure in Image Composition," Bulletin of the Japanese Society for the Science 
of Design, September, 1978 [3] D'Arcy W. Thompson, On Growth and Form I, II Cambridge University Press, 
1968</RefA> The equipment used in this research are as follows: E &#38; S Picture System II and Melcom 700 
for line drawings AED 512 and Micro -11/23 for shaded images The language was FORTRAN A background 
picture and a picture of a shell or a group of spiral plants are made separately  
			
