
 A Modern Curriculum for an Ancient Culture Robert M. Aiken Computer Science Department The University 
of Tennessee Knoxville, Tennessee 37996 Chien F. Chao and Yi Fen Zhu Institute of Computer Science Hefei 
Polytechnic University llefei, Anhui, PRC INTRODUCTION The authors find themselves in agreement with 
the observations contained in several recent studies which have presented "snapshots" of the status of 
computing at various universities and institutes in the Peoples' Republic of China (PRC) [1,2,3]. While 
each report has a different focus'based on the pur-pose of the authors' visits, there do seem to be some 
points of general agreement. ~1ong them are: I. Each institute and university in the PRC is autonomous, 
and though there may be some cooperation between different organizations, this is an excep- tion. [Universities 
and institutes are directly under the charge of different Ministries. There isn't any unifying organization, 
thus people in different computer groups--even within the same Ministry--may be unaware of what other 
groups are doing. Dissemination of information is improving but it still remains a big problem.] 2. Many 
research or production groups are building their own systems, however, the state of their technology 
is less advanced than that of current western models. There are also a number of imported micro- and 
some minicomputer systems at various places. Because of the embargo on selling large, sophisticated systems, 
the PRC has not been able to buy such systems from several countries, including the U.S. 3. BASIC, FORTRAJl, 
ALGOL and Pascal seem to be the most prevalent macro programming languages. Different groups are also 
doing a great deal of research (and implementation) of I/0 and processing of Chinese characters. 4. 
The Cultural Revolution (1966-76) produced great turmoil in the universities and research in- stitutes. 
One result was that many departments/ institutes providing computer science and engineering  Permission 
to copy without ~e all or part of this material is granted prov~ed that the copies an not made or distributed 
mr divot commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and im date 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association mr Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to ~publish, requi~s a ~e and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM 0-89791-067-2/82/002/0237 
$00.75 education were forced to close during some or all of this period. Thus there is a tremendous lack 
of expertise in this area. Previous programs are being rebuilt and others are being initiated. However, 
it will be at least a decade before the PRC will have a solid nucleus of professionals with an up-to- 
date computer science/engineering background. 5. For all their problems, few doubt the re-sourcefulness, 
energy and determination of the people of China to make up for lost time. A major commitment of resources 
(money, facilities, people) is being earmarked for this effort. Given the remarkable achievements made 
in other areas, they are certainly capable of "leapfrogging" over a decade of computing advancements 
in a much shorter time frame. This paper reports on one such effort. The senior author was invited by 
the First Ministry of Machine Building to review a Computer Science pro- gram which had been established 
along the lines of the IEEE Nodel Curriculum [4]. The work of the two other authors and their colleagues 
forms the bulk of the reaminder of the presentation. This discus-sion of a particular program presents 
one of the ways in which the PRC is "catching up". A more complete review is provided in another document 
[5]. BACKGROUND DESCRIPTION On October 1980, after considerable planning and organizing, the First Ministry 
of Machine Building (Beijing, Peoples' Republic of China) in cooperation with the U.S. firm, Computer 
Systems Technology, Inc. (CST), formed the Computer Science Institute at Hefei Polytechnic University 
(HPU), Anhui Province, China. Their primary goal was to inaugu-rate an undergraduate program in computer 
science that would be comparable to much of the IEEE Model Curriculum. The first class was composed of 
some of the best students from those who were in their junior year of University studies or those who 
had been working several years in areas allied to computing, but who had not previously received University 
degrees. These students were to be given an intensive four semesters of courses leading to an Undergraduate 
degree in Computer Science.* *Application has been made to the Ministry of Educa-tion to award the equivalent 
of an Undergraduate Degree in Computer Science. 237 Various Universities ant; Institutes in the PRC 
be poorly documented in parts and aspects of the selected students to sit for the entrance exam, which 
was tile Graduate Record Exam (GRE) Mathemati- cal Aptitude Test. The students were required to take 
the exam in English since the curriculum was based on using English language texts. A Selection Committee 
composed of members of the Institute and of HPU selected 30 students and the First Ministry chose i0 
students for the first class. Curriculum Comparisons Table I depicts the curriculum flow diagram of the 
courses offered by the Institute (based on the IEEE model). The courses with a X through them are included 
in the IEEE model but are not currently offered at HPU. Though there will be some changes made as faculty 
are added, new equipment is received, etc. this is the general model which they intend to follow. As 
one might suspect, all the courses offered by the Institute do not exactly match the courses as described 
in the IEEE model. However, in most cases it's possible from the course descriptions and conversations 
with the instructors to see where matching occurs. It should be noted that only one of these courses, 
the Minicomputer Lab, is included as a core course in the IEEE model, but is not in the HPU curriculum. 
It would also be included as a core course in the Institute's curriculum, except they presently do not 
have a minicomputer. In fact, all of the student's training is on microcomputers. In addition to the 
courses that can be matched directly to the IEEE model, the Institute requires the students to take Linear 
Algebra, Numerical Analysis, and Scientific English. All courses are compulsory except for Special Topics 
offered in the fourth (last) quarter of the program. At this time students can select either Digital 
Logic Devices (DL-4) or Microprogramming (CP-4), depending on their interests and future career plans. 
The one area which has been somewhat slighted in the course structure is C02-I/0 and Hemory Systems and 
C03-Computer Architecture. This material is currently covered in a course in which portions of Microprogramming 
Systems are taught as well. It seems that this latter topic received most of the emphasis. However, this 
deficit is partly rectified for many of the students by their participation in various projects. Projects 
In general, the projects were conceived of as a means to challenge the better students. In the beginning, 
i0 students were chosen to work on soft- ware assignments in order to become acquainted with the systems. 
They were mostly self taught and worked on these projects in addition to other assignments before the 
program actually began. They later became the leaders of additional projects that included other classmates 
as team members. Great emphasis was placed on learning (and improving) system software, especially on 
the CROMEMCO machines since they were most accessible. (e.g. dissassembl-ing and analyzing of Debug, 
Macro Assembler facili- ties and CROMIX). Almost half of the students have now worked on one or more 
of these projects and all of them said this was one of the highlights of their educational experience. 
Even though they found the software to hardware difficult to understand at times, they were uniform in 
their belief of needing as much opportunity as possible to use and learn different systems. PROBLEMS-OBSERVATIONS-SUGGESTIONS 
I. The major problem has been the lack of hardware. This situation is due to several factors ~main one 
being the difficulty of obtaining U.S. export licenses for the machines. When the program began the students 
only had access to 4 CROHEMCO systems (which were shared with the De- partment of Electronic Engineering). 
Though three other microcomputers were added in March 1981, the biggest improvement was the addition 
of four TERAKs, one PDP 11/23 and 6 PDP 11/03s in late Summer. The situation will be further improved 
with the delivery of 50 Heathkit H-89 systems in late 1981. 2. All the machines available and on order 
are microcomputers. The students should be exposed to other systems. Proving students in this program 
with such experience would create professionals with broader backgrounds who could more easily work in 
application and research areas other than those involving micros. 3. The curriculum is exceedingly demandin 
9. The students alT agree on that--and so do most of the teachers and administrators. The students mentioned 
that it took them most of the first quarter to simply get adjusted to reading English language texts. 
 The question might be raised whether students really have enough time to obtain the essentials of a 
solid computer science foundation. The answer is a qualified yes. Two possibilities to provide more material 
are: -to give an intensive short course before the Institute begins -to add an extra quarter to the program. 
a. Students had a wide and diverse range of backgrounds in Electronics and Mathematics. Therefore, a 
short course emphasizing the minimum background one should have in these areas could help mold the students 
into a more cohesive unit-- e.g. create a levelling effect that would make teaching and learning easier 
for everyone. b. The addition of an extra quarter would allow students to have an opportunity to pursue 
in greater depth several topics. Though the curricu- lum adequately covers the basics, there is not enough 
time to investigate important aspects such as the strengths/weaknesses of alternative models. Such options 
as a second course in Operating Systems, or a more fully developed System Architec- ture course that 
compared different system archi- tectures could be included. The availability of a minicomputer would 
open the door to many other possibilities (e.g. a Minicomputer Lab).  4. Introducin 9 a "Pseudo" language, 
such as the one covered in the Introductory text by Gear which is used in this program, is a 9ood way 
to initiate these students into the "art of programm-e". Many students commented on how easy it was to 
learn other computer languages once they had this general model (pseudo-language) on which to build. 
Even more than American students, the Chinese students seem to benefit from such a struc-tured, top down 
approach (i.e. starting with a 238 general, pseudo language and only then covering specific programming 
languages). 5. The emphasis on improving the students English should continue to be stressed. Some of 
these students will be selected for further study. They will read even more English language texts and 
attend additional courses given in English. Some might have the opportunity to study abroad. But even 
for those who do not study further, but work in various applications areas, it is also important to continue 
working on their English. They will be the ones who will need to understand the computer literature and 
be able to act as liaisons with for-eign professionals doing similar work. Some might also be asked to 
participate in International Trade Fairs, Professional Conferences, etc. In any case, their investment 
in learning English should not be wasted. They should be given the time and opportun- ity while they 
are at tile Institute to improve. Furthermore they should be encouraged to continue their language training 
after leaving the Institute. As a final, yet very important observation it should be noted that the students 
in this curriculum take 14 solid computer science courses (plus Linear Algebra and Scientific English). 
This is definitely comparable to what most students receive who major in Computer Science in the United 
States. 6. The mix of local and foreign faculty has been very beneficial. In the first year of the pro- 
gram most of the key software courses have been taught by visiting faculty from the United States. Local 
faculty have been "borrowed" from other de- partments to teach more theoretical courses (espe-cially 
mathematics) and various aspects of hardware design. The visiting faculty is almost totally relied on 
to teach software courses. For the near future and certainly for the long term success of the program 
it is necessary to train/recruit local instructors with a solid background in software design methodology. 
SUMMARY This program has made tremendous progress in the short time of its existence. A solid undergraduate 
Computer Science degree curriculum has been estab- lished and taught. Most of the problems have been 
solved or are currently being tackled. The achieve- ments far outweigh any negative aspects. In addi- 
tion the completion of a new building and the already acquired new computer equipment will alleviate 
some of the most vexing difficulties of the first year. Thus, it seems fair to say that the course material 
covered by these students is approximately the same as that constituting a major in Computer Science 
in many American Universities. Though there is not as much flexibility in this curriculum, all the core 
courses are taught (using the ACM '78 and IEEE Computer Society Curriculum Models), and enough of the 
elective courses from the IEEE Curriculum model are included to give the students a solid background 
in Computer Science or perhaps more pre- cisely Computer Engineering. From discussions with the faculty 
and from look- ing at some exam results, it would seem that most of these carefully selected students 
would fit into the top 25% of a comparable undergraduate Computer Science class in the U.S. Furthermore, 
approximately half of them have the scientific ability and neces- sary Computer Science background to 
qualify for many Master's Programs in the West. The major handicap for them is English, particularly 
listening compre-hension and speaking. The only other area where they have a weakness is a lack of experience 
in writing programs, especially large ones. This pro-blem should be partly corrected this next year since 
additional microcomputer systems will be available. Thus, students will be able to write more of their 
own programs rather than having to analyze and dis- assemble programs written by others (e.g. assemblers, 
compilers, etc. provided by equipment manufacturers). There still remains the problem of how to give 
these students the opportunity to work on mini's and even larger systems. CONCLUS ION This program should 
not be viewed as a typical examgle of how various Univ~ersities in China are attempting to establish 
Computer Science Programs. This program is unique in many ways. The most important difference to other 
Computer Science Pro- grams in China is the major emphasis on students reading English language textbooks 
and listening to lectures in English (with less emphasis on writing and speaking English). The goal of 
this program is to provide superior students the opportunity to study undergraduate Computer Science 
courses, with the best of them continuing on with a Masters Pro-gram and the best of these possibly pursuing 
a Ph.D. in another University in China or a Western country. Those students who do not go into advanced 
degree programs will assume key positions in different institutes and factories where they will be expected 
to utilize their expertise to develop systems and programs to meet various needs. In any case, all of 
the students will have been exposed to the English language as well as many of the traditions and cul- 
tural idiosyncracies of Western society. They will have been a part of an initial effort to build a bridge 
between the rich, ancient culture of China vlhich emphasizes certain ways of doing things and the more 
scientific/technical orientation of the "modern" Western society. Though other programs are also trying 
to bridge the gap between China'scurrent technological status and the more advanced level in the West, 
they are not using English as the "link". While this is a major plus for the program at HPU it also poses 
a problem, and the long term suc- cess of the program depends on how well the problem is solved. The 
Institute must attract more "local" faculty to teach the bulk of the courses. Eventually grad- uates 
of the program who do graduate work elsewhere, will return to teach and do research at HPU. However, 
in the meantime other "local" faculty must be obtained who are willing to adapt to this new way of teaching. 
It's not just the English language that is involved, it's actually a teaching philosophy. The Chinese 
way of teaching emphasizes memorization ~-primarily by examining in detail specific examples (cases). 
The Western manner (as exemplified in the textbooks and by foreign lectures) presents a general framework 
and asks (expects) the student to fill in the details. Concommitant to this factor is getting the faculty 
to use the computers in teaching and research. Many are reluctant to use these systems, thus they don't 
integrate it into their courses and furthermore don't encourage student use. It is the transition to 
this style of teaching, plus use of computers (and way of thinking) that is so very dif- ficult for some 
instructors (and students). Yet, it 239 is that transition which must be made if this pro~ gram is to 
remain viable and expand over the long run. Dr. Chao, one of the principal "architects" of this program 
and Professor Zhu, the Associate Director of the Institute, are well aware of these problems and are 
working diligently to solve them. So far they have received excellent support from the First Ministry 
of Machine Building, and it is that continued assistance which is vital if the Institute is to achieve 
the potential which isindi- cated from its first year of operation. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] Huskey, H.D., "Computing 
in China, 1980", The IEEE Computer Society China Study Group Report, Computer, Vol. 14, No. i0, October 
1981, pp. 38-47. [2] Dale, N.B. "Computer Science in China: Research Interests and Educational Directions", 
Proceed-ings of Eleventh SIGCSE Technical Symposium, February 1980, pp. 186-190. [3] Garner, L.G. and 
Garner, Y.L., Eds., "Report of the IEEE Computer Society Delegation to the Peoples' Republic of China 
Under the Sponsor~ ship of the Chinese Electronics Society", IEEE, New York, 1978, and, "Computing in 
China, 1978", Computer, Vol. 12, No. 3, March 1979, pp. 81-96. [4] IEEE Computer Soceity Model Curricula 
Subcom-mittee, "A Curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering--Committee Report", IEEE Computer Society, 
January 1977. [5] Aiken, Robert M., "An Evaluation of the Under, graduate Curriculum of the Computer 
Science Institute at Hefei Polytechnic University", Unpublished Report, September 1981, 61 pages.</RefA> t~ 
--r-..~ 0.~ "o ~ ~ o i o 8.5 o o o  "5 o Y "F-8~ Lu 4J 0 ~W o ~E o ff~ JJ u aJ q-~ Q. <u o5 4--r- 
£- I 241 
			
