
 @ Computer Graphics, Volume 22, Number 4, August 1988 A NEW RADIOSITY APPROACH BY PROCEDURAL REFINEMENTS 
FOR REALISTIC IMAGE SYNTHESIS Min-Zhi Shao, Qun-Sheng Peng, You-Dong Liang CAD/CAM Research Center 
Zhejiang University P. R. OF CHINA ABSTRACT According to the rendering equation, the diffuse and the 
specular components of the outgoing intensity of each surface patch should be solved simultaneously. 
Rather than establishing a huge set of linear equations defining the unknovn directional intensities 
for all directions and all surface patches, we expand the concept of the delta form-factor which concerns 
the light energy transfer of a surface patch along a respective direction. As the delta form-factor for 
non-diffuse surface patches are dependent on the spatial and spectral distributions of light energy, 
they could not be calculated geometrically. In this paper, we present a new radtosity approach which 
progressively approxisates the delta form-factors and the light energy distributions within a general 
environment to the correct solution. The nucleus of our approach is procedural iteration. Statistics 
indicate the potentials of this method for complex non-diffuse environments. CR Categories and Subject 
Descriptors: 1.3.3 [Computer Graphical: Picture/Image Generation; 1.3.7 [Computer Graphics): Three-Dimensional 
Graphics and Realism General Terms: Algorithms Additional Key ¥ords and Phrases: Distributed ray tracing, 
form-factors, global illumination, hemi-cube, procedural iteration, progressive reftnement,radiostty 
INTRODUCTION In recent years, along with the vigorous developments of computer graphics, ray tracing 
and radiosity methods have gradually become the tee main techniques for realistic Image synthesis. Permission 
to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or 
distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169;1988 
ACM-0-89791-275-6/88/008/0093 $00.75 Ray tracing is used as a method of determining the global illumination 
information that is relevant to the image plane. It correctly simulates the light outgoing a smooth surface 
by mirror reflection and regular transmission. Since the methodology sam introduced by Yhitted [14) in 
1980, it has been widely used and has generated some of the most realistic images to date. However, there 
are many scenes that cannot be adequately modeled by ray tracing. The illumination model posed by ray 
tracing method ignores the interaction of light between diffusely reflecting surfaces. Furthermore, the 
ray tracing methodology, which just provides limited point-sampled information, is not sufficient for 
the application of energy equilibrium models to light behavior. Only the tntra-environment specular effects 
are considered. [6) In 1984, Goral et el. [51 introduced a so called radtosity method from thermal engineering 
[10) [11) to computer graphics. This method models the interaction of light between diffusely reflecting 
surfaces and accurately presents the global Illumination effects. Since then, Cohen et al. successively 
proposed tee famous algorithms to make the radlomity method a practical rendering technique. One is the 
hemi-cube algorithm which extends the radiosity solution to environments with occluded surfaces so as 
to render complex scenes (I); the other is the aubstructurtng algorithm vhtch provides means for local 
discretization of critical portions of the environment vithout affecting the remainder of the global 
solution CZ~. Honorer, the ideal diffuse reflection is assumed in all those algorithms and specular reflections 
from non-diffuse surfaces are not considered. This unfortunately limited the extensive use of the radiosity 
method. Since the form-fectors in non-diffuse environments are dependent on the spatial and spectral 
distributions of light energy and should be evaluated conforming to the specific illumination attributes 
of each surface, a modified hemi-cube algorithm shfch successively approximates the correct form-factors 
of general complex environments is introduced in this paper. The nucleus of our method is procedural 
iteration. First, we obtain a sketchy light distribution of the environment by applying a standard radlostty 
method. Then, the nee form-factors of non-diffuse patches are calculated according to this distribution. 
They In turn propose a more accurate light distribution within the environment. After several repetitions 
ef the iteration, we arrive at the correct solution. Note that a constant radically is assummed for 
 each surface patch and an accurate light radiation distribution at the sample point of each patch is 
retained. This may suggest a direct scan line cenversion to generate the desired image, However, since 
the specular component of the outgoing intensity typically changes very quickly over the patch, a view- 
independent solution may require that the specular surfaces be subdivided into fine details, invoking 
enormous amount of computations. Rather, we adopt a two-pass approach and employ distributed ray tracing 
 to evaluate the specular components of the outgoing intensities of the concerned surface patches which 
contribute to the final vies-dependent image. Statistics indicate the potentials of this procedure for 
complex non-diffuse realistic image synthesis. GLOBAL ILLUMINATION NODBLS FOR GENERAL BNVlRONRBNTS Although 
both ray tracing and radiosity are recognized as global illumination solutions, they describe only the 
two extreme situations of light energy distributions within ideal environments. Nuch efforts were made 
to remedy the deficiencies of the twe methods to cover a more general situatien. From the angle of ray 
tracing: In 1984, Cook et al. [3) [4] presented the algorithm of distributed ray tracing. This algorithm 
provides a correct and easy solution to some previously unsolved or partially solved difficult problems 
in ray tracing, including fuzzy reflections. In 1986, Kajiya [8) made some further advances on the idea 
of Cook's method. He described an algorithm that solves a so called rendering equation using Nonte Carlo 
and variance reduction techniques for stochastic ray tracing. Although, theoretically, thls approach 
could eventually converge to the accurate solution, the computation time would preclude the substantial 
increase of the sample points. Then, the inefficiency of point-sampling becomes the main problem. It 
has not been well solved for general complex environments, especially concerning the diffuse reflection. 
From the angle of radiosity: In 1986, Immel et al. [7) firstly introduced a general radiosity method 
accounting for all interreflections of light between diffuse and non-dlffuse surfaces in complex environments. 
The relationship between a patch and all other patches in the environment becomes, in this method, a 
relationship between a given outgoing direction for a patch and all outgoing directions for all other 
patches. Unfortunately, the computational resources te be expended are too huge to make this method a 
practical approach. In 1987, Yallace et al. [13) presented a two-pass  approach that integrates ray 
tracing and radiosity into a whole. It is thus capable of dealing with complex environments (including 
mlrror surfaces). The first pass is based on the hemi-cube radiosity algorithm with extension to include 
the light energy transfer via diffuse to specular, specular to specular and specular to diffuse mechanism, 
the second pass is based on an alternative to distributed ray tracing. The two-pass approach which 
combines ray tracing and radically organically, takes advantages of both the classic methods and avoids 
their shortcomings. This is a successful scheme indeed. By careful analysis ef the two-pass approach, 
we can easily see that the crux step is the first pass which calculates the vlew-independent illumination 
effects for a non-diffuse environment. According to the rendering equation, the outgoing intensity of 
a surface is composed of three components, namely an emission term, a diffuse term and a specular term: 
Iout(Oou t) = E(Oou t) + Id,ou t (i) + Is,out(Oou t)  where Id,°ut = <dOd I Iin(Oin)C°S(e)d~ (2) Is,out(Oou 
t) = (3) Ks [ Os(Oout'@in)Iin(Oin)C°S(O)d~  with K d , K s indicating respectively the diffuse and 
the specular reflection coefficients of the surface, Kd + ~s = i . Obviously, the outgoing diffuse and 
specular terms each depend on all incoming intensities of the surface. As these incoming intensities 
are just the eutgolng intensities from other surfaces, they in turn contain both diffuse and specular 
components.(13) Thus it is impossible to derive an accurate diffuse energy distribution of the environment 
without precisely determining the specular reflection component of each surface. In other words, both 
diffuse and specular terms of the outgoing intensity of each patch should be solved simultaneously by 
one integrated process. Yallace et al. simplified the situation by assuming all non-dlffuse surfaces 
to be planar mirror surfaces. To incorporate the effects of these mirror surfaces, Yallace adopted a 
so called image method (11) from thermal engineering. The principle is simple and straightforward, namely 
that the light reflected from a plane mirror appears to come from an image located behind the mirror 
(Figure I). Apparently, each mirror introduces an additional virtual world into the environment. F q' 
D q I I I I I t E A p B Figure I. Enclosure with one specular surface (AD).  @ Computer Graphics, Volume 
22, Number 4, August 1988 Now let us make a brief analysis on the image method (Figure 2). If AD is a 
mirror, then one projection of all patches in front of AD turns the entire environment into EBCF, in 
which the number of the patches almost increases by one time. If DC is also a mirror, the further mirror 
reflections turns the environment into EBHI, and the number of the patches within EBHI increases nearly 
three times. Note that the total computation time of form-factors Is of O(N2) (N is the number of patches 
in the environment, representing the complexity of the environment). As the calculation of form-factors 
will cost about 90g of computation tlme in the implementation of the radlosity method, the image method 
may turn to be a very expensive solution when the mirror surfaces introduced into the environment are 
increased. In general, with multiple interreflections between mirror surfaces, the computation time may 
go up in exponential order. This is because the images have their images too. Consequently, a simple 
environment may get very complicated after several mirror reflections. I G H [ F-1 I I ] \\\\\\ \\ \\ 
k\\ \\\V  Ft I I I I I E A B Figure 2. Enclosure with two adjacent (AD,DC) and three arbitrarily positioned 
(X,Y,Z) specular surfaces.  This paper presents a new radiosity approach and solves the problem effectively. 
The concept of delta form-factors is developed to simulate both the diffuse and specular reflections 
of each surface patch. The correct light energy distribution of the environment is determined by a single 
pass. Non-diffuse surfaces in such an environment may possess arbitrary illumination attributes and need 
no longer be limited to perfect planar mirrors. PROCEDURAL REFINEMENT Firstly, we define the form-factor 
between any two patches in a general complex environment. The form-factor of patch i to patch j can be 
defined as follows: B.. F.. = ~O (4) l~ B. 1 where B.. represents the light energy that is iJ  transfered 
directly to patch j from patch i, and B. i  represents the total radiant light energy of patch i. Generally, 
in an ordinary non-diffuse environment,  we have: d s Fij = <idFij + KisFij (5)  where F d ij represents 
the fraction of light energy transfer to patch j via diffuse reflections of patch i and can be calculated 
using the standard hemi-cube algorithm, F-s- 13 represents the other portion of light  energy transfer 
to patch j via spicular reflections of N d s patch i ( ~ F I. = I , E F I. = i , so  N j =l 3 j =l J 
F i. = 1 are coefficients regarding  j=l J )" Kld' Kis the diffuse and the specular reflection of patch 
i respectively ( Kid + Kis = I). Note that the definition of form-factor in our approach is different 
from that in the previous two-pass method. This leads to a series of differences between the two algorithms. 
The following points are then listed: I. Bij is not limited to the radiant light energy transfered 
from patch i to patch j by diffuse reflection. It also includes the light energy which is transfered 
from patch i via self specular reflection to patch J (if patch i is a specular patch). Thus, Bij represents 
the total energy that is directly transfered from patch i to patch j. 2. Bij concerns the direct radiant 
light energy transfer only. The light energy being transfered from patch i to patch j via any other 
intermediate patches is not included. For instance, the light energy radiated from patch i then reflected 
by mirror k and landed on patch j is not included in Bij . This part of energy, according to our definition 
of the form-factor, is determined by B k and Fk~ J . (Figure 3) 3. For an ideal diffuse patch i, the 
form-factor Fij (j may be any other patch in the environment) depends only on the relative locations 
of patch i and patch j and accounts for nothing with the distribution of light energy in the environment. 
 Though B. may vary (which happens during a 1 disturbance of the enclosure), the fraction of its energy 
which is transfered to any other patch in the environment remains the same. In other words, its form-factor 
is purely geometrical. (Figure 4) 4. If patch i is a specular patch, however, the form-factor Fi~a will 
depend on the spatial and  SIGGRAPH '88, Atlanta, August 1-5, 1988 .,  Figure 3. The light energy 
from patch i which is reflected by mirror k and then transfered to patch j is not included in B... 13 
 N i  Figure 4. Form-factor geometry Figure 5. Light energy distribution and form-factor. spectral 
distributions of light energy in the environment. For example, in Figure 5, patch j and patch k are reflection 
symmetrical about patch i. If i is an ideal diffuse patch, then Fij = Fik But if i is a mirror patch, 
the matter will not be so simple. If k is a light source, Fij turns greater. On the other hand, if k 
is a blackbody, Fi~ J will turn smaller. Since the total distribution of light energy in the environment 
is unknown (in fact, this is exactly what we want to resolve), it is difficult to evaluate the specular 
form-factors of non-diffuse patches in a immediate way. Therefore the nucleus of our ~ork is to approximate 
these form-factors first, then successively refining them by procedural iterations. Finally, we obtain 
the correct distribution of light energy within a general complex environment Analogous to the traditional 
radiosity method, we have: N Bi = Ei + B'F''A'/A'[-31 3 i ' i=l'N (6) Pij[l 3  where B i = radiosity 
of patch i which is the total rate of radiant energy leaving the patch per unit time per unit area (watts/meter,,2) 
E i = rate of direct energy emission from patch i per unit time per unit area (watts/meter*,2) Oi = reflectivity 
of patch i and represents the fraction of incident light which is reflected back into the hemispherical 
space (unitless) F.. = form factor which represents the fraction of J l radiant energy leaving patch 
~ and impinging on patch i (unitless) A. = area of patch i (meter,,2) 1 Note that in general non-diffuse 
environments, the following identical equation: F..A. : F..A. (7) 1J i ~i J is not tenable, hence expression 
(6). In this equation, BjFjiA j represents the radiant light energy leaving patch j and impinging on 
patch i. After being divided by A i and then multiplied by Pi ' it represents a portion of the radioslty 
of patch i which is contributed by patch j. Denote Aji = Aj/A i and Dij = FijAij, we obtain the following 
set of linear equations: " -I " i-PlDii -OLD21 .... oiDNi Bi I E1  -P2Di2 i-P2D22~'" -P2DN2 B 2 E 
2 = (8) I I ° "PNDiN -PND2N"  i-PND~:N .BN] S2~ Note: The matrix is formed and solved for the radiostties 
regarding each color band of interest. It is usually solved for three channels (R, G, B) but could be 
done on a wavelength basis if desired. Not only Oi but also Fij may have different values for each channel 
@ Computer Graphics, Volume 22, Number 4, August 1988 I | Next, we discuss the calculation of form-factors 
of specular patches. An imaginary hemi-cube is created around the center (sample point) of each specular 
patch, all other patches in the environment are then projected onto the cube. (Figure 6) Each pixel on 
the hemi-cube relates to a specific patch index, and each patch index refers to a certain radiosity. 
So a hemi-cube retains not only the geometrical, but also the physical characteristics of the related 
patches in the environment. In fact, it has the global light energy distribution of the environment projected 
onto its faces. Therefore, the form-factor of patch k to every other patch in the environment can be 
easily obtained as soon as the delta form-factor is calculated which concerns the light energy transfer 
along a direction from the sample point to every pixel on the hemi-cube within a solid angle. Z q i 
 Y ~_~ ,"    qqT f I % k  Figure 6. The distribution of light energy in the environment is projected 
on the hemi-cube. Now let us consider the delta form-factor associated with any pixel p on the imaginary 
hemi-cube of a specular patch k (Afkp). Firstly, we find out the pixel q which is reflection symmetrical 
with p on the hemi-cube. Apparently, the radiant energy which is transfered towards pixel p by specular 
reflection of patch k is released by surface patches recorded in pixel q and pixels around q. If k is 
a perfect mirror patch, we have the following expression: PkBqAA B hfkp = = % {9) Pk Z (BsAA) Z B s 
s s  where B is the partial radiosity of a surface patch s recorded in pixel s reaching patch k from 
a corresponding direction, thus Z (BsAA) represents S  the total energy landed on patch k. As O k is 
the reflectivity of patch k, Afkp represents the fraction of energy leaving patch k in a specified direction. 
Obviously, nZ Afkp = I. If k is not a perfect mirror patch (e.g. it satisfies the Phong distribution, 
see Figure 7), we sample pixel q and pixels around q, and calculate the weighted average (weights are 
determined by the specified bidirectional reflectance of patch k). sampling area ,l_pixel q Nk pixel 
p B C.  ¢////[/////// M k Figure 7. Weighted sampling according to the related bidirectional reflectance. 
 In general, for each patch k in the environment, we havel + < af~ (10) Afkp = KdAf p s p in which, 
Af~p is the diffuse delta form-factor, Af~p is the specular delta form-factor. Since , A s = i, then 
~ Afkp = i. Z hf = i E fkp p P p P It satisfies the normal condition for form-factors. Particularly, 
if K d = 0 , k is a perfect mirror = patch; if K s 0 , patch k is ideal diffuse. Finally, we give the 
basic program structure o5 our procedural iterative and progressive refined radiosity method. STEP [. 
Assume the whole environment to be an ideal diffuse environment first, The form-factors between all pairs 
of patches within the environment are calculated using the standard hemi-cube algorithm, and the radiosity 
of each patch is then obtained. Meanwhile, the hemi-cube of every non-diffuse patch is preserved as an 
item buffer with each item retaining the information of patches visible from the corresponding pixel 
on the cube. All form-factors are then calculated. The results are correct for the ideal diffuse patches 
but just rough estimations for the non-diffuse patches. Since specular reflections account for only a 
small proportion of the total radiant light energy within the environmeat, we have obtained a relatively 
correct radiosity solution for the whole environment, although in some directions (e.g. the mirror reflecting 
direction of light source) the error might be very large.  STEP 2. Now we take the radiosity of each 
patch obtained in the first step as the initial value (the distribution of light energy on the hemi-eube), 
recalculate the form-factors (R, G, B) of the non-diffuse patches. We firstly find out the pixel q which 
is reflection symmetrical with each pixel p on the hemi-cube (Figure 6). If the index of visible patch 
preserved in pixel q is i, then BiFikis the radiosity of plxel q to patch k. Calculate the weighted average 
of delta form-factors at pixels around q according to the distribution function of bidirectional reflectance 
of patch k and evaluate the delta form-factor Afkp (R, G, B) using formular (9) and (I0). Since the hemi~eube 
Of every non-diffuse patch has been preserved in a data file, this step involves only reading from the 
data file and sampling pixels on the hemi-cube, avoiding the more expensive process of patch clipping 
projecting and hidden surface removal. (9~ SEPT 3. Solve the global systems of linear equations again 
with the more accurate form-factors of the non-diffuse patches and obtain a new solution of light energy 
distribution of the environment. Comparing the radioslty of each patch with its previous value. If the 
difference is smaller than a given tolerance, then the iteration process is accomplished, otherwise, 
go to step 2 and repeat the above processes. It should be mentioned that every environment in the radiosity 
method is assumed to be an enclosure. No energy could be transfered in, and no energy might be scattered 
out. The enclosure always maintains its light energy balance. Furthermore, it is a stable equilibrium, 
namely once the balance is disturbed, it will reach the next equilibrium simultaneously. A simple example 
serves to illustrate this phenomenon. Let us construct two equivalent processes regarding the light energy 
transfer in an environment. (see Figure 8) ¥ithout losing generality, the situations of three patches 
A, B and C among the surfaces in the enclosure will be illustrated. In case I, patch A, B, and C are 
always treated as mirrors and the environment keeps in a certain equilibrium. In case 2, patch A, B, 
and C are treated as ideal diffuse reflectors first, but are gradually transformed into mirrors (the 
reflectivities remain the same). Therefore, the original balance is broken. As a fraction of light energy 
emitted by the light source will gradually transfer to these patches via their specular reflection, the 
form-factors FAB , FBC and the radiosities B A , B B , B C in Figure 8 will C o B A  Figure 8. The 
conservation of light energy in an enclosure. successively increase. Nevertheless, the scale of increments 
are gradually decreased as little of the light energy which is emitted by the source will transfer back 
to it again. And this happens to all patches in the enclosure. So case 2 is convergent. Clearly, our 
progressive refinement procedure is exactly the same with the energy conservation process mentioned above 
an~ will successively converge to the correct distribution. Implementations have demonstrated that the 
convergent speed of our algorithm is very fast. For general complex environments, the accurate light 
energy distribution may be obtained after four to six iterations. The time required by these iterations 
is less than 205 of that by STEP 1 which invokes a standard radiosity procedure. Compared with the image 
method, our approach is regular and fast. It is a breakthrough to the traditional method in radiative 
heat transfer. RESULTS Figure g (A) and (B) show a test environment. The left object is a volume light 
source. All of its surfaces emit light energy except the top one (in green). In the right side, the blue 
object is a light- shelter. It shields off the direct illumination by the volume light source to the 
right wall. Overall illumination of the room is provided by two dim area light sources on the ceiling. 
In Figure 9(A), all patches in the environment are ideal diffuse. The image is generated using the standard 
radiosity method. In Figure 9(B), the floor is treated as a non-diffuse surface (<d = 0.~ , <S = 0.6 
). The image is generated using our progressive refined radiosity method. The effect of specular to 
diffuse reflection is accounted for. Please pay attention to the difference of the light energy distribution 
on the right wall and the subtle variation of the intensity of the blue light-shelter between image (A) 
and image (B). The number of iterations accomplished is five. The implementation data are listed in Table 
|, in which, MAXIMUM (AVERAGE) ERROR represents the maximum (average) errors of radiosities within all 
patches between two successive iterations. The fuzzy images on the floor are generated using a distributed 
ray tracing technique in the post-process. Figure 10 (~), (B) and (C) show a simple and crude room. In 
the middle of the front wall, there is a nearly perfect mirror ( ~d = 0.02 Ks = 0.98 ). A very bright 
light source (in blue) whose backface scatters light to the front wall is located at the left-top corner 
of the room. Figure ]O(A) is the top view. Figure IO(B) shows the environment in which all patches are 
treated as ideal diffuse reflectors. In Figure lO(C), the specular reflection of the mirror has been 
accounted for. Please pay attention to the differences of light spot on the floor, the right wall and 
the top of the table between these two images. Also note the changes of light intensity on the legs and 
the backface of the table appeared in the mirror. The implementation data about Figure ]0 are listed 
in Table 2, ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 22, Number 4, August 1988 For each mirror surface in Figure 
I0 (A), (B) and (C), the distributed ray tracing is used in the post-process. Since the main storage 
of our microcomputer is I Nb, we have no choice but to simplify the complexity of our test environments 
as far as possible, All lanterns are carefully made light enough to be suspended in midair. The program 
was written in C under an UNOS  operating system and ran on an gNIVERSE 68000. All images were displayed 
on a 640X480 resolution E&#38;S PS340 color screen. CONCLUSIONS The outgoing intensity of a surface 
patch in a general environment may consist of three components, namely an emission term, a diffuse term 
and a specular term. With the inclusion of the emission term and the specular term, the outgoing intensity 
of a surface becomes direction dependent. According to the rendering equation, the radiative intensity 
along an outgoing direction is the function of all incoming intensities arrived at the surface patch 
from the other directions and these incoming intensities, radiated by other surfaces in the environment, 
can also be decomposed into the above three terms. Thus, the diffuse and the specular components of light 
energy transfer between surface patches should be solved by one integrated process. Rather than establishing 
a huge set of linear equations defining the unknown directional intensities for all directions and all 
surface patches and solving them simultaneously, we expand the concept of the delta form-factor which 
concerns light energy transfer of a surface patch along a respective direction. @hile the delta form-factors 
for ideal diffuse surface patches are evaluated using the standard hemi-cube algorithm, the delta form-factors 
for non-diffuse surface patches are calculated by distributedly sampling the incoming incident rays within 
a solid angle. Apparently, these delta form-factors for non-diffuse surface patches are dependent on 
the spatial and spectral distributions of light energy and cannot be determined geometrically. An iterative 
solution is then developed. We first calculate the form-factors of all surface patches, ignoring specular 
reflections between them, and solve for the radiosity for each surface patch. The more accurate form-factors 
for non-diffuse surface patches are obtained based on the light energy distribution of the environment 
just derived. Thus, both the delta form-factors for non-diffuse surface patches and hence the light energy 
distribution of the environment can be successively approximated to the correct solution by procedural 
iterations. Statistics indicate the potentials of this approach for solving complex non-diffuse environments. 
Although we have obtained the average radiosity of each surface patch, the spatial and spectral distributions 
of the outgoing intensity is accurate at the sample point of each non-diffuse surface patch only. Thus, 
instead of conducting a further discretization, we adopt distributed ray tracing as a post-process to 
evaluate the emission and the specular components of the outgoing intensities of the concerned surface 
patches which contribute to the final view-dependent image. Our approach is thus a two-pass solution. 
There are two main methods in solving systems of linear equations. One is the direct method (e.g. Gaussian 
elimination scheme): the other is the iterative method (e.g. Gauss-Siedel iteration scheme). The time 
required by Gaussian eliminatlve approach is of O(N 3) (N represents the order of linear equations). 
Therefore, for solving large systems of linear equations, the direct method is too awkward to be invoked 
and the iterative method is commonly used. It can greatly reduce the computation time in general cases. 
[12) This should give us some enlightenment. When the specular surfaces are included in the environment 
and the computation time increases hopelessly, why don't we try to use a seemingly unassured but actually 
smart progressive refined radioslty method? In fact, our approach is fast and effective for rendering 
non-diffuse environments (see Table | and Table 2). By the way, as a procedural iterative radiosity method 
proposed for computer graphics, we believe, it can also be effectively applied to thermal engineering 
for calculating the radiative heat transfer. Computer graphics is a new interdiscipline. Pursuing some 
well-painted non-existent pictures is not the whole purpose. Computer graphics ought to make greater 
contributions to the developments of other disciplines. This problem should, at least partially, be paid 
attention to in the future research. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank all those who helped in the preparation 
of this article. In particular, we are grateful to Prof. Tong-Guang lin for helpful suggestions and encouragement 
during this study. Thanks also go to Guo-Zhao Wang, Yi-Ning Zhu, Hue Xu and Ping-Ping Shun for many valuable 
discussions. Finally, we would llke to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. This research 
was performed in the CAD/CAM Research Center at Zhejiang University. iTE ATfON FORM MATRIX MAXIMUM ERROR 
AVERAGE ERROR NUMBER FACTOR SOLUTION R I I G B R G B STANDARD RADIOSITY 207.6 Min 3,6 Min Ist 4.6 Min 
3.9 Min 178 161 167 29.307 23.071 26.941 2nd 4.6 Min 3,9 Min 9 4 4 1.054 0.602 0.741 3rd 4.6 Min 3.9 
Min 1 1 1 0.036 0.030 0.030 4th 4.6 Min 3.9 Min 1 1 1 0.012 0.012 0.012 5th 4.6 Min 3.9 Min 0 0 0 0.000 
0.000 0.000 TOTAL 23.0 Min 19.5 Min Table i ITERATION FORM MATRIX MAXIMUM ERROR AVERAGE ERROR NUMBER 
FACTOR SOLUTION RlOi R G B STANDARDRADIOSITY 326.8 Min 3.9 Min ist 2.5 Min 4.1 Min 338 ~ 339 342 64.430 
68.774 62.439 2nd 2.5 Min 4.1 Min ii 16 5 0.529 0.783 0.362 3rd 2.5 Min 4.1 Min 2 3 -1 0.015 0.021 O.010 
4th 2.5 Min 4.1 Min 0 1 1 0.000 0.005 0.005 5th 2.5 Min 4.1 Min 0 0 0 0.000 0.000 O.000 TOTAL 14.5 Min 
20.5 Min Table 2 REFERENCES <RefA>CI3 Cohen, M. F., and Greenberg, D.P., The Hemi- and Battaile, B., Modeling 
the Interaction of Cube: h Radiosity Solution for Complex Light Between Diffuse Surfaces, Computer Graphics 
Environments, Computer Graphics (Proceedings (Proceedings SIGGRAPH 84), Vol.18, No.3, July SIGGRAPH 85), 
Voi.19, No.3, July 1985, pp.31-40. 1984, pp.213-2Z2. Cz) Cohen, M. F., Greenberg, D. P., Immel, D. S., 
and (6) Hall, R. A., and Greenberg, D. P., A Testbed for Brock, P. J., An Efficient Radlosity Approach 
for Realistic Image Synthesis, IEEE CG&#38;A, Voi.3, Realistic Image Synthesis, IEEE CG&#38;A, Vol.6, 
No.8, November 1983, pp.10-20. No.3, March 1986, pp.26-35. [7) Immel, D. S., Cohen, N. F., and Greenberg, 
D. P., [3) Cook, R.L., Stochastic Sampling in Computer A Radiosity Method for Non-Diffuse Environments, 
Graphics, ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol.5, Computer Graphics (Proceedings SIGGRAPH 86),No.I, January 
1986, pp.51-7Z. Voi.20, No.4, August 1986, pp.133-142. [4) Cook, R.L., Porter, T., and Carpenter, L., 
(8~ Kajiya, J. T., The Rendering Equation, Computer Distributed Ray Tracing, Computer Graphics Graphics 
(Proceedings SIGGRAPH 86), Vol.20, No.4, (Proceedings SIGGRAPH 84), Vol.18, No.3, July August 1986, pp.143-150. 
1984, pp.137-I45. (9) Rogers, D.F., Procedural Elements for Computer (5) Goral, C. M., Torrance, K. 
E., Greenberg, D. P., Graphics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985.</RefA> IOO   
			
