
 A PC-CONTROLLED DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEM FOR TRANSABDOMINAL RECORDING OF CARDIAC ACTIVITY IN THE HUMAN 
FETUS Donna M. Mooney , Lynn J. Groomez, J. Doug Wilsonl, Dennis L. Steams3, and Lynn S. Bentz4 University 
of Arkansas at Little Rock 2 University of South Alabama 3 LCD Ekctronics, hC. 4 University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences RelevantTraclc MedicalApplications Key Words: Heartratq H-fetw$Noninvaaive:PersonalComputing 
 ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION Transabdominal f~ el~ ography is noninvasive and Although high resolution imaging 
techniques have greatly allows forrelativelypreciseevaluationoffetalcardiacactivityas facilitatedtheearlyidentificationofstmctud 
anomaliesinthe comparedtomethodsbasedontheprocessingofDopplersignals humanfetus,itisnotpssible atthepresenttimetoevaluatethe 
generated by cardiac valve motion. We described a portable, neurologicalstatus of even the grossly abnormalfetus. 
Sioce _ ~puter (P@Xmtldled data acquisition system abnormalstructureis not at all synonymouswith abnd 
designed to noninvasively capture R-waves in the fetal tkti~ the burdenis placed on the prinatdogist 
to predict elednxardiogram. Electrical pOtelltidS generated by fetal neurobehavioraloutcome usingindirectmeasures,suchas 
by cardiac activity were captured using standard cardiac electrodes assessingthe fetal heat rate (FHR) 
pattern. However, simply positioned across the mati abdomen. Data were collected examhing long term variability 
in the FHR has a rather low over eight channels at a rate of approximately 800 samples per predictive 
valw, although there is a relationship between FHR second. The signals were pmceswd with an analog-to-digital 
and specitic central nervous system (CNS) lesions in converter using a unique doublequeuing and Random 
Access anencephalic f-[1], the relationship between FHR sod fXS Menmy sotlware routine. Fetal R-waves 
could be rapidly activity is tltr Iiom complete, since an abnormal FHR pattern is extracted tlorn the 
stored data via an interactive graphical user not predictive of developmental outcome in StNctumlly normal 
interfke. In order to investigate the applicability of this system infknts [2]. in a clinical setting, 
we examined three normal human fetuses at approximately 36 weeks of gestation. Single-channel fd However, 
considerable success in predicting neurobebavioml R-waves Llomeach subject were averaged with the overall 
mean outcome has been achieved in neonates and irthts by aamhing single-channel loss of data being 40 
?/0(range of data 10ss per the coupling between cardiac activity and other physiological single channel: 
13.8-98.3%). However, when the cleanest of the variables, such as respiration [3-6]. Changes in hcmt 
rate single-channel records was selected for each subject, the average associated with breathing are 
mediated by the vagus nerve and fetal R-wave loss was reduced to approximately 15Y0. A fhrther provide 
a measure of autonomic nervous system activity [6]. reduction in fetal signal loss to < 5% was achieved 
by displaying Abnormal sympathetiqxarmympathetic balance in the neonatal all channels simuhneously, and 
this signal 10SSwas due almost period appears to be a predictor of abnormal &#38;velopmental exclusively 
to coupling of the fetal and maternal signals. We outcome later in life [4]. concluded that transabdomind 
fetal R-wave detection was possible with very little sigmd loss using a PCudrolled data Therefore, in 
an effort to enhance the predictive value of FHR acquisition system with multichannel visualization. 
monitoring, we have developed a portable, peraomd computer (PC)-controlled data acquisition system for 
noninvaaively Win&#38;ion tocapywit&#38;Mt ree8fforpwl ofthkm$crbl MgnotaJ collecting R-waves in the 
human fti eldmcardiogram (ECG) Wwhlolttbsttbe cqliaam mtmdeordimibuti for direct while simultaneously 
observkg f~ mspimtion with real-time ~lsdWt8grbth6AcMcO#ghtMtiOr Jmd tbetitteoftba sonography. The fetal 
cardiac signal was uptured over eight pubfkmiooa~ik#veatbat~kby  btitetppmr,andmim channels with standard 
cardiac eledrodes attached to the ~oftbeAnOOMOnfor~~ MaebkaY.Tocqy otbetw@ orto-N!quile4 afce Bnd/orspcci6cmaternal 
abdomen. Adaptive signal pmcwing techniques, permkck which included an interactive graphical -intake, 
were used A~-SAC W2t93AU USA to extract fetal R-waves tiom the raw signal. In this paper we ~ 1993ACM 
0JJ9791-36b~S130 have discussed the hardware and Aware design considerations 622 which were adhased 
in the process of developing this PC-W data acquisition system. Particular emphasis was placed on the 
clinical application of this instrumentation. CURRENT METHODS Several data acquisition systems are available 
fw monitoring fetal cardiac activity [7]. The choice of which method to use is dictated by clinical circumstances 
as well as by the needs of the clinician [8-10]. If the fetal membranes are intact and the goal is to 
rule out fetal hypoxemia, then usually the FHR is monitored using a Doppler signal generated by cardiac 
valve motion. The Doppler signal is triggered by the motion of any of the four cardiac valves. Therefore, 
when compared witi the fetal ECG rezorded directly tlom a fetal scalp electrode placed following rupture 
of the membranes, the Dopplerudculated absolute beat-tAe.at variation in the FHR is approximately twice 
that fbund by direct ECG recordings [11]. Furthermore, changes in the fetal R-R interval in association 
with fetal breathing can not be detected by changes in the Doppler signrd[12,13]. While this does not 
pose a problem for the patient with rupturedmembranes [14], since the fetal ECG can be recorded directly 
using a fetal scalp electrode, the transsbdominrdcapture of fetal R-waves is complicated by loss of the 
fetal signal as a result of noise generated by muscle activity during bouts of maternal movement [12,15]. 
Techniques involving the use of ringing filters have been employed to reduce noise, but these methods 
can generate a spurious signal which may distort the actual fetal ECG [16]. Missing data related to spurious 
noise generation may result in as much as a 50% reduction in fetal R-wavedetection[171. Infact, in some 
instruments emors caused by noise alone may be of the sameorderofmagnitudeasthetrue physiological variation 
inthe FHR, and a FHR trace with reduced variability could easily be misinterpreted as being abnormal[l 
8]. SUWECTS AND METHODS Hardware Design: Hardware consisted of a Gateway 2000386 33MHz PC with 4 Mb 
Random Access Memory (RAM), a Metrabyte DAS-20 data acquisition board which plugs directly into a standard 
PC slot, a Colorado Memory Systems DJ-20 250 Mb Tape Backup, five Grsss Instruments PSI 1 high performance 
AC preamplifiers, five pair of standard cardiac electrodes with switch plate, and an isolation transformer 
as shown in Figure 1. A digital oscilloscope and signal genemtor were used to test the equipment and 
software. The DAS-20 operated in an 8-clumnel, differential-input mode with the maternal signal occurring 
in the millivolt range and the fetal signal in the 10-50 microvolt range[l 8]. The voltage input range 
was chosen for a -5 to +5V bipolar cont@ration with unity gain. The analog to digital (A/D) fimctions 
used an AD774 successive-approximation converter with an 8.5 microsecond conversion rate. This rate, 
combined with a 1.4 microsecond sample and hold time, allowed the DAS-20 to perform approximately 100,000 
conversions per second [19]. Every fifteenth interrupt was serviced in order to ensure a sampling rate 
of 833 conversions per second over eight channels. This timing sequence was confirmed by digital oscilloscope. 
The duration of a human fetal R-wave was approximately 12-35 milliseconds at one-half the peak maximum. 
For a sample rate of 833 Hz, 10-29 samples were collected while the fetal R-wave was present. 623 FETAL 
HEART RATE MONITORING SYSTEM ULTRASOUND MOTHER PREMPLIF!ERS WITH 5 PAJR ELECTRODES Figure 1: Schematic 
Diagram of Fetal Heart Rste Acquisition System. The DAS-20 on-board channel/gain queuing RAM allowed 
for each of the eight channels to be automatically sampled under hardware control according to the programmed 
soflware queuing sequence. This was accomplished with the utiltition of a five channel counter-timer 
(AMD-95 13A), which was connected to a five MHz c@al~ntrolled oscillator for interrupt generation. Whenever 
an interrupt was generated, the queue location pointer incremented to the next channel fbr sampling. 
Upon completion of the queuing sequence, a reset occurred to restart the queuing sequence. This continued 
until the sampling interval had expired. The hardware-sottware design allowed for the collection of data 
on channels 0-7. All of these squences were interruptdriven utilizing INT-ERRUPT o. This particuhu interrupt 
was normally used for the time of day, however, in order for data acquisition to have priority, this 
function was disabled with the application A/D routine being revectored to this address, The counter 
register was loaded with the hexadecimal equivalent of 80 microseconds in order to preserve the 12,500 
Hz update rate. As the counter with this value timed out, an interrupt was generated and data acquisition 
occurred. A 50 pin ribbon cable attached the DAS-20 to the five Grass preamplifiers. Channels 04 of the 
DAS-20 were @Mected to preamplifiers 1-5, with channels 5-7 being attached to open connectors. Although 
software was titten to sample eight channels, only five of the eight channels were utilized for this 
particular application. Three channels were thus available fm fiture device expansion without the need 
fm software revision. To facilitate channel identification and to evaluate electrode placement, a graphical 
sot?ware package displayed each channel in a dit%rent color. Inputs to theP511 ditlkrential amplifiers 
were capacitor+upled with an input impedance of 20 megohms referenced to ground. Adjustment for each 
of the preamplifiers provided for variable gain control, high-pass (0.03-30 KHz) and low-pass (0.01-300 
Hz) filtering, 60 Hz notch filtering, and adjustable calibration capabilities [20], The front panel, 
which housed each of the -PS fmd a rei@ated POWeISUPPly,was attached to each Of five probes, and each 
probe served as one end of a 16 foot cable which connected the equipment to the electrode plate. A portable 
cart containing the equipment was constructed to alloN the data acquisition system to be moved from one 
location to another. A switch plate was designed to hold the ends of the five cables, with each end consisting 
of three binding posts. Gne of =hoftie ti-~mapmd, mdtieoti~tipa wereattached asapairtoa setof standard 
cardiac electrodes located on the motheds abdomen. The differential voltage between the two electrodes 
was recorded fm each pair. Software Desigm In this section only the software written strictly for instrumentation 
and data acquisition is presented. Data analysis software, including the fd R-wave extinction and adaptive 
digital signal processing algodhms, are discussed elsewhere [21]. A menu program was designed to be used 
by technicians with little or no prior computer knowledge. All soflware was written in ANSI C. For every 
collection period, a fde containing each of the ampli!ier  SC!ttillgS and sampling pammdem (listed 
in Figure 2) was saved. Values tlom the previous session were used to initialize these _eters. The updated 
file was automatically saved at the -of each session. Awindow wasprovided within theprogramto ~OWthe 
USertO update ~ fw the current data acquisition session. An example of the UpdateJChange menu is given 
in Figure 2. The DAS-20 board parameters appeared below this inhmation. Included in this list were a 
statement that eight channels were sampled sequentially, the sample interval in minutes, the sample rate 
(S00 sampleshx), @n(xl ), and mode (differential), and the inputhutput nmge(+L5V). If the user elected 
to change one or more parameters, the CURRENT PAWWEfHM MENU indicated the spec~lc pammeta choice followed 
by a prompt fw the new value. The RUN MENU prompted the user fw the date and sample time (in minutes), 
thus giving the user one last sequential order tithno 10ssof data. The size ofeach queue was limited 
totheamount ofdatathatcoldd be written between interrupts. The queues alternated in this manner until 
the pmde&#38;mhed sampling time had elapsed. Attheend of the collection peri~ the entire file located 
on the RAM drive was transf-to harddi* fm permment storage. Ilmmlmll l-n 1I # 1 Figure 3: Queuing A@ithm 
for Aquisith Sdlware. Timing for the s.mnpling algorithms aud squence control fw the DAS-20 board were 
simulated using a signal generator to ~ fw aliasing. Various input tl-equency combinations ranging 6mm 
0.001 to 10 Hz, modeled as sine, square, and mwtooth wavefbrms, were generated and the output was examined 
for missing data. This mnge of trial frequencies approximated various input sigruds fm the instrument. 
Timing sequences fbr each intenupt were confiied using a digital oscilloscope. opptunity to change the 
parameter values. The current parameters were then written to a file and could not be changed until the 
next session. CURRENT PARAMETERS MENU x *-W m Lowfwm*F- mmtmw anlu) O.J-fmtc FLTER 1 xl 0.3 300 YEs 
2 Xlo 0.3 300 ;:: 3 xl 0.3m 34 ma 4X5 0.3 4-4 YES 5)(20 0.3 300 $s YES WS.m-P Sc4N aEIE -e-~ -nw s-9a0-mrm 
,1 WOE RANGE ./-5* *YIOW w*m~MDU Figure 2: Example of the CurrentParametersMenu. Software design fbr 
data acquisition involved several critical timing sequences as shown in Figure 3. Two queues were formed 
with a polling algorithm. Data acquisition was performed each time an interrupt occumed as described 
above. Atler each data point was cdected, the fti queue began filling. Gnu! full, afl~-wmdtie~dq-tia~pbfill. 
Between interrupts, the kit queue was written to a RAM disk and the flag was reset upon completion. The 
fti queue could then accept data once the second queue was filled. While one queue was collecting new 
data, the other queue was writing to RAM disk in Protocok system was functional inaclinical setting, 
three he4dthypregnant women at approximately 36 weeks of gestation vmre recmited fimn the patient population 
attending the obstetrical clinics at The University of Arkansm fm Medical Sciences (UAMS). lhis study 
was approved by the Institutional Review Board at UAMS, and infonued consent was obtained tlom each patient 
prior to data collection. studyInorder todetermine whether or not this Au examinations wereperfonned 
in aquiet mom with the mother resting in a Iefi-lateral, semi-mcumbent position. Real-time sonography 
(GE RT300 with 5MHz tmsdwxr) was used to determine fetal position. After thoroughly cleaning the maternal 
abdomen, right arm, and left leg with ethyl akohol, a commercial skin prep (Baxter electrode) was applied. 
Electxode patches (hkditraCe prOtlZuXCk4UttlpeSiklZ~Ori&#38;) containing electrode conducting gel were 
then attached to each pair of standard cardiac electrodes. In order to obtain a datively clean maternal 
signal, one electrode was attached to the mothefs right arm and a second electrode was attached to the 
motheds left leg. Esch of the other four pairs of ektrodes were vectored across the mothes s abdomen 
accding to the position of the fetal heart as determined by real-time sonography. Gain and tilter wttings 
were adjusted as needed and ektrodes were positioned to optimize recognition of the fetal R-wave prior 
to data collection. Data were collected in three minute blocks over a period of approximately two hours. 
A 5MHz linear-army ukrasound transducer was positioned to provide a view of the f~ thorax throughoutthe 
study ueriod.  624- ­ RESULTS We defined fetal signal loss as the ftilure to identifi a fetal R-wave 
wit$in a window of 1.5 times the average R-R interval. For each subjeeL estimates of fd signal loss were 
made by mmining the fist 10 three-minute blacks which were recoded -periods of high variability in the 
FHR pattern(Table 1). 1*1. Awn@@nu?tOlroffuR--ddoclm-folrclmnd8mc0rd8d  h~tidlrmld~--hth-l mal H mM 
- un - (- -1.-) - ma 1 2 3 4 Mm 1 220 7 352 = m 2 m 343 42 12 374 24 I 398 3 354 307 34s 372 411 22 
I 433 We were unable to interpret the signal for only approximately one minute out of a total of 90 
minutes of data collection. When all subjeets and all single-channel records were combin~ the average 
fetal signal loss, using the same single channel to extract fti R-waves, was approximately 40% (range: 
13.8-98.3VO). However, when the cleanest single-channel record was selected for each subject, the average 
loss of fetal R-waves was reduced to approximately 150A. A ilu ther reduction in fetal signal loss to 
< 5% was achieved by viewing all channels simultaneously, and this sigrud loss was due almost exclusively 
to coupling of the fetal and maternal signals. Visual loss of the sonographic image of the fetal thorax 
did not exceed 20 seconds at any one time. A random 1.6 second segment of data taken hm a three minute 
block for one subject is shown in Figure 4 (fetal R-waves marked with an arrow). Figure 4: Multichannel 
Visualization of Human Fetal R-waves. For illustrative purposes, only three of the five channels collected 
are shown in this figure. No fetal R-waves were found on channel one, which represented the maternal 
right-arm left-leg reference signal. Maternal R-waves could be identified on all three channels, although 
their amplitudes were considerably less in channels two and three. As shown, fetal R-waves were present 
in the second and third channels. 625 For the same three mirmte block Figure 5 shows the fd R-wave intend 
distribution following R-wave extinction using adaptive signal processing algorithms [21-24]. For this 
paticular three minute segment, the mean R-R interval was approximately 350 milliseconds. Both short-term 
and long-term variations atxmtthe mean were clearly evident. wwlOmTEo PETAL R-n !$41EnvN.s no u, 4N Figure 
5: R-wave Intervals for a Single ~-mimlk Block. DISCUSSION In this paper we have described a portable, 
P@ontrolled &#38;ta acquisitionsystemdesignedto noninvasivelycaptureR-wavesin the fetal ECG. The fetal 
signal was sampled over eight channels at a rate of 833 times per second. Data acquisition was performed 
using a twoqueue algorithm, where one queue was collecting data while the second queue was writing to 
a RAM disk. When utilized in a clinical setting, we fbund that transabdomind fetal R-wave deteetion w 
possible with very little signal loss while simukaneously obseming fetal breathing using a 5MH2 linear-array 
transducer positioned on the mothds abdomen Several design fatures greatly facilitated data acquisition. 
First, adjustment of hardware parametm prior to data collection allowed for these parameters to be individualized 
for each subject. his was particularly usefid when the gain fix a particular channel required changing 
due to, for example, changes in electrode placement. After the pmmetem were specified, each of the values 
were saved by writiog the parameter file to disk. A second f-ture was mV~tiOXl of INTERRUPT O, which 
enabled data acquisition to assume a prinuuy role without interference hrn other lower priority operations. 
This also allowed specified algoritluns written within the service routine to be implemented during the 
acquisition process. Finally, use of a RAM disk enabled simultaneous sampling of eight channels with 
no 10ss in fetal R-wave structure. This was possible because writing directly to RAM disk was approximately 
15 times faster than W@ to hard disk, thus rdlowing ample time to service the routine between interrupts. 
Because large volumes of data were collected (30-70Mb for each study), and since there was limited space 
on the hard dislq each patient s data were stored on tape (3M DC2120). ~S W ~ imMOVmf311t OVCZ tWChi$ 
i.Wl methods involving analog storage, site the easy access to &#38; original raw signal required minimal 
manipulation for data pmmsing. Fmthemme, we found that multiple channel visualization provided more oppmhmities 
fm fetal R-wave detection than could be achieved using a single channel. Each channel was graphically 
displayed in a different color which allowed fd R-wave visualization in any given channel to be differentiated 
from the signal being displayed on the other channels. When the cleanest single channel was independently 
evaluated, approximately 85°Aof the fetal R-waves were deteckd as compared to >95% with multiple channel 
visualization. Coupling of the maternal and fetal R-waves accounted for the majorityof the signal loss 
when multiple channels were used. We have found that use of the noninvasive PC+mntrolled fetal acquisition 
system, together with specifically targeted software algorithms, effectively redumd fetal signal loss 
to < 5V0 even before the application of adaptive signal processing techniques. Mailing Addresx Donna 
M. Mooney, University of Arkansm at Little Rock, Deptment of Electronics and IWrumentation, 2801 S. University, 
ETAS 575, Little Rock ArkanMs 72204-1099. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] Terao T, Kawaahima Y, hltlIllOtOY, Lin TY, Sumimoto 
~ Maeda M (1984). Neurological control of f~ heart rate in 20 cases of anencephalic f-. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
149:201-8. [2] Painter MJ, Scott M, Hirsch RF, G Dono@ue P, Depp R (1988). Fetal heart rate patterns 
during labor Necrologic and cognitive &#38;velopment at six to nine years of age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
159:854-8. [3] Porges SW, McCabe PM, Yongue BG (1982). Respiratory-heart rate interactions Psychophysiological 
implications for pathophysiology and behavior k Pempoctives in cardiovascular psychophysiology. Eds: 
Cacippo J, Petty R. Guilt&#38;d Press, New York. [4] Fox N~ Porges SW (1985). The relationship betwen 
neonatal heart period patterns and developmental outcane. Child Develop %28-37. [5] Fox NA (1983). Maturation 
of autonomic cdrol in preterm infanta. Develop Psychobiol 16445-504, [6] Porges SW (1983). Hemt rate 
patterns in neonates. A poterltid -C WindOWto the hirl. hlhfimts km At Risk Physiological and Perceptual 
Pmmsses Eds: Field ~ Sostek A. New York Grime&#38;S-pp 3-22. [m ~ Contributions to Biophysical E1ectro­UlldiOgl 
Sphy(1982). pp. 63-92. E&#38;. Pilkin@on TC, Plonsey. IEEE Press, John W Riley and Sons, hlC.NY, NY. 
[8] Pardi G, Femzzi E, Cetin ~ Ram@o S, Baselli G, Cerutti S, Civardi S (1986). The cliical relevance 
of the abdomind fetal electmcdiogram. J Perinat Med 14:371-7. [9] Wheeler T, Cooke E, Murrills A (1979). 
Computer aualysis of f~ heart rate variation during normal pmgmncy. BrJObstet Gynacol 86186-97. [10] 
Sayers BM (1973). The study of heart rate variability. Ergonomics 16:17-25. [11] Da-OS, VisserGHA, Goodman 
JDS, LevineAL (1981). Numerical analysis of the human fd heart raw Modulation by breathing and mov-t. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 14053544. [12] Dawes GS, Visser GA, Goodman JS, Redrnan CW (1981). Numerical analysis 
of the human fktal heat rate The quality of ultrasound records. Am J Obstet Gynecol 141:43-52. 626 [13] 
hWeS GS, Redman CWG, Smith JH (1985). hllpRN eIneIltS intheregistxation andanalyaisoffd kmtrate recorda 
atthe bedskle. Br J ObatetGynacol 92:317-25. [14] Divon MY, Yeh S-Y, Zimmer EZ, Platt LD, Paldi E, Paul 
RH (1985). Respiratorysinus arrhythmiain the hmnan fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 151:425-8. [15] Cerutti 
S, Baselli G, Civardi S, Fermi E, Marconi M Pagani W Pardi G (1986). Variability analysis of fetal head 
rate signals as obtained bm abdominal eletrmardiographic ~. J Pesinat Med 14:445-52. [16] CrawfordIW 
(1986). Limitations of current fti monitoring technology. JPerinatMed 1437933. [171 Carter MC (1986). 
Advances in fetal monitors -real or ~. J Perinat Med 14:405410. [18] Kariniemi VJbsti J (1986). Abdominal 
el~W@Y in intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring. J Perinat Med 14263-6. [19] Metrabyte DAS-20 Manual 
(1989). Part No. 67260 ~-OIL TaunW MA 02780. [20] Grass Model P511 High performance AC Preampli.tkr InstructionManual 
(1985). Grass I@rument company, Quincy, MA 02169. [21] Mooney DM (unpublished). Adaptive Imtmmentation 
for Noninvasive Assessment of Re@atory Siius Ard@mia in Normal Human Fetuses. Doctoml Dimertation Thesis. 
DepfUfment Of Electronics and htrumentatiosL university of Arkamas at Liffle Rock. [22] Geddea U Baker 
LE (1989). Principals of applied biomedical instrumentation 3rd Edition. pp. 667-710. W@4ntersciencc, 
NY, NY. [23] Stanley WD, DoughaIy G~ ~ R (1984). Digital Signal Processing 2nd Edition. pp. 215-314. 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. [24] Advanced Topics in Signal Proces@ (1987). pp. 58-122. 
Eds. Lim JS, Oppdeim AV. Prentice-Hall Signal Processing Series, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.</RefA> 
			
