
 A FlST FULL OF DOLLARS: FOUR CASES OF WEB ENTREPRENEURS Ruth Guthrie University of Redlands, Whitehead 
College, Redlands CA 92373-0999 David Overoye Visual Edge Productions, Altadena CA 91001 John Gaskins 
University of Redlands, Whitehead College, Redlands CA 92373-0999 Abstract This paper looks at four 
distinct, business web sites developed between 1994 and 1996. The four sites described in this study 
are an environmental activist site (Santa Monica Bay Restoration Project), a small business (Bengal Cats), 
an EDI provider (Loren Data Corporation) and a cybermall (CyberTown). Short case descriptions of the 
four web sites are given. Details about the original and eventual purpose of the site, the current business 
utility and the site success are discussed. The four cases are described in terms of popular marketing 
models to gain insight to the business potential of the Internet. Keywords: Electronic commerce, web 
entrepreneurship, web marketing Introduction Recently, Toshiba Corporation solicited bids for redesigning 
their web site. The first bid that came in was for $700,000. The second bid was for $391,000. A manager 
responsible for evaluating the bids was stunned. His response -- How come the second bid is so low ? 
Business web site development has become big business. The number of web site developers has risen to 
include advertising firms on Madison Avenue and mom-and-pop ventures in local communities everywhere. 
A business desiring a web site can pay anywhere from $50 a page (Webs R Us) to a million dollars for 
an integrated web marketing plan. Billboards, television advertisements and radio shows everywhere proudly 
make reference to their URLs and e-mail connections. Why? Because they are Permission Lo make digitnllhnrd 
copies ofall or pall oflhis mnterinl for personnl or ~I;LWYXX~~ use is granted without kc provided that 
the copies arc not made or distributed for profit or commwcial advantage, the copy- right notice, the 
title ofthe public&#38;w nnd its date appear, nnd notice is given that copyright is by permissiw ofthe 
ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish. to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific 
pennission and/or fee SIGCPR 97, San Frnncisco CA USA Copyright 1997 ACM fJ-89791-904-l/97/04 ..SB.XJ 
following the ubiquitous promise of increased sales and product exposure on the Internet. What can businesses 
expect from their lnternet investments and marketing endeavors ? Several papers speculate (Cronin (1994), 
Guthrie and Austin (1996) , Lederer et. al. (1996)) about the impact of the Internet in relation to Michael 
Porter s work on markets and strategy. In a 1995 study of 290 commercial web sites, Thompson and Kaul 
conclude that companies are not using existing marketing theory or strategic logic to promote their businesses. 
The question remains what heuristics exist that can help businesses market products and services successfully 
on the Internet. This paper examines four business web endeavors and looks for insights from Lavidge 
and Steiner s Hierarchy of Effects Model (1961) to offer guidance to other web businesses. Specifically, 
the cases include: The Santa Monica Bay Restoration Project (SMBRP) - (http:Nwww.smbay.org) An environmentalist 
coalition of scientists, activists and government officials promoting the clean-up of Santa Monica Bay. 
The International Bengal Cat Society (TIBCS) -(http://www.bengalcat.com) A home based, cat breeders organization. 
Loren Data Corporation (LDC) -(http://www.ld.com) A consulting company, specializing in the offering 
of ED1 services to governmental contractors. CyberTown - (http://www.cybertown.com) A cyber community 
offering a virtual life to net citizens, including a cyber mall, virtual chat rooms, 3D games, and various 
information resources. 20 Each case description gives a brief business description, a summary of how 
the site was developed and an assessment of how the site is operating today. The web sites in this paper 
were selected because of the owners willingness to talk about their business and because of their diversity. 
Web Business Cases s . rolect B - In 1988, as a result of funding from the Environmental Protection Agency, 
the SMBRP was formed to develop a long range plan for the restoration and clean-up of the Santa Monica 
Bay. Pollution in the bay is largely due to storm runoff from the heavily populated coastal cities of 
Los Angeles. The bay is a California landmark providing commerce for local business, water recreation 
for 45 thousand visitors a year and a habitat for native species. The restoration plan was implemented 
in March of 1995. By January 1996, the coalition that authored the restoration plan was preparing to 
disband. As part of their closure, they decided to post a web site to inform the public about watershed 
conservation. Karen Cesar , project leader for the web site, stated the initial purpose of the site was 
to educate businesses and individuals as to their impact on the bay, what they can do to minimize that 
impact and to understand how a polluted bay affects the various ecosystems and tourism industries which 
depend on clean water. SMBRP hired a consultant to develop 40 web pages for $6,000. Artwork and graphics 
developed largely by SMBRP were converted to logos, icons, menu bars and clickable maps. The site contains 
information on citizen and government activism, recreation, bay ecosystems, human impacts, what s happening 
and watershed (pollution from runoff). Development of the site to approximately 160 hours over a six 
week period. An SMBRP employee was trained by the consultant to maintain the web site. To promote the 
site, pamphlets containing the organization s information and the site address were mailed to numerous 
ecological and industrial companies and organizations. A press conference was held to present SMBRP s 
findings, and announce the web site as a repository for the results. The continued maintenance and hosting 
of the site is $50 per month. The site has a hit rate of about 50 users a month and material on the site 
is rarely updated. l&#38;e lnterw , - By cross Cdt Societv iq breeding lines of domesticated cats with 
a wild Asian leopard cat, cat breeders Judy Sugden and Jean Mill have developed a new breed of cat, the 
Bengal. The breed is gaining acceptance in the cat fanciers world and is also gaining world-wide popularity. 
In January of 1996, Judy Sugden decided to develop a web site to educate the general population about 
Bengal cats and to give cat breeders a web presence . Judy, an artist and knowledgeable computer user, 
decided to develop the site herself. The site features general information about Bengal cats, a newsletter, 
a breeders list and Bengal Cat Chat. Members of the Bengal Cat Society can post small advertisements 
for free. It is also possible for members to purchase a larger advertising space to post a gallery of 
their cati for potential buyers to view. Development of the Bengal Cat Page took an intensive eight months 
of work. It is heavily graphic and contains an interactive message board for cat breeders to participate 
in on-going, web-based conversations. It costs $50 a month to host the page and Judy performs all the 
maintenance and correspondence related to the page. The page has a hit rate of 500 a month from all over 
the world. The site was awarded Cool Pet Site of the Day from another pet-web organization. Promotion 
was limited to the TIBCS monthly newsletter. The popularity of the site is due to the interest of Bengal 
cat fanciers and word of mouth. People purchasing galleries have great success in selling their kittens 
and continue to post advertisements on the page. Unexpectedly, international sales have been generated 
as a result of the Bengal cat page. I I oration &#38;.QQ - LDC has been in business for eight years, 
offering high-tech consulting in computer programming and procurement largely to aerospace industry clients. 
In 1994, Todd Gould and Gary Keopnick launched a web page to advertise the consulting company. Within 
a year, LDC was offering the Commerce Business Daily (a daily journal in which the U.S. Government solicits 
bids from industry) free from their web page. In October of 1994, the Federal Acquisition Streamlining 
Act was signed, requiring all vendors to use ED1 in government procurements by January of 1997. LDC felt 
that by offering the CBD and search services to clients, they could persuade them to purchase ED1 services 
from LDC as well. The web site uses a direct, no-frills, approach, offering instant information to web 
users. To attract potential customers, Gary registered the site with every search engine and business 
list he could find. Additionally, he examined web sites of governntent agencies and when he found anything 
appropriate, he e-mailed the web master and requested them to add.a link to LDC. This tactic proved effective. 
The site was profitable within 6 months and has a 1500 hit rate per day. The bulk of LDC s income is 
generated from the 1000 companies signed up to use LDC as an ED1 provider. CvberTown - In March of 1995, 
Tony Rockliff and Pascal Bandar decided to direct their artistic talents towards the Internet. As artists, 
they viewed the lnternet as an international canvas to create on , and spent many hours developing their 
vision of a futuristic town - one which would allow them to create a unique world with no 21 limitations, 
and the ability to grow as new technology came to the Internet. Their goals: 1) To create something artistically 
exciting, and 2) To showcase their work, and expand the business of their multimedia company. With a 
concept in mind, they launched the first stage of CyberTown - 250 pages with a lot of under construction 
signs. The funding came almost entirely out of pocket. Since there was no advertising budget, they entered 
themselves into major search engines and sent press releases to every lnternet magazine they could find. 
The unique look of CyberTown, combined with cutting edge technology and the concept of a virtual community 
brought a lot of free publicity to CyberTown, including magazines, TV appearances, books and CDs. CyberTown 
has now grown to over 750 pages, averaging 5 million hits per month. CyberTown boasts that they are the 
most awarded site on the web. Income is generated from advertising banners, pay as you play games, software 
sales and percentage of sales generated from the numerous cybershops in the town. The company is now 
valued at several million dollars. In addition, the site has generated a number of web design requests 
from various high-end clienb such as UNOCAL and MCI. When asked to explain the phenomenal success of 
the site, Tony believes that being on the cutting edge of technology has generated a lot of press and 
excitement among users and reviewers. In addition, creating an entertaining virtual community with a 
considerable amount of free services and well researched informational links keeps people returning to 
the site. Looking to the future, Tony sees many years worth of growth for CyberTown, especially in multi-user 
3D virtual reality. His goal is to make CyberTown a fully immersive experience for the net surfer . Analysis 
Why did these organizations decide to create web pages ? At the very least, the web offered them an additional 
avenue to reach customers. It offered them the opportunity to produce an international canvas with the 
potential of expanding exposure of their organization or service. Amidst the hype of millions of dollars 
to be made in on-line commerce, it is noteworthy that the more successful web sites had as theit primary 
purpose the communication with customers and potential customers, offering information, community and 
services, not just a direct sale. This paper is exploratory. Diverse business sites can give insights 
toward a broader study of web marketing. The following subsections describe commonalities between the 
four web sites of this paper. Specifically, communication with customers, expectations of success, and 
the importance of direct involvement. Communication with Customers - The purpose of each web site was 
not to make money from direct sales. Instead, each site established itself as an information source offering 
services to other web users and businesses and offering information to net citizens. In these cases, 
the revenue generated directly from sales at each site is small in comparison to the revenue generated 
from selling advertising space or locking in customers to other services. The Importance of Ownership, 
Change and Interactivity - Involvement of the business in creation of the web site, change and interactivity 
were key factors in site success. In each case, the owner was a champion for developing the web site 
and was highly involved in its content, development and image. The SMBRP site never had a direct champion 
and the people who wanted the site had little knowledge or experience on the World Wide Web. The site 
served more as a closure mechanism for their research than as a living web site. TIBCS, LDC and CyberTown 
change daily and offer highly interactive, personal encounters to visitors. Expectations - In each case, 
the result of having a web page was different from the owners expectation. The Bengal Cat Page sought 
to inform a general audience. The communication aspect, and access to a global market was a potential 
that was unseen before launching the site. ln the case of LDC, the expectation was to use the site to 
sell consulting services. Offering the Commerce Business Daily as a lead in to selling ED1 services only 
evolved after the site had existed for some time with a base of clientele. CyberTown had a mission of 
building a cyber community. The advertising for cyber stores, a great revenue generator, was almost tertiary 
to building the virtual town. The SMBRP case has the least impressive activity of the four cases with 
an average of only 50 hits per month. Marketing Models -Several marketing models describe the relationship 
of the customer to the product. A hierarchy of effects model (Lavidge and Steiner, 1961) nicely describes 
the communication objectives of customer interaction. The six buyer readiness states are awareness, knowledge, 
liking, preference, conviction and sales are defined in Table 1. CyberTown used traditional media to 
a very high extent to increase product awareness. SMBRP used direct mail only. All four businesses used 
on-line promotions such as registering with search engines and creating cross links with other sites. 
TIBCS and LDC, sites appealing to specific markets, did little promotion. In these cases, increased customer 
awareness is largely due to customers finding them. All four businesses have high content web sites. 
Audiences are free to gain as much information about a product as they desire. 22 The hierarchical effects 
of liking, preference and conviction are difficult to assess. Each business site had a likable look and 
feel presented in the spirit of net- culture. Quality, quick loading graphics were used in all but the 
LDC site which had a philosophy of giving customers information with no frills . SMBRP is the only site 
that had little human interaction between visitors and site developers. The other three sites, had tremendous 
customer involvement. It was not uncommon for visitors/customers to know the webmaster on a first name 
basis and to have some familiarity with the changing history of the site. Each case is relatively novel 
site with little competition so little can be said about preference and conviction. The site with the 
most competition, LDC, offers tremendous cost advantages and features over their competitors. None of 
the four sites promotes sales in a direct way, i.e. displaying forms for credit card entries or posing 
sales incentives on the top web page. Traditional marketing methods, which utilize print, radio and television 
rarely promote direct sales. With the exception of devices which slice and dice most products utilize 
marketing techniques that focus on increasing the first five buyer readiness states, and leave sales 
to sales people and stores. Applying the same principles to the web, the success of the web site may 
be measured in terms of the effect on the consumer for these same five states, with the added bonus that 
direct sales are subsequently possible. With traditional marketing methods, an audience is targeted through 
the popularity of the show, magazine or newspaper the advertisement is placed in. On the web, the advertisement 
must become the popular TV show , article, or radio talk show if it is going to bring new customers and 
improve the buyer readiness states. But what is a popular TV show on the web ? What attracts the web 
surfers, like Seinfeld attracts viewers on television? The conventional wisdom points to information 
as a key to the successful web site, however as evidenced by the SMBRP site, a stagnant, information 
based site will attract a niche of customers, but will not expand the market. The information content 
is high, but there is little else to attract the net surfer. The Bengal Cat and LDC sites offer high 
information content, and customer interactivity. They provide informational resources, question and answer 
forums, a high level of interactivity and value to the customer. These sites give information that can 
directly influence business and/or personal decisions. CyberTown, adds another layer to the information/interactive 
equation - entertainment. New users are given many reasons to visit the site and keep returning, As visitors 
return, they become increasingly involved with the site - thereby increasing their five buyer awareness 
states. Along with the five buyer awareness states comes a feeling of relationship and trust. In this 
new medium of on-line sales, trust is essential before people are willing to divulge private, personal 
or financial information on-line. Sales have gone well in CyberTown, but only after the five stages are 
in place, and the feelings of trust and relationship are established. Ellsworth and Ellsworth (1995) 
describe web marketing as having three levels of engaging a potential customer: getting people to visit 
your page, getting people to engage in activity or linger on the page, and getting people to relate interactively 
with the page (Table 2). These three levels of marketing engagement do not represent a new kind of marketing, 
Instead, they are a specialization of models that exist. These three steps are compared with the Lavidge 
and Steiner model in Table 3. Table 3 also lists common tactics for achieving the levels of web engagement. 
Awareness on the lnternet is equivalent to getting people to visit the web site. This is done through 
search engine registration, indexing and metatags, cross links and alliances with other sites, user group 
participation, novelty and through traditional advertising channels. Creating product knowledge is congruent 
with making a web site that causes visitors to linger. A clever site can create interest and educate 
visitors in an entertaining, comprehensible way. The user can control the amount and type of information 
that they wish to see. The Web offers new forms of communication with customers that link interactivity 
with liking and preferring a product. On-line chat groups about specific interests or products, e-mail 
that is quickly responded to, entertainment and rapid feedback to customer requests provide interactive 
channels to enhance customer relationships. By examining these relationships, and the cases described, 
features that make web marketing successful can be identified - realizing that success may be measured 
by an increased buyer awareness , not just direct sales. Conclusions Success on the Internet may not 
be as simple as lf you build it they will come . In fact, these cases have demonstrated that success 
on the lnternet requires direct involvement in the technology and the community which will access the 
web site. The stagnant information based site [nay have a success measured more in terms of supporting 
existing customers, and maintaining a niche visibility, but not necessarily expanding the product into 
the larger market promise of the Internet. More research is necessary to investigate how promotion on 
the web effects hit rate and what types of promotion work for specific products and services. Little 
is known about differences in businesses that have web sites versus web based businesses like CyberTown. 
23 As the market evolves and cyber cash or web based credit transactions become more accepted, sites 
are likely to push more heavily for direct sales. However, as with traditional marketing edicts, developing 
a relationship and interaction with potential customers, albeit electronic, appears to be an effective 
tactic. References <RefA>Cronin, Mary J. -Business: wav is TV *. How &#38; :omDanies Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1994. Ellsworth and Ellsworth, Marketing John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1995. Guthrie, R. A. and Austin, 
L. D. Competitive implications of the Internet, ation Svstems B Summer 1996, pp. 90-92. Lavidge, R. J. 
and Steiner, G. A. A Model for Predictive Measurements of Advertising Effectiveness, Journal m, October 
1961, p. 61. Lederer, A. L, Dinesh, A. M., Sims, K. Electronic Commerce: A Strategic Application ?, Proceew 
of h . 1996 ACM SIGCPR/Sl GMlS Co nferetlce, April 1996, pp. 277 - 287. Thompson, D.G. and Kaul, A. The 
Corporate Response to the World Wide Web: Evidence and Strategic implications of the Hypermarketing Phenomenon, 
available on-line http://www200O.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/nova~WWWMarket ing/WWWMarketing.html, May 1995.</RefA> 
Table 1 -Lavidge and Steiner s - Hierarchy of Effects Model with Descriptions Awareness Making the target 
audience aware that the product or service exists. Establishing name recognition. Knowledge Giving the 
target audience greater information about the product or service. Liking Establishing a good impression 
or disposition for the target audience towards the product or service. Preference Getting the target 
audience to prefer the product or service above others through quality, value, performance, cost...etc.. 
Conviction Convincing the target audience that they need the product or service. Purchase Making the 
sale. Table 2 Ellsworth and Ellsworth s Levels of Web Marketing Engagement Level 1 - Getting Presetting 
simple postings of information and data People to Visit the to net users. Page Level 2 - Activity Providing 
buttons, search tools and link that create spontaneous interest. (lingering) Level 3 - interactivity 
Offering web based forums where the visitor can leau: remarks, send electronic mail, purchase (communicating) 
product or request more information. Table 3 Web Marketing Tactics Hierarchy of Effects Tactics . .reatltlg 
Hits/Traf&#38; Levels of Engagement Register with Search Engines Awareness - Cross Links with Other Sites 
y Visit the Page Novelty Knowledge Indexing and Meta-tags Traditional Advertising Channels Contetlt Liking 
Product lnformation Company lnformation / Activity Culture Preference Style Look and Feel Conviction 
 Purchase Purchase Links Surveys Change Feedback Entertainment 25
			
