
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, II. Kang, W. R. Lilegclon, 
and D. Goldsman A FORWARD AND BACKWARD LINKAGE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION SIMULATION MODEL Fe Zinnia Albay 
Levsiri Munasinghe Conrado M. Gempesaw 11 Global Systems and Technology J. Richard Bacon Merrill Lynch 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540, U.S.A. Department of Food and Resource Economics University of Delaware 
Newark, Delaware 19717, U.S.A. ABSTRACT This paper illustrates the use of a forward and backward ~iage 
agricultural production simulation model. CHICKSIM III is a comprehensive, farm-level, and stochastic 
capital budgeting simulation model which provides an analytical framework for simulating probable consequences 
of production, marketing, financial, and policy variables on the profitability of a farm or agribusiness 
fm. The model is applied to evaluate the profitability of a representative farm producing broiler, beef, 
eom and kenaf. 1 INTRODUCTION The use of farm-level simulation models has a long history in agricultural 
application (Klein and Narayanan 1992). For example, various single-product simulation models have been 
formulated to estimate yields for specit3c crops. Examples are the SORGF model for sorghum (3&#38;as 
and Arkin 1978), TAMW model for winter wheat (Maas and Arkin 1980), CORNF model for corn (Stapper and 
Arkm 1980), and the COTTAM model for cotton (Jackson, Arkin, and Heam 1988). Multiple-product models 
have also been developed that combine two or more techniques to represent an integrated farm operation. 
Dillon, Mjelde, and McCarl (1989) generated yield estimates using the SORGF, TAMW, CORNF, and COTTAM 
models and integrated these with an economic model using quadratic progr amming to study the economic 
feasibility of Texas 131acklands com production in relation to sorghum, wheat, and cotton. Bosch and 
Eidman ( 1987) used simulation and general stochastic dominance to value information when risk levels 
are neutral for a representative southwest Minnesota farm produ&#38;g irrigated (corn and soybeans) and 
unirrigated crops (ccxm soybeans, and rye). For aquiculture production, AQUASIM was used by Gempesaw 
and Bacon (1993) to evaluate the risks and returns associated with specialization and diversXlcation 
in the production of broilers, hybrid striped bass, and cadlsh in the Mid-Atlantic region. While this 
model is capable of simulating an integrated aquiculture operation and can represent transfers of output 
from one production stage to another, it can only model the forward linkages in the production system. 
AQUASIM allows the outputs from au earlier stage to be used as inputs for a later stage but cannot simulate 
the flow of inputs from a later stage to an earlier stage. In an integrated farm with crops, poultry, 
and livestock, it is possible to use crops as inputs into poultry and livestock production (e.g., mm 
as feeds) and at the same time use by-products from poultry and livestock production as inputs to crop 
production (e.g., manure as fdlizer). The cyclical process requires the use of a model which can simulate 
not only forward linkages in the system but also backward linkages. The main objective of this paper 
is to develop a model (CHICKSIM 111)which can simulate the operations of an integrated farm including 
the forward and backward linkages between various production processes. The second objective is to simulate 
the operations of integrated and. specialized representative Delaware farms producing, broiler, beef, 
mm and kenaf using CHICKSIM III. Data~ sets reflecting the different combinations of inputs andl outputs 
will be created to compare the profitability of specitdized and integrated farms and to evaluate the 
use of alternative sources of inputs. Lastly, this paper will discuss the results of the various scenarios 
simulated for the representative Delaware farms. 2 SIMULATION MODEL CHICKSIM III, the updated version 
of AQUAS~ is a comprehensive, farm-leve~ aud stochastic capital budgeting computer simulation model. 
Written in FORTRAN and using the accounting subroutines from FLIPSIM (Richardson and Nixon 1986), this 
model includes 963 964 Albay, Gempesaw, additional subroutines to model the production and financial 
peAormauee of multiple output, multiple input and vertically or horizontally integrated farms and agribusiness 
fm. Reeently, additional improvements were made in the model to include the use of biophysical variables 
in production estimation and the simulation of cyclical and backward flows of inputs between stages in 
the production process. The enhanced flexibility of the model allows the analyst to: 1. Model multi-outpw 
multi-rnput enterprises (e.g., joint production of broiler, kenaf, beef, and eom).  2. Model the simulation 
of enterprises that produce products (outputs) that are used as factors (inputs) in the next stage of 
operation (e.g., a broiler farm that is producing manure that eau be used as fertilizer or feed ingredient 
in another stage, a total of 10 stages­outputs is alIowed with the current memory dimension% the upper 
limit on the number of stages­outputs is determined by the available computer memory). 3. Simulate production 
processes with different time periods (e.g., weeks, time period=52; months, time period= 12; a total 
of 120 time units is currently available, the upper limit is again determined by the computer memory). 
The different stages are not required to have similar production time periods (e.g., chkkens require 
2 months per flock with continuous stocking after harvest while corn, kenaf, and beef production may 
need 6 months with only one stocking at different periods of time during the year). 4. Specify stochastically 
most wntrol variables (output quantities and prices, variable input costs, mortality and feed conversion 
rates, etc.) using several optional probability distributions (triangular, bet% normal and lognormal) 
within each production stage. The model can simulate a poultry farm producing broilers following a lognormal 
distribution and aquiculture following a triangular distribution.  .5. Select output and price relationships 
such that a random high output quantity will be em-related with a low random output price and vice versa­ 
6. Estimate variable costs of production using pre, average, or post mortality population. 7. Control 
variable cost spec~lcation on a per unit (per head) or weight basis and monthly allocation of variable 
cost. For example, harvesting costs will only be inGurred during the last two months of an eleven month 
production cycle. 8. Model production with a quota option along with penalties for exceeding the quota 
based on price reduction or addition of the penalty cost to total production cost. 9. Impose a loan 
deferml payment scheme for cash flow purposes during the initial life of the project. 10. Sell exeess 
outputs not needed in the next stage or buy  Bacon, and Munasinghe deficit inputs required in the next 
stage. 11. Use biophysical variables such as rainfall, temperature, fertilizer type, farming methods, 
and others in production estimation. 12. Model cyclical and backward flows of inputs in addition to 
forward and one-way flows of inputs between stages.  Ile backward and forward linkages of a system represent 
the transfer of inputs and outputs between the different production processes and rdso the selling of 
the final products. The model simulates these linkages through matrices showing the transfer rates, conversion 
ratios, and salespermntages. The transfer rate specKles how much of the output from one production process 
will be trausfkrred as input to another stage. The conversion ratio computes the equivalent quantity 
of that input in the receiving production stage. For example in a system which produces eom and livestock, 
the transfer rate matrix can speci&#38; that 50 percent of the com output is used as feed inputs for 
livestock production. The eonversion rate speeif3es how many tons or bushels of com feed is needed to 
produce a unit of livestock output measured either in terms of weight or number of heads. The sales percentage 
reflects how much of the output is sold in the outside market. Transfers from one stage to another may 
mean the actual transfer of au output or the transfer of a by-product from one stage to another. However, 
there is a difference between the transfer of an output from the mere transfer of aby-pmduet and this 
is refleded in the options given by the model for the transfer and sales matrices. The default option 
is for the transfer of the output itself where sales occur before the transfer. The sales percentage 
is based on the total production while the transfer percentage is based on the remaining quantity after 
the sales. For iustanee, if stage 1 has 100 units of output with 50 percent sales and 100 pereent transfer, 
it means that 50 units will be sold (50 pemmt of the total production of 100 units) while 50 units will 
be transferred to another stage (100 percent of the remaining quantity after sales). For stages where 
there is a by-product, the trausfkr preeedes the sales. Since the transfer of the by-product does not 
actually reduce the output, the quantity transferred is not subtracted from the output. It is then possible 
to have 100 percent transfer of the by-product and 100 percent sales of the final output. An example 
would be the broiler production which generates broiler meat and the manure as by-product. The broiler 
meat can be sold 100 percent and 100 percent of the manure can rdso be transfizred for use as feed or 
fertilizer in another stage. In cases where the output is not sold but rather transferred from stage 
1 to stage 2 while the by-product is also moved to a separate stage (3), a dummy stage can be created. 
The output will be sold to the dummy stage which will transfer that output to the receiving stage (2). 
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the forward and backward linkages. An integrated farm system such as a fish 
Agricultural Production Simulation Model production system may have only fonvard linkages (Figure 1). 
From the fingerlings to the market-size fish, the production process moves forward without any backward 
flows. Figure 1 reflects the flow of inputs in a system with purely forward linkages. Stage 1 Stage 
2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Figure 1: Integrated Farm System with Forward Linkages However, some integrated farms 
system are more complex since the outputs from one production process can be used as an input to another 
production process. Figure 2 reflects an integrated farm with three production stages where stages 1 
and 2 provide inputs for stage 3 which in turn provides inputs for stage 1. The flow of inputs from stage 
3 to stage 1 reflects the backward flow of the inputs. 4 Stage 3 v . II 1I .,- Stage 4i Figure 2: Integrated 
Farm System with Forward Backward Linkages 3 MODEL APPLICATION The model, CHICKSIM III, is applied to 
simulate the operations of specialized and integrated representative Delaware farms producing broiler, 
beef, corn, and kenaf. The farms were simulated iteratively with the results forecasted for a period 
of ten years. The specialized farms are the broiler farm, beef farm, and corn farm. Kenaf is being promoted 
for the use of its core as bedding material for broiler production instead of the more commonly used 
materi&#38; pine sawdust. Therefore, kenaf is grown only with broiler production and is not considered 
m a specialized product. The main output of the representative Delaware farm is broiler meat which is 
assumed to be produced in all integrated farms. The integrated farms are the broiler-beef farm, broiler-corn 
farm. and broiler-beef-corn farm. Figure 3 shows the production characteristics of each output. The 
fully integrated farm produces all four outputs. The final outputs are broiler, beef, corn, and kenaffiber. 
Kenaf core is an intermediate output which is used as bedding material for broiler production. Broiler 
litter (bedding plus manure). a by-product, is used as fertilizer for com and kenaf production and as 
feed rationing ingredient for beef production. Figure 4 shows the relationship of inputs and outputs 
between the different production stages. With the use of CHICKSIM III the transfer of the by-products 
kenaf core and broiler litter can be modeled. Data sets were created for the different scenarios to compare 
the profitability of specialized and integrated farms and to evaluate the use of alternative sources 
of inputs. The current practice is for the broiler integrator company to, supply the sawdust to growers. 
Therefore. as far as the grower is concerned, the bedding material is free. In order to compare the use 
of kenaf core and sawdust as bedding, materials, it is necessary to include its cost in the broiler production. 
The use of the conventional bedding material. pine sawdust, was compared to the alternative material., 
kenat core. The different sources of kenaf core were also, considered since it is possible for the farm 
to buy froml outside sources or to grow kenaf within the farm Pmduciug kenafrequires the separation of 
the raw material into kenaf fiber and kenaf core which is performed as a custom operation along with 
harvesting. This leads to twc~ more options where the farm may choose to pay for the custom operations 
and sell the fiber or trade it in exchange for the custom operations. In addition, the viability of broiler 
litter as fertilizer and feed rationing ingredient was evaluated and compared to the use of conventional 
fertilizers and feed ingredients. A total of 55 scenarios was generated and simulated using CHICKSIM 
111.  4 RESULTS The major results based on the simulation of the various scenarios are presented as 
follows. Table 1 shows the financial indicators for the specialized and integrated farms. Among the specialized 
farms, only the broiler farm has ;l positive net present value (NPV). The beef and com farm both have 
internal rates of return (IRR) below the cut-off point of 5 percent. On the other hand, all the integrated 
farms show positive NPVS which are higher than that of the specialized broiler farm. The same is true 
for the IRR. This would imply that while beef and com production in a representative Delaware farm may 
not be profitable ventures as independent farm enterprises. it can be made profitable when integrated 
with broiter production. Table 2 compares the different scenarios for specialized broiler farms and the 
different sources of bedding materials. Albay, Gempesaw, Bacon, and Munasinghe DEE Ten Acres of Land 
Three Broiler Houses 24,000 Heads per House Six Settings per Year per House  LiEzcl 50 Acres of Land 
120 Acres of Land 20 Acres 25 Head of Cattle 100 Bushels per Acre 5 Tons per Acre Starting Weight -Around 
600 Lbs. Separated Into Core and Fiber Finishing Weight -Around 1,100 Lbs. Figure 3: Production Characteristics 
of a Representative Delaware Farm BROILER KENAF CORE v BEDDING LITTER [ FEED FERTILIZER v CATTLE CORN 
KENAF PRODUCTION PRODUCTION PRODUCTION Figure 4: Integrated Farm Model for a Representative Delaware 
Farm Agricultural Production Simulation Model If the grower has to buy sawdust for the broiler farm, 
the NPV of the farm would decrease by $40,521.60. On the other hand, if the grower buys kenaf core material, 
the difkrenee in NW is only $28,554.40. In terms of IRIL the purchase of sawdust leads to a decrease 
of ahnost one percentage point while the purchase of kenaf core leads to only a three-fourths of a percentage 
point decrease. While the grower does not really have to concern himself about the price of sawdust and 
the fact that kenaf is a cheaper alternative source of broiler bedding matenrd, this information may 
be useful for poultry integrators who are supplying the bedding material. Based on the simulation results. 
buying kenaf is more proftile than growrng kenaf in a specialized broiler farm. If the farm grows kenaf 
and trades the fiber for the custom services, the deerease in NPV is $17,023.91. However, if the farm 
grows kenaf and sells the fiber. the decrease in NPV is only $13,331.80. If the farm grows kenafand uses 
Table 1: Ten-Year Projected Average Annual Financial Indicators for Specialized and Integrated Representative 
Delaware Farms Scenario NPv ($) IRR ( %0) BROILER FARM 142.196.40 8.91 BEEF FARM -6,822.07 2.09 CORN 
FARM -36,340.70 2.74 BROILER-BEEF 150,418.70 8.93 BROILER-CORN 171.098.60 7.71 BROILER-BEEF-CORN 166.662.50 
7.50 Table 2: Ten-Year Projected Average Annual Financial Indicators for Specialized Representative Broiler 
Farms in Delaware Using Various Broiler Litter Materials Scenario NPv ($) IRR(?40) FREE SAWDUST 142.196.40 
8.91 BUY SAWDUST 101,674.80 7.85 BUY KENAF CORE 113.642.00 8.17 GROW KENAF 1. trade kenaf fiber for 96.618.09 
7.21 services  2. sell kenaf fiber 113.079.20 7.64 3. trade kenaf fiber 100.310.20 7.31 and use litter 
as fertilizer  4. sell kenaf fiber and 116.740.80 7.72 use litter as fertilizer   the broiler litter 
as fertilizer for kenaf. the NPV increases by more than $3.600.00. This is true for both cases when the 
kenaf fiber is traded and when it is sold. While it is not profitable to grow kenaf on a broiler farm 
and a broiler-beef farm, the results show that it is better to grow kenaf on a broiler-corn farm. This 
is true since the production of com and kenaf can share in some common planting equipment and machinery. 
Table 3 shows the t mancial indlcatom for the broiler-beef-corn farm scenarios. These scenarios show 
the effect of using broiler litter on the performance of the integrated farm. Using the broiler litter 
asfertilizer for eom and kenaf increased the NPV by at lemt $19,295.60 (under the free sawdust scenario) 
and at most $19.770.60 (under the buy sawdust scenario). The increase in the IRR is ahnost one third 
of a percentage point. Table 3: Ten-Year Projected Average Annual Financial Indicators for Specialized 
Representative Broiler-Beef-Corn Farms in Delaware Scenario ml ($) IRR (~0) FREE SAWDUST 1. Use conventional 
166.662.50 7.50 feeds and fertilizer 2. Use litter as 185,958.10 7.79 fertilizer  3. Use litter as 
feed 180.328.40 7.71 ingredient  4. Use litter as 199,422.50 7.99 fertilizer and feed ingredient  
BUY SAWDIJST 1. Use conventional 126.604.50 6.85 feeds and fertilizer 2. Use litter as 146.375.10 7.17 
fertilizer  3. Use litter as feed 140,516.50 7.08 ingredient  4. Use litter as 160,156.70 7.39 fertilizer 
and feed ingredient  BUY KENAF CORE 1. Use conventional 138.382.70 7.04 feeds and fertilizer 2. Use 
litter as 158.037.30 7.35 fertilizer 3. Use litter as feed 153,824.90 7.29 ingredient 4. Use litter 
as 173,242.70 7.60 fertilizer and feed ingredient  968 Albay, Gernpesaw, The effect of using broiler 
litter as feed ingredient varies depending on the type of bedding material used. The use of sawdust-based 
feed led to an increase in NPV of more than $13,000.00. On the other hand, the use of kenaf-based feed 
increased the NPV by over $15,000.00. The increase in IRR is slightly higher for the case when kenaf-based 
feed is used instead of the sawdust-based feed. Lastly, the effect of using the litter both as fertilizer 
and feed ingredient was simulated. The increase in the NPV ranged from $32,700.00 to $34,860.00. while 
the IRR increased by approximately one-hrdf percentage point. 5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS CHICKSIM III 
was developed to simulate the operations of an integrated farm enterprise. Various options were incorporated 
in the simulation model to allow for the interaction of the different inputs and outputs within the farm. 
The simulation model can represent backward linkages and cyclical processes in an integrated production 
operation. The model can also compare dflerent scenarios reflecting different production structures (specialized 
and integrated), broiler bedding materials (pine sawdust and kenafeore), fertilizer and feed ingredients 
(litter-based and conventional). This study has compared the performance of specialized farms versus 
integrated farms with special emphasis on broiler farms. In the anrdysis of specialized and integrated 
farms. this study included the production of beef and com iu addition to broiler meat. Furthermore. it 
has considered the use of alternative materials for bedding, feeds, and fertilizer. More specifically, 
the use of kenaf as bedding material and the use of broiler litter as feed ingredient and fertilizer 
were investigated. The simulation results for the representative farms show that broiler production is 
the only viable project in a specialized farm. However. integrating com and/or beef production with broiler 
production can increase the profitability of the enterprise. Kenaf core has proven to be a more profitable 
alternative as broiter bedding material compared to pine sawdust. If grown with corn, kenaf production 
can be recommended. However, for farms producing only broiler and/or beef, it is better to buy kenaf 
core from other sources. The use of litter-based fertilizer and feeds cau deerease input costs and increase 
the profitability of the integrated farms. REFERENCES <RefA>Bosch, D. J., and V. R. Eidman. 1987. Valuing Information 
When Risk Preferences are Nomeutral: An Application to Irrigation Scheduling. American Journal ofAgricultural 
Economics. 69:658-668. Dillon, C. R., J. W. Mjelde, and B. A. McCarl. 1989. Biophysical Simulation in 
Support of Crop Production Bacon, and Munasinghe Decisions: A Case Study in the Blackhmds Region of 
Texas. Southern Journal of Agricultural Economics. 21:73-86. Gempesaw, C. M. II, and J. R. Bacon. 1993. 
Broilers and Aquiculture: A Case of Agricultural Output DiversKlcation. Journal of the American Socie@ 
of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers. 57:18-26. Jackson, B. S., G. F. Arkin, and A. B. Heam. 1988. The 
Cotton Simulation Model COTTAM : Fruiting Model Calibration and Testing. Transaction of the American 
Socie~ ofAgricultural Engineers. 31:864-854. KleirL K. K., and S. Narayanau. 1992. Farm Level Models: 
A Review of Developments, Concepts and Applications m Canada. Canadian Journal of Agn-cultural Economics. 
40:351-368. Maas, S. J., and G. F. Arkin. 1980. TAMW: A Wheat Growth and Development Simulation Model. 
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Program and Model Documentation No. 80-3. Maas, S. J., and G. 
F. Arkin. 1978. User s Guide to SORGF: A Dynamic Grain Sorghum Growth Model With Feedback Capacity. Texas 
Agricultural Experiment Station, Program and Model Documentation No. 78-1. Richardso~ J., and C. Nixon. 
1986. Technical Description of the Firm Level Income Tax and Farm Policy Simulation Model (FLIPSIM V). 
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. B-1528. Stapper, M., and G. F. Arkin. 1980. CORNF: 
A Dynamic Growth and Development Model for Maize (Zea mays L.). Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Progmun and Model Documentation No. 80-2</RefA>. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES FE ZINNIA ALBAY is a graduate student and 
research assistant at the Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, College of Agricultural 
Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University. CONRADO M. GEMPESAW II is a professor and department chair 
at the Department of Food and Resource Economics, College of Agricultural Sciences, University of Delaware. 
His areas of research include agricultural finance and production economics. J. RICHARD BACON is an Associate 
Scientist at the Department of Food and Resource Economics, College of Agricultural Sciences, University 
of Delaware. LEVSIRI MUNASINGHE is an Associate at the Advanced Offke Serv&#38;s, Global Systems and 
Technology of Merrill Lynch, New Jersey. 
			
