
 A Framework for Medical Information Science Bruce Blum Applied Physics Laboratory Laurel, MD 20707 
A one day workshop on the topic "A Framework for Medical Information Sci- ence" was held in October. 
Three issues were considered: what is Medical Informa- tion Science, what are the key research issues, 
and what are the educational needs. Because of the brevity of the workshop and scope of the topic, no 
summary conclu- sions were developed. Individual papers and position statements will be published. This 
paper reviews the workshop and some of the principal issues discussed. Key words: Medical Information 
Science; Medical Education Introduction The use of computers in medicine has seen considerable suc- 
cess in the past ten years. With the availabilty of inexpensive microcomputers, there is an ever-increasing 
interest in how this technology can be applied to office practice. The Symposium for Computer Applications 
in Medical Care (SCAMC) has been hold- ing an annual meeting to present and discuss developments in this 
field. The first meeting, in 1977, attracted an audience of under 200; the registration at each of the 
last three symposia exceeded 2,000. Attendance is equally divided between physicians and non- physicians 
with the following distribution: one third academic, one third private practice, and one third other 
health care activities. In 1983 SCAMC sponsored a one day limited attendance workshop to discuss a framework 
for Medical Information Science (MISc). The primary motivation for the workshop was a desire to identify 
in what areas MISc was indeed a science and where it was simply the application of a tool. If this could 
be determined, then guidelines for a research and education agenda would follow. (An extract from the 
call for participation is included as an appendix.) Attendance at the workshop was limited to persons 
submit- ting either a paper or a short position statement. The workshop itself was structured as follows: 
Individual introductions and short statements. Panel discussion: What is MISc? Panel discussion: What 
are the educational needs? General discussion. Some forty papers were received, and there were fifty 
participants. Because of the broad scope of the topic and the limited time avail- Permission to copy 
without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed 
for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1984 ACM-O-89791-126-1/84/O02/0207 
$00.75 able, emphasis was placed on discussion and interaction among the individuals. There was no attempt 
to compile conclusions or recommendations. All participants will have an opportunity to revise their 
initial submissions. Publication of the workshop papers is planned for inclusion in a special issue of 
Medical Infor- matics to be issued in August 1984. Although there was neither a concensus nor a conclusion, 
I have compiled some of the key points made during the workshop. The selection is personal, reflects 
my prejudices, but is generally representative.  What is Medical Information Science? Earlier in 1983 
there was a meetin~ in France which addressed informatics and medical education. "Several participants 
attended that meeting and provided preprints of their papers to the workshop attendees. That of J. R. 
Mohr (University of Heidelberg) begins with a definition. 2 Education in informatics has evolved into 
several distinct types, e.g. --computer science --information systems The computer science concepts 
seem to be compatible with a concept of informafics as a systems science dealing with the foundations, 
nature and principles of realization of algo- rithms. The information systems concept seems to be oriented 
towards informatics as a methods science dealing with the application of the concepts of computer science 
to the solution of problems in a particular environment, mostly business and economics. This latter approach 
seems also applicable to medical informatics with orientation towards solution of problems in the health 
care field with the metho- dology and technology of computer science. This concept has been adopted for 
a specialized curriculum which was introduced in cooperation between the University of Heidel- berg and 
the Heilbronn Polytechnical School in 1972. In a way it is unfortunate that the term informatics is 
not in vogue in the United States. We tend to use the term, "computer science" to mean both the generic 
area, i.e., inforrnatics, and the narrow speciality, i.e., realization of algorithms. Of course, this 
avoidance of the term was implicit in the title of the workshop. J. H. van Bemmel (Free University of 
Amsterdam) felt that MISc was well defined. He presented a model for medical informa- tion processing. 
3 It consisted of the following six levels of process- ing ordered by increasing complexity and dependence 
on man: 1. communication, recording  2. storage, retrieval, data bases 3. computations, automation 
 4. recognition, diagnosis 5. therapy, control 6. research, development.  Automation has been applied 
to many of the lower level funerions. The goal of MISt is to understand better the higher levels; com- 
puter aided support can then be built upon this new knowledg.e. E. H. Shortliffe (Stanford University) 
made the following observation: 4 It can be argued that medical informatics is still in a "preseienrific 
era." We build artifacts, our papers describe them, but an underlying theory has thus far failed to emerge. 
In the field of pure computer sci- ence, courses in the mathematical theory of computa- tion exist, but 
even so, much of that field is character- ized by individual experiments and reports of their success 
or failure. The field of medical informarics has underlying fundamental principles, but we tend to identify 
and articulate them poorly, and those basic science issues that exist are not generally recognized or 
accepted. Rarely are scientific activities in the field viewed on an equal level with traditional "pure 
sci- ence medical research." Among his recommendations was a guideline for publications in this field. 
 Perhaps one of the most articulate expressions came from M. S. Blois (University of California, San 
Francisco). 5 It is sometimes asserted that medical science is no different than any other science. 
I disagree strongly with this view; medicine in its descriptions, reasoning, explanation, and prediction 
draws upon lower level sciences, but physics, for example, does not. Because medicine derives its experimental 
con- tent from an entire hierarchy of sciences (both "hard" and "soft"), its processing of observational 
data faces very different problems. This is why there is a "medi- cal information science," and why there 
is not a "phy- sical information science." It has long been pointed out that medical com- puting is largely 
drawn by its technological applica- tions, and that it suffers deeply from a lack of critical inquiry 
into its own foundations. Moreover, despite this deficiency, it is still the case that research propo- 
sals designed to inquire into the fundamentals of the field have been received poorly, and that the support 
has gone instead into the development of ever more elaborate application systems. As a result, MIS as 
a science remains more of a research program, or a hope, than a coherent set of accomplishments. The 
final word was given by W. S. Yamamoto (George Wash- ington University) in a position paper entitled, 
"Insisting on a Name Can Blunt Its Impact." He stated. # The idea that medical information science may 
constitute a discipline or a Special entity in the configuration of academic endeavors in medicine is 
provocative, but it is superfluous. However, human beings being what they are with respect to their ambi- 
tions and their career needs, it is very probable that something called "medical information science" 
will come to be, and certain practitioners will form organi- zations, rifles, journals, and distinctions 
in that con-text. As one who has been involved with computers since very early days, I would like to 
submit an opin- ion: "medical information science" would not exist in its present connotation were it 
not for the existence of computers. Like any other technology which is tool- driven, the essential concepts 
and the discovery of new understanding coalesce about the subject matter because of the physical tool. 
Prefix the notion of information processing with "medical" and it seems to be unique. But the human processing 
of information formed the very essence of the practice of medicine long before the emergence of computers. 
Physicians were the principal practitioners of medical informa- tion processing using the only available 
tool of their time, the human brain. So, if there is a discipline it differs only by machine. It was 
pointed out in the discussion that medical information sci- ence has made a major contribution to medicine 
which is in widespread use: the problem oriented record. It, of course, is not tied to automation. Having 
considered the scientific nature of MISt, the discus- sion turned to why it was important to have it 
organized as an identifiable identity. The principle issues related to career paths and competition for 
research and internal support. Fo r exampIe, it was pointed out that -while there were few intellectual 
differences between studying computer applications to cardiology in a MISt or cardiology organization 
-there were significant differences in com- peting for space and research support. There is also the 
issue of academic advancement. One sees this in both the clinical and computer science departments. In 
each case there are established criteria for promotion keyed to the definition of the science or discipline. 
Persons attempting to work across discipline boundaries often have no basis for evaluation; they are 
seen as working on an applications area which is outside the interest of the home department. Thus, without 
an identifiable entity, work in MISc will not be encouraged, there will be few sources for research support 
dedicated to foster the discipline, and both training programs and the curriculum will be diffused. 
 What are the Educational Needs? The discussion on education began with a review of some existing programs 
in Europe. Both van Bemmel and Mohr have over ten years' experience with programs in this field. The 
Dutch program is oriented to medical application, 7'8 while the German program is directed more to bioengineering 
applications. 9 In the case of the medical program, it was agreed that the isolation of a separate course 
was inappropriate; the material must be integrated into the curriculum. Van Bemmel reviewed a five day 
training program in medical informarics (Meduc), and G. O. Barnett (Har- vard University) described some 
of the ways he is integrating com- puters into medical education. 10 A paper by M. J. Ball (Temple University) 
and R. H. Shannon (Spokane, Washington) provided a perspective in vertical and horizontal curricula; 
L. C. Gatewood and J. P. Glaser (University of Minnesota) presented the training needs in a broader perspective. 
Both papers are sufficiently com- plete to preclude their abstraction for this paper. It was agreed that 
there was a need for trained professionals in the health care field. One projection was one Ph.D. plus 
five support M.S. staff for each major hospital. While this demand was questioned, it was agreed that 
there were no training programs which could produce large numbers of graduates. When the discus- sion 
restricted itself to M.D., Ph.D. graduates, the issue of MISe was again raised. Most graduates could 
not find appointments unless they completed a residency. Several training programs have been terminated. 
Few universities had a critical mass which was necessary to provide specialized education in this field. 
 In a follow-up session open to all SCAMC attendees, several people from major universities asked, "Well, 
what can you tell us? ~ The answers were disappointing. There was no concensus for teaching MISc as one 
more course such as, for example, molecular biology. The material must be integrated into the curriculum. 
But how? There are a limited number of computer supported aids for teaching decision making (e.g., Barnett 
and van Bemmel); they may not be sufficiently standardized nor robust enough to allow tran- sport. And 
teaching how to use devices containing computers really has little to do with MISc. The training of computer 
professionals to work in the medical field was only partially considered. We are in a major state of 
flux. Where ten years ago, the abiity to write programs defined the base- line skill for a computer professional, 
today that skill is being taught in the third grade. There continues to be a high degree of amaturism 
in the computing profession. Still, we have difficulty in defining and teaching what Mohr referred to 
as the information sci- ence aspect of informatics. One model for non-medical participation was based 
on that of the pharmacist in the health care process. He has specific knowledge and skills, interacts 
with providers as a professional (and responds professionally) and has his intellectual roots tied to 
a combination of pure science, medicine, and professional applica- tions. Yet it is probably too early 
to formalize a parallel profession in the medical information processing field.  Conclusion The workshop 
had a large number of participants and a lim- ited amount of time. There was a great deal of interaction, 
many ideas were presented, and there was a general concensus. This paper attempts to present some of 
the flavor of the workshop. The revised papers will represent another dimension. If there was a conclusion 
to be drawn, it might be this: It is too early to say exactly what we mean by MISc, where it fits in 
the academic structure, or who needs to know what. It also is clear that the use of the com- puter will 
continue to have a major impact on medi- cine and health care delivery; furthermore, persons knowledgeable 
in both medicine and computer science will be required to guide the associated research and development. 
 One suggestion was that MISc is where biomedical engineering was a decade or two ago. It is in the process 
of establishing an identity based upon demonstrated results. If this is true, then we have no choice 
other than to be pragmatic and wait ten years. To close on a positive note, let me point to some signs 
of encouragement which may be found in the growing number of texts and collections which are beginning 
to appear. Branzino has an introductory text; 11 Shorthffe, Wiederhold and Feigenbaum are preparing a 
text for their medical informatics course, and I am writing a text on clinical information systems. Collections 
of papers are available from Artech House, Mosley has a series, Springer-Verlag has just issued a series 
entitled Computers and Medicine, and several other collections or series are in the process. The availability 
of this literature will facilitate course development and aid in the growth of computer literacy for 
those who did not get it in the third grade. Once that baseline is established, we should be able to 
identify what must be presented in further detail. Post Script This paper reports on a workshop designed 
for the medical computing community; it is being presented at a meeting with interests in computer science 
education. A few comments may improve its relevance to this audience. The use of computers has grown 
significantly in medical applications. The initial use was limited to data processing and data analysis. 
Statistical packages are now routine, data processing for laboratories and administration standard, and 
computational support for quantified physiology commonplace. The next genera- tion of applications dealt 
with information processing. This is now the backbone of the hospital information system, database network- 
ing, and many of the smaller computer (and microcomputer) appli- cations. Current emphasis is on medical 
decision making and artificial intelligence. Medical knowledge (and diagnostic methods) are very well 
suited to symbolic analysis; over a quarter of all export systems deal with medicine. From this appraisal, 
it is clear that parts of MISc are simply applications of computer technology to a specific area, while 
other parts involve advances in both medicine and computer science. Of course, this situation is not 
unique; similar statements could prob- ably be repeated for management science, legal services, and many 
other application areas. Thus, one challenge to the computer sci- ence community is to educate students 
to be professionals who apply their expertise in many different applications areas. Further, there also 
is need to recognize that there are some multidisciplinary areas which involve both computer science 
and a host discipline. In the case of medical computing, the ACM has played a major role in coordinating 
these two activities. 12,13 As computer knowledge diffuses, many disciplines will find computing to be 
an essential, integral component. Each field will have to establish what to teach and who should teach. 
And the computer science community will also have to determine how it will interact with those other 
disciplines. This paper addressed only medical science. But the issue is not restricted to MISc; it is 
the natural outgrowth of the phenominal success of our field. References <RefA>[1] Pages, J. C., A. H. Levy, 
F. Gremy and J. Anderson (eds.), Meeting the Challenge: Informatics and Medical Education, Elsevier Science 
Publishers B.V. (North-Holland), 1983. [2] Molar, J. R. and F. J. Leven, The Heidelberg/Heilbronn Cur- 
riculum of Medical Informatics, in Meeting the Challenge: Informatics and Medical Education, 1983. [3] 
Van Bemmel, J. H., A Comprehensive Model for Medical Information Processing~ Meth. Inform. Med. 22 (1983) 
124- 130. [4] Sbortliffe, E. H., The Science of Biomedical Computing, in Meeting the Challenge: Informatics 
and Medical Education, 1983. [5] Blois, M. S., Medical Information Science as "Science," unpublished 
position paper. [6] Yamamoto, W. S., ~Medical Information Science": Insisting on a name can blunt its 
impact, unpublished position paper. [7] Van Bemmel, J. H., L. Stracker, E. S. Geisema, S. Hasman, and 
J. Smith, Education of Professionals in Medical Infor- matics, J. H. van Bemmel, M. Ball and O. Wigertz, 
ed., MEDINFO "83, North Holland, 1982. [8] Van Bemmel, J. H., A. Hasman, P. G. C. M. Sollet, and A. F. 
L. Verb, Training in Medical Informatics, Comp. Biomed. Res. 16 (1983) 414-421. [9] Mohr, J. R., F. J. 
Leven, and R. Rothemund, Formal Educa- tion in Medical Informatics, Meth. Inform. Med. 21 (1982), 169-180. 
[10] Barnett, G. O., E. P. Hoffer, and IC T. Famiglictti, Comput- ers in Medical Education: Present and 
Future, R. E. Dayhoff, ed., Seventh Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care, IEEE Computer 
Society, 1983. [11] Bronzino, J. D. Computer Applications for Patient Care, Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Co., Menlo Park, CA, 1982. [12] Duncan, K. (ed), SIGBIO Symposium on Health Computing Careers, ACM, 1981. 
[13] Duncan, K. (ed), A Model Curriculum for Doctoral-Level Programs in Health Computing, ACM, 1982. </RefA>
 Appendix: Extract from Call for Participation Medical Information Science (Medical Informatics) has 
grown from visionary concepts to practical realities. With the widespread diffusion of computer technology, 
improvements in computer sci- ence, and growth of a market for medical computing applications, there 
is a need to reestablish what is meant by Medical Information Science. Without a framework for the discipline, 
it will be impossi- ble to define an agenda for research or identify educational needs. The objective 
of this one day, limited attendance workshop is to work toward a framework for Medical Information Science. 
Three major issues will be considered: What is Medical Information Science? Does it differ from the biomedical 
sciences and computer science, or is it a speciality area in each? Is the computer simply a tool which 
facilitates the accomplishment of the scientific objectives, or does it fundamentally alter the discipline? 
Can the field be stratified into a hierarchy which goes from research through the application of accepted 
knowledge? What are the principal research issues? Given a struc- ture for Medical Information Science, 
what are the major avenues for disseminating existing knowledge (i.e., avoiding the reinvention of the 
wheel), and developing new knowledge (i.e., research)? What research issues are purely in the area of 
the biomedical science, computer science, and medical information science? What are the key educational 
needs? What knowledge is required of Medical Information Science profession- als, medical students, computer 
professionals in the medical field, clinical practitioners, clinical researchers, and other health care 
professionals? How are these needs being met, and what alternate strategies should be explored? Clearly, 
the.scope of the meeting is too broad to suggest reso- lution in a one day workshop. Nevertheless, it 
should be pos- sible to establish a framework for a continued dialogue. 
			
