
 A Framework and Methodology for Knowledge Management System Implementation Hanlie Smuts School of Computing, 
University of South Africa, and Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd, Private Bag 9955, Cresta, 2118, South Africa 
+ 27 83 222 1111 Smuts_h@mtn.co.za Marianne Loock School of Computing, University of South Africa P 
O Box 392, UNISA, 0003, South Africa +27 12 429 6381  Loockm@unisa.ac.za ABSTRACT Knowledge assets are 
of far greater value than any tangible asset and provide organisations with the basis for creating a 
sustainable competitive advantage. The nature of knowledge and knowledge management have given rise to 
a range of different definitions of knowledge management systems that enable organisations to convert 
their knowledge into actionable information that provides them with a competitive edge and innovative 
capability. Such an implementation process is a comprehensive course of action that requires focus and 
commitment through-out the organisation in order to achieve results, yet no universally accepted framework 
or methodology for such a process exists. This paper analyses and describes enhancements to a 12-step 
process derived by Calabrese and Orlando [6] to implement a knowledge management system aimed at providing 
a more comprehensive framework and methodology for knowledge management system implementation. These 
enhancements are based on findings relating to a knowledge management proof of concept implementation 
conducted at one of the major mobile telecommunication operators in South Africa. Categories and Subject 
Descriptors H.1.1 [Information Systems]: Models and Principles; Systems and Information Theory; Value 
of Information General Terms Management, Documentation. Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 09,12-14 October 2009, Riverside, Vanderbijlpark, 
South Africa. Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-643-4 $5.00. Alta van der Merwe Meraka Institute of the 
CSIR, and School of Computing, University of South Africa P O Box 395, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa +27 
12 841 3208  alta@meraka.org.za Paula Kotzé Meraka Institute of the CSIR, and School of Computing, University 
of South Africa P O Box 395, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa +27 12 841 4791  Paula.kotze@meraka.org.za 
Keywords Knowledge management system implementation process; knowledge management system implementation; 
knowledge management system implementation methodology. 1. INTRODUCTION Knowledge assets are of much 
greater value than any tangible asset that provided organisations with a competitive edge in the past 
[8]. Furthermore, as new technologies, innovation, organisational flexibility and new and better forms 
of leadership propel the growth and earnings of knowledge-intensive organisations, so the need to extract 
wealth from brainpower and knowledge (individual and organisational) becomes increasingly pressing. The 
shift to knowledge as the primary source of value results in the new economy being led by those who manage 
knowledge effectively. Today s organisations are creating and leveraging knowledge, data and information 
at an unprecedented pace and the extraordinary growth in on-line information, makes the use of technology 
not an option, but a necessity [1, 20]. The specific nature of knowledge and knowledge management (KM) 
lead to different definitions of KM systems that in general refer to a class of information systems (IS) 
applied to managing organisational knowledge [3]. Technology adds value by reducing time, effort and 
cost in enabling people to share knowledge and information. This is particularly true when technology 
is closely aligned with organisational requirements and the way people work and is integrated with relevant 
processes [15, 23]. Although KM comprises much more than software tools, these play a significant role 
in facilitating KM in organisations [11, 29, 39]. The implementation of KM software tools that are integrated 
with organisational processes assists an organisation to convert knowledge into actionable information 
that provides it with a competitive edge and innovative capability. However, the process of implementation 
is a comprehensive procedure that requires focus and commitment through-out the organisation in order 
to achieve results. Numerous approaches to KM have been developed, yet no universally accepted framework 
or methodology for the implementation of KM solutions exists [23, 30]. Calabrese and Orlando [6] suggested 
a 12-step approach for the implementation of a KM system. In order to derive the 12-step approach, Calabrese 
and Orland analysed 5 KM approaches 2 derived from academic sources and 3 from practitioner organisations 
 and derived the 12-step hybrid KM approach, that combined the best features of the KM approaches analysed. 
We took the 12-step approach and used it in a telecommunication environment. However, in implementing 
the approach in practice, we found it not to be comprehensive enough and lacking especially in implementation 
detail. We therefore address this gap in this paper and identified a number of possible enhancements 
that would improve the suggested 12 step approach. The goal of this paper is to report on the suggested 
enhancements to the 12-step process derived by Calabrese and Orlando [6] and to propose an adapted framework 
and methodology for KM system implementation. These enhancements are based on findings relating to an 
implementation of the suggested 12-step approach at one of the major mobile telecommunication operators 
in South Africa. Section 2 provides the theoretical background to the paper. In section 3 the enhanced 
method is described as a proposed KM implementation framework and methodology based on the outcome of 
the implementation of the 12-step approach. Section 4 comprises a summary and conclusion.  2. BACKGROUND 
In this section we provide the theoretical background to the paper. In it we discuss the nature of knowledge 
and the implication for KM solutions and barriers to successful KM implementation. In addition, we provide 
an overview of the 12-step process as proposed by Calabrese and Orlando [6], as well as of the method 
followed to enhance that process. 2.1 The Nature of Knowledge and the Implication for Technology Solutions 
Explicit knowledge is defined as knowledge that has been articulated in the form of text, diagrams, product 
specifications and so on [7, 26]. Nonaka, Toyama and Byosiere [27] refer to explicit knowledge as being 
formal and systematic, as in the case of a computer program. Explicit knowledge is found in reports, 
documents and manuals and can easily be gathered and stored as a knowledge base [7, 9, 28]. Organisations 
use groupware applications to collect, store and share their explicit knowledge, and once this has reached 
a sufficient level of efficiency, collaborative technologies such as intranet, the internet, extranet, 
e-mail, video-conferencing and tele-conferencing are used to assist in the growth of implicit and tacit 
knowledge transfer [7, 28, 39]. Implicit knowledge is far less tangible than explicit knowledge and refers 
to knowledge deeply embedded in an organisation s operating practices [16, 18]. This is often the knowledge 
that is observed by a work-study consultant or task analyst and made explicit through being documented. 
Tacit knowledge, as a dimension of implicit knowledge, includes relationships, norms and values. This 
is knowledge that cannot be articulated and is much harder to detail, copy or distribute. In order to 
enable organisations to retrieve captured knowledge, knowledge route maps and directories are developed 
to create an understanding of the location of knowledge [3, 7]. Knowledge networks are created using 
virtual business environments such as chat rooms, team web sites and learning communities [3, 7, 28] 
with the development of specific applications of technology such as databases, workflow systems, personal 
productivity applications and enterprise information portals [39, 40]. According to Lindval, Rus, Jammalamadaka 
and Thakker [20], software tools make it possible to capture knowledge by converting it from being unpredictable 
and tacit to predictable and explicit. Software tools support storage and organisation through distributed 
databases and document-management technology. It also enables reliable and secure access from various 
locations. Software tools support efficient search and retrieval by means of search engines and databases 
enhanced with artificial intelligence techniques and facilitate collaboration between people who are 
not geographically co-located. Although KM tools are enhancements of existing technologies, true KM technologies 
differ in several important aspects from the traditional workflow, document management and intranet to 
groupware solutions [12, 14, 28, 37]. According to Tsai and Chen [37 : 258], KM systems are: ... more 
than just information systems or IT-enabled tools in support of knowledge management activities. Instead, 
a knowledge management system must be a socio-technical system as a whole which comprises the knowledge 
itself (the intellectual capital of the organisation), organisational attributes (intangibles such as 
trusting culture), policies and procedures, as well as some form of electronic storage and retrieval 
systems. Although KM initiatives rely on IT as an important enabler [23], not all information technologies 
apply to KM [3, 28]. If it is considered that people (knowledge workers and managers), technologies (manual 
and computer-based technologies) and knowledge itself interact to comprise a KM system [37], then Alavi 
and Leidner s [3 : 114] definition is more appropriate as a generic definition: Knowledge management 
systems refer to a class of information systems applied to managing organisational knowledge. These specific 
implications of knowledge and knowledge management for KM systems are important, as these different views 
lead to different perceptions and definitions of KM systems [4, 29].  2.2 Barriers to Successful Knowledge 
Management Solution Implementation Given the dynamics of hyper-competition and globalisation , organisations 
in the new economy deal with two major management tasks: the resulting re-invention of businesses and 
pressure for innovation, as well as the related re-alignment of corporate activity [5, 17]. Further changes 
in this landscape that organisations need to deal with, include global integration [16, 17], geographic 
distribution associated with the globalisation of markets and growth in organisational scope. Organisations 
have to do more with less and at an accelerating pace of change [5, 13]. When staff attrition due to 
downsizing and reengineering, growing knowledge intensity of products and services and the revolution 
in IT are considered, obstacles for KM reveal three main groups of factors [5, 21]. The first group relates 
to flaws in the organisational KM process [25], the second to misconceptions of the role of technology 
in the process [22] and the third to a disregard for the importance of the human factor in realising 
a successful knowledge managing and knowledge sharing culture [21, 23]. In addition to having to contend 
with obstacles to KM system implementation, organisations also have to deal with barriers to sharing 
knowledge such as organisational hierarchy, geographical barriers, human nature and personality. Motivating 
users of a KM system to contribute their knowledge to the system is critical for the success of the overall 
KM initiative [11, 24]. Any KM initiative in an organisation must deal with and overcome these barriers 
to optimise knowledge sharing, as this forms the basis of value creation and leveraging of the intangible 
assets of the organisation.  2.3 Overview of the 12-Step Process There is currently no universally accepted 
standard or best practice for the implementation of KM systems, although organisations today have developed 
multiple approaches to creating distinct steps to design, implement and measure KM systems that meet 
the goals and objectives of the organisation [6]. Calabrese and Orlando [6] analysed 5 KM approaches 
 2 derived from academic sources and 3 from practitioner organisations and derived a 12-step hybrid 
KM approach, that combined the best features of the KM approaches analysed. These 5 KM approaches include 
the 10-step roadmap proposed by Tiwana [As cited in 6], the George Washington University 8-step blueprint 
[As cited in 6], as well as approaches formulated by practitioner corporations IBM, SAIC [32] and CSC 
in order to provide a broader comparative population. A summary of the 5 approaches analysed is given 
in Table 1, which reflects the steps or phases of which each consists. Calabrese and Orlando [6] have 
identified correlations among the 5 approaches and derived the 12 steps summarized in Table 2. These 
12 steps were then logically distributed to the George Washington University Four Pillar Framework [6]. 
The Four Pillar Framework consists of leadership, organisation, technology and learning four domains 
that have constantly shown the potential to encompass all aspects of effective knowledge sharing and 
collaborative cultures [34]. Leadership refers to the cultivation of business strategy through the driving 
of values for knowledge creation and sharing, while organisation refers to support for the values. Technology 
connects knowledge through a network to allow knowledge to span the whole enterprise and learning aims 
to cultivate and utilise virtual teams and exchange forums for shared results and innovation. These four 
pillars or domains are interrelated in the process of creating a usable KM system as it encompasses all 
the aspects of effective collaboration and knowledge sharing. Table 1: Summary of the five KM implementation 
approaches analysed by Calabrese and Orlando [6] Steps Tiwana s 10-step roadmap George Washington University 
8-step blueprint IBM (9 event process) SAIC (6 event process) CSC (9 event process) 1 Identify knowledge 
critical to your business Locate knowledge critical functions Deal with a critical business problem that 
faces the organisation Identify and select pilot projects Assess current state of knowledge flow 2 Align 
business strategy and knowledge management Develop process models for candidate functions / applications 
Align knowledge effort with most pressing business issues Customise pilot process and create stakeholder 
alignment Assess state of sponsorship 3 Analyse existing knowledge in your organisation Analyse knowledge 
critical gaps, opportunities and risks Familiarise oneself with expertise and skills within the organisation 
Capture key learning and good practices Define / revise business drivers 4 Building on, not discarding 
existing IT investment Prioritise and select goals Implement repositories / technologies Establish and 
leverage communities of practice Define / revise principles, directions and gaps 5 Focus on processes 
and tacit, not just explicit, knowledge Ensure alignment of KM with corporate strategy Establish communities 
of practice and mentoring programs Train and coach internal KM practitioners Plan and document high level 
strategy 6 Design a future-proof, adaptable knowledge management platform Develop KM requirements Understand 
unique needs of various users groups Monitor, review and optimise pilot learning and impact Design the 
measurement program 7 Build and deploy a results-driven knowledge management system Document requirements 
and describe KM cycle elements required Create new products and services and provide better support for 
existing ones Implement strategy / operate knowledge environment 8 Implement leadership and reward structures 
needed to make knowledge management work Develop and sell KM resource(s) and manage reward and management 
commitment to plan Measure contribution KM makes to bottom line Monitor, measure and report 9 Evaluate 
initiatives using real options analyses Share appropriate knowledge Extract lessons learned and change 
requests 10 Learn from war stories Table 2: Derived 12-step process (Calabrese and Orlando) Pillar 
Steps 1 12-step process Identify knowledge critical to your business Leadership 2 Conduct work-centred 
analysis 3 Sell high-level plan of action to senior management 4 Engage key stakeholders 5 Develop process 
model Organisation 6 Identify critical knowledge gaps, opportunities, and risks 7 Establish and prioritise 
goals 8 Develop requirements and measurement programme 9 Plan high-level strategy approach Technology 
10 Implement strategy, build, and deploy 11 Monitor, measure, and report metrics Learning 12 Learn from 
results  2.4 Method Followed to Determine the Applicability of the Framework The purpose of our research 
was to determine whether the 12 step process proposed by Calabrese and Orlando [6] was generally applicable 
to organisations, and specifically an organisation that has advance telecommunication technology as its 
niche market. In order to do so, we followed what we refer to as a proof of concept research approach 
in the remainder of this paper, to test the applicability of the 12 step process in this environment. 
2.4.1 Proof of Concept Environment According to Lindval, Rus, Jammalamadaka and Thakker [20], it is better 
to evaluate how people share information naturally and then build a system to support those activities 
[8, 19, 38]. The means to successful KM therefore lies in leveraging existing infrastructure by including 
what already exists and then integrating it [35, 36]. We therefore chose an existing telecommunication 
company as proof of concept environment, namely the Mobile Telephone Networks (MTN) Group, a leading 
provider of communication services, offering cellular network access and business solutions globally. 
Launched in 1994, the MTN Group is a multinational telecommunications group, operating in 21 countries 
in Africa and the Middle East. As at the end of April 2009, MTN recorded more than 100 million subscribers 
across its operations. Technological advancement of mobile phones is evident when one considers the change 
experienced over the past 15 years since the launch of mobile telecommunications in South Africa. The 
development of cost-effective and marketable growth products, the ability to recognise the best technology 
and the focus on retaining key employees and intellectual property are vital components in staying ahead 
in an extremely competitive market. Enterprise architecture understanding, device and value proposition 
knowledge, knowledge to put together a mobile solution design and customer service are some of the key 
differentiators for ensuring a positive customer experience (and subsequently market share growth) in 
the mobile telecommunication sector today. These differentiators also foster innovation in an environment 
where all mobile operators have access to the same mobile networks, devices and similar products and 
services. Innovation is a key differentiator and KM processes play a key role in facilitating innovation 
cycles. It is with these objectives in mind that doing a proof of concept using the 12 step framework 
was approved within the MTN South African (MTN SA) operation and a project team established.  2.4.2 
Knowledge Focus for the Proof of Concept The project team decided to focus on three key areas of the 
12­step process proposed by Calabrese and Orlando [6] to guide the proof of concept implementation. These 
key areas were an implementation methodology, relevant content and a chosen technology solution. Customer 
experience is one of the strategic themes and a key differentiator for the MTN SA operation and therefore 
the proof of concept focused on optimising the customer experience at the MTN SA Service Centre customer 
touch point with the aim to achieving the following objectives: Reduction in training time.  Reduction 
in transaction completion time.  Increase in on-sell and up-sell transactions.  Increase in customer 
satisfaction.  Retention of knowledge within the organisation.  Identification of specialised training 
requirements for customer service agents.  Dismantling of information silos residing in the organisation. 
 The proof of concept focused on a number of Service Centre business processes identified as per step 
2 of the 12-step process. The most complex and time consuming business processes were selected, namely 
contract upgrades, insurance claims, new contracts, technical book-ins, billing queries and subscriber 
identity module (SIM) swaps. Each of these processes was assigned a process champion someone with specific 
subject matter expertise (SME) to assist and advise during the analysis phase. In addition to these 
six business processes, existing content that has already been deployed in the eGain KM software application 
[10] was made available and utilised. This was primarily information relating to old and new price plans 
being used by the call centre agents. The team agreed that one of the measures of success would be the 
transaction completion time per transaction type identified for the particular business processes, as 
well as a reduction in training time of the service centre agents. The project plan for the implementation 
of the proof of concept was developed as per the 12-step process and the proof of concept process was 
formally initiated in accordance with the MTN SA project management methodology.  2.4.3 Outcomes of 
the 12-Step Process Proof of Concept With step 1 of the 12-step process concluded, the next steps of 
the 12-step process were initiated. Key stakeholders were engaged, knowledge elicitation sessions were 
held and knowledge gaps were identified. During the establishment and prioritisation of goals (step 7 
of the 12-step process), did the project team experience problems that had a negative effect on the proof 
of concept. These problems delayed the project significantly as prior steps of the 12-step process that 
were concluded already, had to be revisited and re-scoped. The problems experienced included the following: 
 The 12-step process is a general approach not specifically aligned for the telecommunications environment, 
and for that matter MTN SA. This resulted in misalignment between the 12-step process steps and the proof 
of concept implementation steps, as a result of which the latter had to be reconsidered.  The order 
of the proposed steps had to be changed in order to accommodate project issues and risks raised. At the 
time, KM had not yet been established in MTN SA and additional clarification, buy-in and positioning 
were required.  It became evident that a principle of design for the enterprise, implement for the proof 
of concept had to be followed in order to achieve and align the objectives of the proof of concept to 
organisational goals, as well as other areas in the business where similar projects could be executed. 
 A methodology is defined as a set of procedures that can be followed for achieving an objective and 
is more specific than a framework; it provides guidelines as to how to carry out the procedure in such 
a way that it is consistent with a particular framework [31]. The 12-step process did not provide enough 
detail on how to go about the KM implementation and therefore proved inadequate as a methodology. This 
also resulted in project delays as some of the steps had to be updated after significant issues in terms 
of approach had been amended.  With regard to the nature of knowledge, some gaps in the 12­step process 
became evident as not all components of the KM process (for instance organisational design), were dealt 
with.  The project team conducted a special session on status and progress made with the proof of concept. 
It was concluded that the issues identified had to be addressed and that additional steps had to be included 
in the 12-step process in order to achieve the envisaged outcomes within the timeframes allocated.  
 3. PROPOSED ENHANCED FRAMEWORK AND COMPREHENSIVE METHODOLOGY Rubenstein-Montano, Liebowitz et al. [30] 
make the following recommendations regarding a KM framework: A KM framework should be both prescriptive 
and descriptive.  A KM framework should be consistent with systems thinking.  The organisational goals 
and strategies must be linked to KM.  Planning should take place before any KM activities are conducted. 
 The cultural aspects of the organisation must be acknowledged and the KM practices must be compatible 
with that culture.  KM must be directed by learning and feedback loops, both single and double.  Following 
a number of discussions with key stakeholders and subject matter experts, as well as consideration of 
what constitutes a KM framework [30], an enhanced framework and comprehensive methodology were defined 
and utilised for the continuation of the proof of concept. This proposed framework and methodology are 
depicted in Figure 1. The proposed framework consists of five phases namely strategising, evaluation, 
development, validation and implementation. Each phase of the framework consists of sub-phases describing 
the methodology applicable to each phase. Strategising is the first phase and it entails the development 
of the overall KM strategy for the organisation including the desired outcome of the strategy and what 
the KM objectives are. It is essential that the KM strategy be aligned with the overall business strategy 
[2] and that the perceived outcomes support the desired key performance areas of the business strategy. 
The way KM will be monitored and measured must be defined and the critical success factors identified. 
Executive sponsorship and a strong organisational or governance structure of the KM programme are key 
requirements for success and constitute key components of the strategising step. This step deals with 
the KM principles at enterprise level and is referred to as the KM programme scope of work. The methodology 
procedures relevant to this step are KM principles and governance, organisational structure and sponsorship, 
requirements analysis and measurement.  Figure 1. Proposed KM framework and methodology The second phase 
in the proposed framework is evaluation. This phase focuses on the assessment of the current state of 
knowledge and KM in the organisation, as well as the scoping and prioritisation of specific initiatives 
in the organisation. These initiatives are aligned with the enterprise definition, but can be implemented 
as standalone initiatives. Technology as an enabler must be considered and the way in which existing 
technologies in the organisation support KM enablement or what gaps exist must be evaluated. The methodology 
procedure steps that form part of this phase are knowledge audit, initiative scoping, prioritisation 
and technology solution assessment. The third phase is development. Here the emphasis is on the building 
blocks required for the implementation of the prioritised KM initiative. This phase entails the drafting 
of a project plan to manage the activities to implementation of the prioritised KM initiative and includes 
the collation, acquisition and harvesting of knowledge required for the initiative. Lastly, it includes 
the building of a pilot that can be tested and launched in subsequent steps of the proposed methodology. 
Planning, knowledge elicitation and building are the methodology procedures that are pertinent for this 
phase. Validation is the fourth phase of the proposed framework; it deals specifically with the components 
required to launch the pilot such as the formalisation of the community of practice or user group for 
the specific KM initiative, the testing and update of the KM initiative pilot and the definition of all 
processes required to maintain the knowledge base once launched. Methodology processes applicable to 
this step include pilot launch, review and update of the pilot and knowledge maintenance processes. The 
last phase in the proposed framework is implementation. This phase focuses on the publishing of the signed 
off KM base and all processes related to the communication and change management of the effort in order 
to facilitate user adoption. The maintenance and support processes defined are activated in order to 
build the knowledge base initiative launched and to facilitate continuous improvement and innovation 
cycles. Regular and active measurement and reporting of the KM effort is implemented and any key issues 
identified are addressed. The specific methodology procedures for this step are publishing, communication 
and change management, maintenance and support and measurement and reporting. The proposed methodology 
describes the procedure and steps to be followed and is aligned with the proposed framework. This is 
reflected in Table 3. Table 3 also describes artefacts of each procedure within the methodology. The 
proposed framework is cyclic and iterative and a shorter or longer cycle can be utilised as required 
by the organisation once the overall strategy is completed (Step 1). It is essential -as experienced 
in the proof of concept -to design for the enterprise and to implement initiatives in a phased approach 
aligned with the overall strategy. The timelines for the proof of concept implementation were re­planned 
in accordance with to the proposed framework and methodology and the phases and sub-phases were followed. 
Proof of concept target outputs were achieved successfully. This proposed framework and methodology will 
also be utilised for further implementations of KM initiatives in MTN SA. The comparison of the proposed 
framework and methodology with the 12-step process is shown in Table 4. Table 3: Detailed description 
of framework and methodology Table 4: Comparison of 12-step process vs. proposed framework and methodology 
Framework component Methodology procedure Methodology procedure description Artefact Strategising KM 
principles &#38; governance Define the key objectives for the KM programme and identify what dimensions 
of knowledge i.e. explicit and implicit (tacit) must be addressed by the KM effort. Indicate how the 
programme will be managed and overseen and the strategy driven in order to achieve the defined objectives. 
Define knowledge framework or taxonomy. KM principles and objectives to be aligned to organisation strategy. 
KM strategy and governance document. Organisational structure &#38; sponsorship Define the organisational 
structure and roles and responsibilities that are required to support the KM programme and maintain focus 
on implementation and adoption. Identify executive sponsorship to visibly support the KM objectives and 
motivate people to share knowledge. KM strategy and governance document Requirements analysis Analyse 
and identify specialist areas in the organisation that my require KM. Identify key areas of knowledge 
in line with the knowledge dimensions defined as part of the KM strategy. KM business requirement analysis 
document Measurement Define how the implementation and maintenance of the KM programme will be measured 
and tracked. Identify the key drivers [35] of the key performance measures and indicate what actions 
have to be taken to address negative key performance indicators on the KM dashboard. KM strategy and 
governance document KM dashboard Evaluation Knowledge audit Find and verify potential knowledge bases 
that may fulfil the requirements defined in the requirements analysis and produce an audit report. Identify 
the key employees who hold tacit knowledge that must be harvested as part of the KM programme. KM audit 
report Initiative scoping Scope initiatives aligned to and in support of the requirements analysis of 
the KM programme. Include the audit result to recognise where knowledge already exists in an explicit 
form that may be shared. KM initiative scope document Prioritisation Prioritise scoped KM initiatives 
in order to achieve best results first and / or quick wins. KM initiative scope document Technology solution 
assessment Utilise KM solution characteristic list to assess and select the best toolset of existing 
technology in the organisation and / or new technology to enable the KM programme [33]. Expand the initiative 
scoping with the technology requirement specification. KM initiative and system requirement specification 
Development Planning Draft a work plan with activities required, timeframe, resources and budget requirements 
to implement the prioritised KM initiatives. Define the way of working required to achieve the implementation 
of the identified KM initiatives. KM initiative project plan Knowledge elicitation Collate and / or elicit 
knowledge as per the KM initiatives planning through workshops, knowledge harvesting sessions, collection 
of explicit knowledge, etc. and document / collate / consolidate. Validate knowledge, classify knowledge 
according to framework (taxonomy) and encode knowledge. KM workshop outputs KM content documents Building 
Build the knowledge base and user interface as per the collated and elicited knowledge and technology 
enablement defined in the KM initiative and system requirement specification. Define storing, retrieval, 
sharing, maintenance and collaboration processes and workflow. Define and establish KM pilot community 
of practice to oversee and support KM pilot KM prototype Validation Pilot &#38; test Pilot and test the 
prototype with identified community of practice / user group. Test storing, retrieval, sharing, maintenance 
and collaboration processes. Log enhancement and faults find. KM pilot test results KM pilot fault / 
enhancement log Review &#38; update Update KM build with enhancements and faults as logged during the 
pilot phase. Obtain sign off on content. KM updated / enhanced prototype Knowledge maintenance processes 
Update storing, retrieval, sharing, maintenance and collaboration processes as per review and update 
and confirm maintenance process roles and responsibilities. Obtain sign off on processes. KM final prototype 
(includes content and processes) Implementation Communication &#38; change management Draft communication 
plan to focus on information sharing and benefits regarding KM pilot. Change management plan to focus 
on user adoption and visibility, facilitating knowledge about the maintenance processes and optimal usage 
of the KM pilot base. KM communication and change management plan Train &#38; publish Train community 
of practice / user group on using KM pilot and launch pilot with approved content and processes. Continuously 
assess adoption and usage rate and address areas of low adoption. KM e-learning manual / user manual 
KM dashboard KM knowledge base Maintenance &#38; support Support KM users with queries logged, tips and 
techniques. Community of practice to actively facilitate maintenance of knowledge base and aid innovation 
cycles. Updated KM knowledge base Measurement &#38; reporting Continuous assessment and monthly KM dashboard 
reporting tracking progress and alignment to objectives. Track and report on benefits defined in the 
KM strategy. Evaluate any updates to the KM strategy based on the implementation results and dashboard 
tracking. KM dashboard Leadership Organisation Technology Lea rni ng 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Framework 
component Methodology procedure Identify knowledge criticalto your business Conduct work-centredanalysis 
Sell high-level plan of actionto senior management Engage key stakeholders Develop process model Identify 
critical knowledgegaps, opportunities, and risks Establish and prioritize goals Develop requirements 
andmeasurement program Plan high-level strategyapproach Implement strategy, build,and deploy Monitor, 
measure, andreport metrics Learn from results Strategising KM principles &#38; governance Organisational 
structure &#38; sponsorship Requirements analysis Measurement Evaluation Knowledge audit Initiative scoping 
Prioritisation Technology solution assessment Development Planning Knowledge elicitation Building Validation 
Pilot &#38; test Review &#38; update Knowledge maintenance processes Implementation Communication &#38; 
change management Train &#38; publish Maintenance &#38; support Measurement &#38; reporting A comparison 
of the 12-step process with the proposed framework and methodology reveals that the proposed framework 
and methodology comply with the four pillars as indicated, namely leadership, organisation, technology 
and learning. However, the proposed framework and methodology provide more detail relating to the implementation 
process and approach and what specific outputs are required. A key step included in the proposed framework 
and methodology is technology assessment to establish optimal enablement of the KM programme. Other additional 
procedures are the pilot and testing of the KM initiative chosen prior to launching it. Sponsorship and 
user adoption are supported by a very comprehensive communication and change management plan and not 
just singular events as suggested by the 12-step process.  4. CONCLUSION Sustainable competitive advantage 
in organisations is created through knowledge assets that are of far greater value than any tangible 
asset. A company with poor KM systems risks financial losses when losing its skills and knowledge encapsulated 
within its workforce. The successful implementation of KM is a key driver in mitigating these risks. 
Organisations today are creating, storing, using, sharing and sending vast amounts of data and information 
and this makes the use of technology as enabler, an obligation. However, technology aimed at KM is not 
the only answer, as the way in which knowledge workers create, disseminate and manage information, is 
vital. The development of a comprehensive KM system that supports all phases of KM is both a technological 
and organisational solution, and is not necessarily available as a single technology. The KM implementation 
process is a comprehensive course of action that requires focus and commitment through-out an organisation 
in order to achieve results, yet no universally accepted framework or methodology to guide such an implementation 
exists. In this paper, we have proposed a framework and methodology for KM system implementation. This 
proposed framework and methodology evolved from the application of a 12-step implementation process derived 
by Calabrese and Orlando [6] and the implementation of a KM proof of concept for a particular department 
in an organisation. The study was conducted at a mobile telecommunication organisation in South Africa, 
in an environment characterised by an enormous demand for skills and an extremely competitive industry 
where innovation and value proposition are key differentiators to increasing market share. The proposed 
framework and methodology take account of the nature of knowledge and KM, as well as barriers to KM system 
implementation that are evident in organisations today. The KM system implementation framework and methodology 
were derived from a qualitative study and further research is needed to generalise them. However, according 
to informal discussions with key decision makers within different organisations in South Africa, there 
is strong evidence that they may also be appropriate for smaller companies. It was also possible to re-use 
the framework and methodology to guide the implementation of different sized initiatives in the telecommunication 
company in South Africa.  REFERENCES <RefA>1. Abar, S., T. Abe and T. Kinoshita. A Next Generation Knowledge 
Management System Architecture. in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Advanced Information 
Networking and Application (AINA 04). 2004. 2. AlAmmary, J. and C.C. Fung, Knowledge Management Strategic 
Alignment in the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries. The Electronic Journal of Knowledge Managemen, 2008. 
6(2): p. 75 - 84. 3. Alavi, M. and D.E. Leidner, Review: Knowledge Management and Knowledge Management 
Systems: Conceptual Foundations and Research Issues. MIS Quarterly, 2001. 25(1): p. 107 - 136. 4. Asgarkhani, 
M., The Need for a Strategic Foundation for Digital Learning and Knowledge Management Solutions.  Electronic 
Journal of e-Learning, 2004. 2(1): p. 31-42. 5. Barclay, R.O. and P.C. Murray (1997) What is Knowledge 
Management? Knowledge Praxis Volume, DOI: www.media-access.com/whatis.html 6. Calabrese, F.A. and C.Y. 
Orlando, Knowledge organisations in the twenty-first century: deriving a 12­step process to create and 
implement a comprehensive knowledge management system. Journal of Information and Knowledge Management 
Systems, 2006. 36(3): p. 238 ­ 254. 7. Clarke, T. and C. Rollo, Corporate initiatives in knowledge management. 
Education + Training, 2001. 43(4/5): p. 206­ 214. 8. Davenport, T.H. and L. Prusak, Working Knowledge: 
how organisations manage what they know. Paperback 2000 ed. 1998, Boston: Harvard Business School Press. 
198. 9. Dix, A., J. Wilkinson and D. Ramduny, Redefining Organisational memory: Artefacts and the Distribution 
and Coordination of Work, in Workshop on understanding work and designing artefacts. 1998, Lancaster 
University: York. 10. eGain. 2009 2009 [cited 2009 July]; Available from: http://www.egain.com/products/knowledge_management.as 
p 11. Frappaolo, C., Knowledge Management. 2006, West Sussex: Capstone Publishing Ltd. 127. 12. Frappaolo, 
C. and S. Capshaw, Knowledge management software: capturing the essence of know-how and innovation. Information 
Management Journal, 1999. 13. Gordon, G., Emergence of the Knowledge Age, in Competing Effectively in 
the Information Age: Knowledge Management. 1999. p. 22-25. 14. Hahn, J. and M.R. Subramani. A Framework 
of Knowledge Management Systems: Issues and Challenges for Theory  and Practice. in 21st International 
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2000). 2000. Brisbane, Australia. 15. Hoffmann, M., K.-U. Loser, 
T. Walter and T. Herrman, A design process for embedding knowledge management in everyday work. ACM, 
1999. 99(11): p. 296-305. 16. Kotelnikov, V. Collecting, Leveraging and Distributing both Explicit and 
Tacit Knowledge Throughout Your Organisation. 2001 [cited; Available from: www.1000ventures.com. 17. 
Kothuri, S. Knowledge in Organisations. 2002 [cited; Available from: gseweb.harvard.edu. 18. Kothuri, 
S. Knowledge in Organisations. May 2002 [cited; Available from: gseweb.harvard.edu. 19. Krogh, G.v., 
K. Ichijo and I. Nonaka, Enabling Knowledge Creation: How to unlock the mystery of tacit knowledge and 
release the power of innovation. 2000, New York: Oxford University Press Inc. 292.  20. Lindvall, M., 
I. Rus, R. Jammalamadaka and R. Thakker, Software Tools for Knowledge Management: A DACS State-of-the-art 
report. 2001, Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software Engineering Maryland and The University of 
Maryland: Maryland. 21. McCullough, C. What is Knowledge Management -Knowing What We Know? 2005 [cited; 
Available from: www.topicarticles.com/knowledge-management/. 22. Moteleb, A.A. and M. Woodman, Notions 
of Knowledge Management: a gap analysis. The Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management, 2007. 5(1): 
p. 55 - 62.  23. Muganda-Ochara, N., K. Sewchurran, M. Ndlovu and A. Pillay, Assessing the Application 
of the Knowledge Management Success Paradigm in South Africa. International Business Information Management 
Association (IBIMA), 2008. 3: p. 122-131. 24. Muller, R.M., M. Spiliopoulou and H.J. Lenz. The Influence 
of incentives and Culture on Knowledge Sharing. in Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Science. 2005. Hawaii: IEEE. 25. Murray, P.C., Knowledge Organisation -the best-kept business 
secret of the 21st century?, in The Barrington Report on Advanced Knowledge Organisation and Retrieval. 
2004. p. 3-7. 26. Nickols, F., The Knowledge in Knowledge Management, in Paper commissioned for Knowledge 
Management Yearbook 2000 - 2001. 2001. 27. Nonaka, I., R. Toyama and P. Byosiere, A Theory of Organisational 
Knowledge Creation: Understanding the Dynamic Process of Creating Knowledge, in Handbook of Organizational 
Learning &#38; Knowledge, M. Dierkes, et al., Editors. 2001, Oxford University Press: New York. p. 491­ 
 517. 28. O'Leary, D.E., Enterprise Knowledge Management. IEEE, 1998. March: p. 54-61. 29. Offsey, 
S., Knowledge Management: Linking People to Knowledge for Bottom Line Results. Journal of Knowledge Management, 
1997. 1(2): p. 113 - 122. 30. Rubenstein-Montano, B., J. Liebowitz, J. Buchwalter, D. McCaw, B. Newman 
and K. Rebeck, A systems thinking framework for knowledge management. Decision Support Systems, 2001a. 
31(1): p. 5-16. 31. Rubenstein-Montano, B., J. Liebowitz, J. Buchwalter, D. McCaw, B. Newman and K. 
Rebeck, SMARTVision: a  knowledge management methodology. Journal of Knowledge Management, 2001b. 5(4): 
p. 300-310. 32. SAIC. SAIC's KM Methodology: Implementing an Effective KM Solution. 2009 [cited 2009 
May]; Available from: www.saic.com/km/methodology.html. 33. Smuts, H., A.v.d. Merwe and M. Loock. Key 
characteristics in selecting software tools for knowledge management. in ICEIS 2009. 2009. Milan. 34. 
Stankosky, M., F. Calabrese and C. Baldanza. A Systems Approach to Engineering A Knowledge Management 
System. in 2003 Knowledge Management: Employing Proven Tools for Results. 1999. Washington, DC. 35. 
Sunassee, N.N. and D.A. Sewry. A Theoretical Framework for Knowledge Management Implementation. in Proceedings 
of SAICSIT 2002. 2002. 36. Tiwana, A., The Knowledge Management Toolkit: Practical Techniques for Building 
a Knowledge Management System. 1999, Prentice Hall.  37. Tsai, C.-H. and H.-Y. Chen, Assessing Knowledge 
Management System Success: An Empirical Study in Taiwan's High-tech Industry. Journal of American Academy 
of Business, Cambridge, 2007. 10(2). 38. Vequist, D.G. and M.S. Teachout, A Conceptual System Approach 
for the Relationship between Collaborative Knowledge Management and Human Capital Management.  IEEE, 
2006. 0-9785699-0-3(06): p. 150-156. 39. Wessels, P.L., E. Grobbelaar and A. McGee, Information Systems 
in the South African business environment. Second ed. 2003, Durban: LexisNexis Butterworths. 40. Wilson, 
L.T. and C.A. Snyder, Knowledge Management and IT: how are they related? IT Pro, IEEE, 1999. March / 
April</RefA>.   
			
