
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D. Goldsman A GENERIC SIMULATION PACKAGE FOR ORGANIZING OUTPATIENT CLINICS Ray J. Paul Department of 
Computer Science and Information Systems at St. John s Brunei University, West London Uxbridge, Middlesex 
UB8 3PH, U.K. ABSTRACT A computer based visual simulation model, made up of a complex data input component 
to detine the clinic logistics, and an iconic visual simulation representation to show the effect of 
the policy has been btilt using a variety of commercial application packages. Visual simulation has made 
it possible to show interested parties in hospital outpatient cliiics how the clinic appointment and 
operating policy can influence patient waiting time. The package has been tested at 20 tests sites in 
the United Kingdom (U.K.), and interest is such that further modifications to the system have been proposed. 
A user support cxmtre has been setup to give advice to any outpatient clinic in the U.K. S National Health 
service. INTRODUCTION Hospital out-patient clinics are a typical example of the sorts of organisational 
problems that simulation modelling should be able to handle in health care. In this papa a visual simulation 
modelling approach to this problem is examined. Research by the Centre for Applied Simulation Modelling 
at Brnnel University has led to the investigation of a variety of packages and languages, some of which 
have even been developed by the group itself (Bahner and Paul 1986, Paul 1992, Paul and Hlupic 1994). 
The research group is heavily oriented towards the use of program generators and towards the use of visual 
simulation. Visual simulation is an increasingly wular method of tacklhg simulation problems, but it 
has a variety of difficulties of its own as have been described by Paul (1989). Some idea of the variety 
of simulation packages and approaches that are available are given in the paper by Paul (1991). In this 
paper we shall tirst of alt, in the next section, look at the background to the problem which required 
the development of a visual simulation modelling package called CLINSIM. The following section describes 
the Jasna Kuljis Department of Mathematics and Computing Whitelands College, Roehampton Institute West 
Hill, London SW15 3SN, U.K. features of the CLINSIM package that were required by the customer for the 
system. The tinal section of the paper discusses the future of CLINSIM and the more widespread use of 
such systems in medicine. 2 THE NEEID FOR CLINSIM It has long been recognised that patient waiting times 
in outpatient clinics are inthmously long. In the United Kingdom its recognition has taken place since 
the bii of the National Health Service in 1947, although it was undoubtedly a problem long before that. 
It is probably true to say that patient waiting time in clinics is a world wide problem, with perhaps 
one or two exceptional exceptions. The National Health %-vim in the United Kingdom recognises this as 
a recurring problem which has many political undertones (Thakar and Mdln 1989). It is the sort of problem 
that is likely to generate questions by Members of Parliament in the House of Commons, and then to generate 
questions by the Minister concerned from his civil servants. It is curious that this problem has existed 
for so long, given that there have fist of all keen many attempts at trying to solve it and secondly, 
a fairly well known theory as to how the problem can be solved. The attempts that have been made to solve 
this problem consist of queuing thecry, simulation meddling of a blackbox type, statistical analysis, 
and there have been many investigative studies of a general nature which by and large led to the same 
conclusions. The conclusions which can be generated by these mathematical techniques or common sense 
are, that if one assumes that doctors time is more important than patient waiting times, then clinics 
will be loaded with patients to make sure that doctors do not wait. The second confounding factor is 
the assumption made in making these appointment schedules, that doctors will arrive on time in the cliniq 
and this historically has not been proved to be true. This combination of factors, overloading the clinic 
~at 1043 1044 Paul the beginning of the clinic session and the irregular arrival times of doctors in 
effect causes the problem that this paper is going to look at. The model descxibed in this paper is then, 
@ another attempt at solving a classical problem to which to some extent the solution is already known. 
Because we know the solution, this attempt is kased around a general purpose Vkual Simulation Model. 
The idea behind this approach, is that such a model could be used to show consultants and administratcm 
why they have the problems they do have with waiting tim~ and how these problems might be resolved. In 
or~ to make this simtdatkm model general pup% so that it can be taken aroun~ distributed and shown to 
as many people in the National Health Service in the UK as possibl~ the specification required that it 
be IW based because this is the machine that is most likely to be available. Secondly, that the visual 
representation should be an iconic representation, so that non computer specialists could understand 
what the simulation rnodelhg is trying to do. Thirdly, that the model should be of a general purpme, 
data driven construction, so that in theory any hospital clinic could be modelled by this general purpose 
model. If one thinks about the structure of a hospital out-patient clinic it is in fa~ in queuing or 
flow terms, t%ly simple. Patients arrive, they check in with the receptionis~ they may have some pre-consuhation 
tests, they wait for a doctor, they have a consultation, they check out again to lxxk their next appointment 
time, then they leave. This dees not appear at fist sight to be a very difficult problem and therefore 
at its inception it was handed to a student as a three month projecL In a sense, this student discovered 
that the project had an iceberg hidden depth which he was not able to handle. The second attempt at this 
projed was by a small soitware company who were Pascal experts, and who constructed a model in that language. 
This attempt Wed because again, whilst it may appar that the problem to be modelled is relatively straight 
forwara the complexity of trying to build a general purpose structure inevitably meant that the development 
of the model by this company could not handle the changes of ttnderstanding that took place during mcdel 
development. So several years after the project inception, a third attempt was made to build this model, 
and this attempt is what is being desaibed in this Paper. ~ilst tie development of this model was late, 
typical of many sotlware developments you may thiti one has to bear in mind that its lateness is not 
the lateness of the third attemp~ but the lateness of the project overall, which was now some five to 
six years behind.  3 CLINSIM FEATURES Whilst the model was des@ed to be general purpose in construction, 
one obviously had to limit to some extent the numbex of objects that might be in the system so that the 
and Kuljis screen could be ckxigned to handle a mnge of clinics. It was decided that most clinics would 
have at most six doctors, so the model was designed to enable thereto be between one and six doctors. 
It was decided that there would be up to two receptionists, and if there were a second receptionist this 
second receptionist would specialise in handling missing case notes only. Missing case notes are a recurring 
problem in United Kingdom hospitals, and the specirdist time in searching for them is considered to he 
an important design characteristic of a clinic. Pre-constdtation tests, such as urine samples and blood 
tests, are handled by between zero and three test groups. In other words, there could be no pre-consultation 
tests or there could lx up to three test rooms in parallel. Figure 1 shows a snapshot of the CLINSIM 
model, illustrating a typical hospital outpatient clinic configuration. The clinic itself could be considered 
to have a variety of times related to the startj end and shutting of the clinic. But it has to be borne 
in mind that the start time is not the start time in the cliniq the end time is not the end time of the 
cliniq and the time when the clinic shuts is not when the clinic shuts. These remarkable descriptions 
are best understood by explaining that the clinic start time might be nine o clock in the morning, for 
example, but that this does not stop patients who are eager to be on time arriving befwe the start time. 
It maybe officially designated that the clinic will end at twelve o clock, but of course the patients 
that are in the clinic will still be seen even if they are there after the offkid end time. It may be 
decided that the clinic will be physically locked at a certain time to stop more patients arriving, but 
still the clinic is not shut since there are still patients locked inside who are going to be served 
before the clinic a end. Patient behaviour has a similar variable pattern almut it. Appointment time 
in United Kingdom clinics is now detined as the time at which the patient is due to see the doctor. In 
order that the patient might know when to actually appear in the cliniq they are given a presentation 
tire% which is some constant time in advance of the appointment time, This constant time is supposed 
to allow for delays in the system in queuing, seeing the receptionist and being handled by pre-consultation 
tests where these exist. In any event there is another time to be considered when thinking of patients, 
which is the patient arrival time, which has nothing to do with the presentation time or appointment 
time, and more to do with patient anxiety about being sure they are on time at all. Patients themselves 
can be categorised in four different ways. They can either be new patients to the system or re-attenders, 
and they can also be either hospital transport patients or non-hospital transport patients who come by 
their own transport. There is a fifth unplanned category, the extras , who turn up with no appointment 
at all! Simulation for Organizing Outpatient Clinics Doctor behaviour similarly has a variety of patients 
over re-iattenders, and therefcze they may search characteristics. The arrival time of the doctor in 
the system the queue to a certain depth, looking for a new patient. If can have an official time, and 
then there is of course the there are no new patients within a certain number of places time when the 
doetcx actually turns up. The doctor will in the queue, they may then take the first re-attender frem 
handle the patients in a variety of ways. One might the hut of the queue. Another feature of this general 
anticipate that the chief consultant will be more likely to see feature package is that since one cannot 
anticipate what mos~ if not all, of the new patients, and less senior doctors question will be asked 
when the model has been run, it will see a decreasing proportion of new patients, so that the follows 
that the output from the model has to be very most junior doctor may only see the re-attenders. The vari@ 
to try and attempt to answer any sort of question. consultation times for these doctors and patients 
could vary, The stochastic aspects of the model, as applied to all therefcre, according to the eharaeter 
of the patients and of sampled times described above, can be handled by selecting ,. ,,, . . . , . . 
. . ,, B @i Rtie :. < ., , ,. ... ,, , ,,, ... . . . . ,,, :4, , ..; *. , 4 ,  :.. . ., ,, ,, 
,,. . .,, ,.. ., ,,, ., . . . . . . .,. ., n  , m Figure 1: An Example of the Visual Running of the 
Model the doctors. Queuing khavionr in the system is by and one of six common statistical distributions 
with their large the well known British f~st in fwst out system. This is parameters, or from histogram 
data supplied by the user. true except for the queue of patients for consultation. Fiist The package, 
whose visuat display is shown in Figure 1 of all, the queue itself is sorted according to whether m not 
was built using a dBase IV data input interface combined the patient has arrived on time for his or her 
appointment to with Pascal routines for generating appointment schedules. see the doctor. There are a 
variety of ways of handling this The simulation part of the package was txdlt using in the clinic itself, 
so that the user of the model can penalise SIMSCRIPT 11,,5, primarily kecause of the excellent patients 
for beiig late in a variety of different ways. Even graphics of the simulation package. The two application 
so, having sorted the queue in one way or another, the paekagcs, dBase IV and SIMSCRIPT 11.5 were -bln~~ 
dector does not have to select tkom the liont of the queue. using a simple menuing environment known 
as Automenu, The doctors may elect to give some sort of priority to new which gives the impression of 
a seamless package. The 1046 Paul and Kuljis reasons for using this packaged approach to developing the 
model were several. l%st of all, in spite of the previous attempts to build this model, the docmnentation 
laying out the needs of the model were still more of a requirement than a specification. A specification 
would explain exactly what the model should do at any decision point and exactly the sorts of output 
required and how it should be displayed. To some extent these specifications were going to be determined 
by trial and error during the development of the model. Therefore a package approach had been determin~ 
because the environment in which the development was taking place was thirly dynamic. It was thought 
that a package approach would be more able to handle changes in the requiremen~ or changes in the specification, 
than trying to develop a suitable architecture in a high level programming language from scratch. dBase 
IV was selected for the data input part of the package because of the theoretically widely available 
expertise in this particular language. It turned out that our particular use of dBase IV, which was the 
Application Generator, was not widely used at all, and this caused a variety of problems in its own right. 
Further details concerning the development of CLINSIM are given by Kuljis et al. (1990) and Kuljis and 
Paul (1991).  4 THE FUTURE FOR CLINSIM CLINSIM has been tested at 20 test sites throughout the UK. Results 
show that the model can b used to create current clinic conditions, a powerfid validation test. There 
is sufficient enthusiasm fw the system to suggest that moditbtions to the system are worthy of the expense 
(early results suggest that health service administrators see some benefits of the system). An independent 
repcrt written for the Department of Health (Hall 1993) canes to the following conclusion. In summary, 
CLINSIM is not the only method of assessing the effi of changes in outpatient clinic managemen~ but it 
is probably the most appropriate. The system will be offered for general release with appropriate support 
tkom the CLINSIM Centre (Hall 1994). Examples of potential modifications are for doctors to have to leave 
the clinic during a session to attend an emergency, and for a doctor s clinic session to end at some 
predetermined time prior to the official clinic end time. Further details concerning the use of CLINSIM 
can be fcxmd from the Department of Health, whose address is given in the references. Further information 
concerning this form of modelting can be obtained lkom the authors. One of the problems associated with 
the development of systems lie CLINSIM is the development time. CLINSIM is designed to form a vehicle 
fm debate amongst those responsible for running clinics. Therefore, the s~tcm has to second guess the 
nature of this debate prior to the debate having taken place. This meant that the contents of the system 
evolved with the development of the system, and ccndd not be predetermined as one would like in crder 
to make the proctss easier and quicker. The architecture of CLINSIM therefore had to be fairly robust 
to changing user requirements and to requirements interpretation whilst developing. Experience in this 
type of development does assist in making the exercise feasible. Many business and policy matters stier 
tiom a lack of common understanding by the stake-holders in a problem. The organisation of health care 
is no less alllicted by this problem. Visual modelling is one opportunity for providing some common ground 
for debate. As long as the participants in the debate do not coniime such meddling with decision making 
(the model does not give answers to problems it merely reflects the possible outcome for the set of conditions 
and assumptions that are built into the model run), then the debate can progress to some conclusion drawn 
by, and acceptable to, the debaters. REFERENCES <RefA>Bahner, D.W., and RJ. Paul. 1986. CASM -The Right Environment 
fcr Simulation. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 37:443-452. Kuljis, J., RJ. Paul, H. Malin, 
and S. Thakar. 1990. Des@ing an Out-patient Clinic Modelling Package. In Proceedings of the 12th Internutionul 
Symposium on Computer at the UniversiQ, 6.3.1-6.3.7. University Computer Centre, Zagreb. Kuljis, J., 
and R.J. Paul. 1991. Human-Computer Intmfaces for Mcdellhg Systems. In Proceedings of the XIII International 
Conference on Infort@ion Technoibgy hterjhces, 401-407, University Computer Centre, Zagreb. CLINSIM, 
Operational Research Service, Department of Health, 80 London RoaG Elephant and Castle, London SE1, U.K. 
Hall, J. 1993. CLINSIM St@ Final Report. Hoskyns @ll.lp, London. Hall, J. 1994. Z% CZ.INSIM Cenlre. The 
Uniccrn Trading Partnership, Copsham House, Broad Str@ Chesham, Bucks. Paul, R. J. 1989. Visual Simulation: 
Seeing is Believing. In Impacts of Recent Computer Advances on Operations Research, Publications in Operations 
Research Series (R. Shara B.L. Golden, E. Wasil, O. Balci, and W. Stewam Eds.) North-HollanQ New York. 
9:422-432. Paul, R J. 1991. Recent Developments in Simulation Modelling: A Review. Jourtud of the OpertUional 
Research Sociery, 42217-226. Paul, RJ. 1992. The Computer Aided Simulation Meddling Environment An Overview. 
h Proceedings of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. J Swain and D. Gainsman, 737-746. Aswciation 
for Computing Machinery, New York. Simulation for Organizing Paul, R J., and V. Hlupic. 1994. The CASM 
Envimoment Revisited. In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivarman, 
D. A. Sadowski and A. F. Seti 641-648. Association for Computing Machinery, New York. Thakar, S., and 
H. Malin. 1989. Reducing Waiting Time in Out-Patient Depamnents: Stra$egy and Tmtics. Technical Report 
0W1186, DHSS Operational Research Services, London.</RefA> AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES RAY J. PAUL holds the first U.K. 
Chair in Simulation Modelling at Brunei University. He previously taught Information Systems and Operational 
Research at the London School of Economics. He received a B. SC. in Mathematics, and a M. SC. and a Ph.D. 
in Operational Research from Hull University. He has published widely in book and paper form (two books, 
over 80 papers in journals, books and conference proceedings), mainly in the areas of the simulation 
modelling process and in software environments fcx simulation meddling. He has acted as a consultant 
for a variety of United Kingdom government departments, software companies, and commercial companies 
in the tobacco and oil industries. His research interests are in methods of automating the process of 
discrete event simulation modelling, and the general applicability of such methods and their extensions 
to the wider arena of inf-ation systems. Recent research results have been in automatic code generation, 
colour graphics modelling interfaces, dynamically driven icon representations of simulation models, machine 
learning applied to output analysis, object oriented approaches, and information systems paradigms. He 
is the Directm of the Centre of Applied Simulation Modelling, which consists of four faculty and a dozen 
research students. He has recently instituted the first M. SC. in Mrnulatkm Modelling, a one year course 
starting in Octokr each year at Brunei University. He is currently the Head of the Department of Computer 
Science and Information Systems at St. John s, Brunei University, West London, United Kingdom. JASNA 
KULJIS is a Senior Lecturer in Computing at the Roehampton Institute. She has a B.SC.in Mathematics horn 
Zagreb University, an M.S. in Information Science from Pittsburgh University and a Ph.D. in Information 
Systems from the London School of Economics. She is currently researching into human-computer interfaces 
K) modelling systems, having previously spent over a decade as a researcher, consultant and teacher at 
the University of Zagreb Computer Centre. She has published widely in many aspecls of computing, and 
has undertaken consultancy fcr a variety of government agencies and Outpatient Clinics companies in 
Croatia as well as for the Department of Health in the United Kingdom. 
			
