
 A GENERALIZED SYSTEM FOR UNIVERSITY MATHEMATICS INSTRUCTION by Robert L. Smith and Lee H. Blaine Institute 
for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences Stanford University Introduction EXCHECK is a system 
for developing mathematically-based CAI courses. It is currently being used at Stanford University to 
teach a college-credit course in axiomatic set theory (Philosophy 161). New courses now under development 
include proof theory and the foundations of probability. EXCHECK includes facilities for defining the 
language of the theory as well as the curriculum material. Students interact with the EXCHECK proof checker, 
which accepts proofs presented in a style comparable to standard mathematical practice. Previous proof 
checkers have required that the student's proof be presented as a derivation in a primitive formal system. 
This paper describes the system's instructional uses. (I) The design of this system had several goals. 
First, we wanted an instructional system that would provide a semantic base for our work on processin~ 
natural language and computer-generated audio. Axiomatic mathematics fits this description in that the 
underlying semantics is relatively well understood, but many of the interesting problems of natural language 
are also involved in the informal language of mathematics and the informal expression of mathematical 
proofs. Second, we recognized that traditional proof checkers were inadequate for teaching mathematics, 
or for that matter, introductory logic. People understand mathematical concepts and arguments at a level 
much higher than the traditional formal systems of mathematical logic. Finally, we designed the EXCHECK 
system to be an extensible system in which other curricula could be implemented with incrementally less 
work. (I) We would like to thank Professor Patrick Suppes for his general direction of this project. 
Also we thank M. Hinckley, J. McDonald, V. Marinov,  H. Graves, D. Ferris, P. Oppenheimer, and J. Prebus 
for their assistance. The research reported here was supported by the National Science Foundation under 
NSF Grant EPP 74-15016, A01.  (2) See Van Lehn, 1973 and R. Smith, 1975.  (3) See Quam, 1967 and Wolpert, 
1975.   This design is currently being tested and we will subsequently report on whether or not we 
have been successful. 2 Authoring ~ Mathematics Curriculum for EXCHECK Designing an author language 
that can be used by subject-matter specialists to produce courseware is a classical problem of computer-assisted 
instruction. Many authoring systems "solve" this problem by offering the user computationally inferior 
programming languages in which it is difficult if not impossible to program something as complex as a 
proof checker. EXCHECK, which is written in two hi~h-level programmin~ languages originally intended 
for artificial-intelligence research (SAIL (2) and LISP (3)) and runs on the IMSSS PDPI0/TENEX timesharing 
system, does not have such limitations. Several specialized processors are associated with the proof 
checker, and these processors are used by the curriculum authors for specifying the mathematical theories 
and curriculums in a machine-independent manner. A curriculum for EXCHECK is prepared and maintained 
by a curriculum author. Our authors have been professors and graduate students in philosophy rather than 
professional programmers. 2.1 The Languages for Mathematics Used by EXCHECK The author must first characterize 
the language of the mathematical theory in question. Currently, the author writes a context-free grammar 
for the language, including macro templates that show how to build the internal representation from the 
parse of a given sentence of the theory. This system is described in N. Smith, 1974. Table I gives a 
selection of the formal and informal sentences of set theory that are recognized by our grammar for set 
theory, which has about 500 context-free rules. To facilitate use in other theories, such as probability 
theory, the set theory grammar is modularized. Using a context-free language, it is easy to define fragments 
of mathematical languages in which the scopes of operators are well defined. For example, the sentence 
 For all x,y if x is a set and y is a set then For all z, z is in x if and only if z is in y is quite 
easily parsed by a context-free language. The more comprehensible paraphrase Two sets are equal just 
in case they have the same elements presents, for the current systems of natural language understanding, 
certain difficulties that form one of our research problems. (4) The program associated with the definition 
of this language, CONSTRUCT, can then be used to test and examine the grammar interactively at a display 
 terminal, and produce a compiled version of the grammar for inclusion in other programs of the system. 
Table I The Language for Set Theory as Recognized by the EXCHECK Grammar In the following we give several 
formulas of set theory, labelled Formal, and equivalent English-like expressions, labelled Informal, 
that are recognized by the EXCHECK grammar. The expressions labelled Paraphrase are not currently recognized 
or generated by EXCHECK, but represent more readable versions of these sentences. Formal (A x)(E y)(x 
sub y) Informal For every x there is a y such that x is a subset of y Paraphrase Everything is a subset 
of something Formal Function(F) &#38; F:A -> B Informal F is a function and F maps A into B Paraphrase 
Function F maps A into B Formal {x : x neq x} = O Informal The set of all x such that x is not equal 
to x is empty ~araphrase The set of those things not equal to themselves is empty Formal (A A)[Dinfinite(A) 
IFF (E C)(C psub A &#38; C := A)] (4) See Smith and Rawson, ~ multi-processing approach to natural language, 
forthcoming, for a description of our current work in handling the complex scopes of natural language 
operators. Informal For all A, A is Dedekind-infinite just in case there is a C such that C is a 
proper subset of A and C is equipollent to A Paraphrase A set is Dedekind-infinite just in case it 
has a proper subset eeuipollent to itself. 2.2 Definin~ the Theory After givin~ the language of the 
theory, the curriculum author can state the axioms, definitions and theorems of the mathematical theory. 
For example, the definition of the notion of subset: For all x,y [x is a subset of y if and only if 
For all z, if z is in x then z is in y] Another processor, the theory executive (THRYEX), then interactively 
checks the definitions that the author has given, compiling a binary version that can be read with random-access 
when the student uses the system. The current set theory system contains over 500 theorems. This is actually 
too many as evidenced by the fact~that only about 100 theorems were used by the students who took the 
set theory course in the spring quarter of 1975. 2.3 Curriculum Text The curriculum itself is prepared 
using the mathematics executive (MATHEX) program. This is an interactive program that accepts student 
exercises and text material, checkin~ for errors and allowing on-line correction. MATHEX produces a list 
of exercises for the program as well as a curriculum text. The curriculum text is processed automatically 
by a text justification system (5) to produce a hard-copy version for the students. The student uses 
the computer terminal mostly for the construction of proofs. Very little presentation of text material 
is done at the terminal, and only a few "multiple choice"-type questions are given. The computer is being 
used primarily as a proof-checking laboratory, not for presenting simple facts. The hard-copy text itself 
is over 200 pages which, while coordinated to the computer exercises, is written in a traditional style 
similar to Suppes, 1972, upon which it is based. 3 The Runtime System The program the student sees, 
EXCHECK, contains the bulk of our research effort. This system is actually two separate programs, one 
written in SAIL and the other in LISP, communicating by means of the multiple-process ("fork") facilities 
of the TENEX timesharing system. Together these programs require about 250,000 words of paged PDPI0 memory. 
Figure 2 (5) PUB Tesler, 1972. shows a conceptual chart of the components of EXCHECK. 3.1 Dialog with 
the Student The input system contains a context-free parser, initialized to the language defined by 
the curriculum author as described above. There are also command editing facilities, command name recognition, 
and automatic command defaulting. For example, suppose the student wishes to specify for the variables 
in a quantified expression, usin~ the SPECIFICATION command. The followin~ dialogue shows how this might 
be done. (i) For all a,b there is c such that for all bl if bl < a &#38; bl > b then c <a &#38;c > 
bVc = bl *IspecIFICATION [Here the student typed enough of the command name to cause the entire command 
to be recognized.] Do you want to specify for (A a,b) *$ Variables *$a,b [The command processor accepts 
the ENTER key as requesting that the program find the obvious thing to do at that point. This particularly 
saves typing in substitution sequences where there is an obvious "guess". We use $ to represent a typing 
of the ENTER key by the student. In the immediately preceding interaction, the program asked the student 
which variables he wanted specified. The student typed the ENTER key without naming any variables, thus 
signaling the program that he wished the default list of variables. The program computes the default 
list of variables and prints it out so that the student will know what value is being used; in this case 
the variables are ~ and ~.] Substitute for a *$a Substitute for b *$b Do you want to specify for (E 
c) *$ Ambiguous name for c *$c Do you want to specify for (A bl) *$ Substitute for bl *$bi I SPECIFICATION 
Substitute b for b, a for a; c for c; bl for bl (2) If bl < a &#38; bl > b then c < a&#38;c > bV c = 
bl [The program prints out the result.] The SPECIFICATION command, though reasonably simple, illustrates 
the combination of heuristics and logic that is typical of EXCHECK. The heuristics help to determine 
what is a plausible next step in the current command, and the logical routines certify that the step 
is correct logically. Also, since it is important not to generate frustrating syntactic errors when there 
is a charitable interpretation of the student's command, the command evaluation functions try to make 
plausible matches for the student's input. For example, we avoid ~enerating syntax errors when the order 
of arguments is different from that ~iven in the manual, in those cases where changin~ the order ~ives 
a correct application. 3.2 Output System The output system includes functions for printing the steps 
of the student's proof in readable form, plus reviewing various parts of the proof. The students work 
on hi~h-speed displays; EXCHECK uses a split-screen so that the student can place a portion of his proof 
in semi-permanent display at the top of the screen, while dialog with EXCHECK scrolls at the bottom. 
 The history component maintains a profile of the student concerning his location in the exercises, and 
saves partially completed proofs for the student, so that the construction of a proof can extend over 
several sessions. Completed proofs are listed on a high-speed printer and delivered to the students, 
since we want them to have copies of the work they do on the display terminals. Complete data collection 
for analysis is also done. We have found that it is best to save data in several different layers of 
detail so that the simplest kinds of data analysis will be easily performed, but it will still be possible 
to perform more complete analysis. The curriculum driver component supervises the presentation of exercises 
to the student. Although the driver contains routines for text presentation and answer judging, this 
is not an important component in our application. 3.3 Proof Checker The EXCHECK proof checker (see 
Figure I) is a general purpose proof checker for many-sorted theories. In direct opposition to earlier 
proof checkers EXCHECK does not require proofs to be expressed as derivations in a standard formal system 
for first-order logic. The design philosophy of EXCHECK is to accept a sequence of statements as a proof 
of the last statement if each statement in the sequence either can be seen to be true in the theory under 
consideration or can be seen to be a consequence --in the theory under consideration --of previous statements 
in the sequence. Note that there is no ~ priori restriction of methods --either for determining that 
a statement is true in the theory under consideration or for determining that a statement is a consequence 
of prior statements. Also, there are no "stored proofs" associated with the curriculum. Hence, the student 
can present whatever proof he can find and understand. Earlier checkers (for both instructional and 
general applications) required that proofs be expressed as derivations in a standard elementary formal 
system for first-order logic. This involves two rather severe restrictions neither of which is plausible 
when considered in the light of mathematical practice. The first major restriction is to pure first 
order logic. This in turn involves two restrictions: I) The only way to show that a statement is true 
in the theory under consideration is to give a first order derivation of it from the axioms and previous 
theorems (instead of using decision procedures and calculations where appropriate); 2) ConseQuence in 
these earlier checkers is restricted to first order logical consequence rather than consequence in the 
theory under consideration. The second restriction is to elementary formal systems. In these systems 
the logical inferences allowed by the rules are far too small to be used for checking naturally occurring 
proofs. One of our major research goals is the development of methods which allow the user to express 
his proofs in standard mathematical style. Part of this is the development of natural inference procedures 
--natural in the sense that they justify the inferential steps actually made in standard mathematics. 
 In standard mathematical practice the details are not explicitly handled --and for a good reason: detail 
simply gets in the way of understanding. Usually left implicit are: I) References to logically necessary 
previous results -- axioms, definitions, and theorems, or procedures. 2) References to inference rules 
or procedures --in particular logical detail is almost never done explicitly. As an example of the latter 
consider this example from Suppes, 1972 p. 35: [Suppose there were a y such that] y is in {x: x is 
not equal to x} Then by Theorem 47 y is not equal to y Theorem 47, mentioned above, is the theorem 
of concretion, which states for any formula FM, for each z, if z is in {x: FM(x)}, then FM(z) Such 
inferences are common in mathematics --giving as a justification for an inference that it follows "by" 
applying or using a previous result. Part of our problem is to analyze such inferences and to develop 
procedures adequate for their expression. This divides roughly (certainly not cleanly) into a logical 
(proof-theoretic) component and a linguistic component. The proof-theoretic component provides the actual 
inference procedures and the linguistic component interprets from the actual expression of the inference 
and its context in the proof into explicit procedure calls to be evaluated. For example, for the above 
inference the most likely explicit procedure call in EXCHECK is to a procedure called IMPLIES, which 
applies a previous result to a line or lines of the proof. Thus, one would have the following command 
sequence (with student input underlined): WP (I) ~ i_~s i_~_n ~x: ~ i~s not equal t_~o x} IthSEOREM 
*47 (2) y is not equal to y Doin~ this inference completely (in the sense of doing the details that 
are left implicit) involves a considerable amount of proof checking machinery. We should add that in 
the current version of the program we are not attempting to deal with elliptic references to previous 
results. There is a clear adequacy condition for such natural inference procedures, namely, are they 
adequate to express natural (preexisting) inferences, i.e., are they strong enough to justify the inferences 
actually made? To test adequacy one takes, as we have done above, the statements of the preexisting (textbook) 
proof and cites the natural inference procedures as justification. In the above, we used our IMPLIES 
procedure to justify the inference. If the procedures justify the inferences taken, then they are adequate 
for natural inference in the corpus under study. There is as yet no mathematical characterization of 
natural inference, and hence testing of procedures for natural inference will have to be case studies 
as above. Also, procedures adequate for one mathematical theory will not in general be'adequate for another. 
 3.4 Further Extensions of the Proof Checker Currently the proof checker is limited to employing inference 
procedures only after the premises of the inference have been established -- e.g., induction theorems 
are applied only after the basis case and the induction cases have been established. This means that 
the user must attend to detail --such as writing out the induction hypothesis --which the program could 
easily handle if the user could specify beforehand which inference procedure he intended to use. To 
continue with the induction example, if the user specified the form of induction to be used, and if necessary 
what he is doing induction on, the program could easily take care of all of the details, setting up the 
induction hypothesis and the induction cases, with the user ~illing in only the "essential details". 
We have used induction as an example because of its familiarity, but the phenomenon is a general one. 
Almost every proof procedure can be applied this way, with a substantial savings of effort on the part 
of the user. Work is currently underway to extend EXCHECK to work in this fashion and more generally 
as an interactive theorem prover. Hence, we intend to have available a number of proof procedures, 
heuristic theorem proving algorithms, and special purpose algorithms (such as BOOLE, the decision method 
we designed and implemented for class algebra). Again this is in keeping with standard mathematical practice: 
people learn a variety of these proof procedures, which then form a part of the common background and 
are implicitly referenced in the proofs. Proofs can then be presented by giving a sketch of the proof 
(or even: the "idea behind the proof" or "essential steps") and the hearer can then use the common base 
of procedures to construct the full proof. Student Usage of EXCHECK The EXCHECK system was used during 
the 1974-75 school year to teach axiomatic set theory to Stanford students. In the spring quarter of 
1975, eight students completed the course. The analysis of the data collected from those students, which 
we summarize here, will be detailed in a forthcoming technical report. The students were given grades 
on the basis of preassigned standards of completed material -- theorems that they had to prove. Five 
students received a grade of A, one B, and two PASS grades. The amount of time spent at the terminal 
varied from a high of 84 hours to a low of 32, with a mean of 50.8 hours and a standard deviation of 
21.1. Individual variations in work styles accounted for much of the variability. For example, $5 (student 
number 5), who worked 84 hours at the terminal, did most of his studying for the course interactively, 
reading his text and trying things out with the proof checker. Other students would enter the computer 
classroom with a completed proof written out. The average number of proofs done was 52.6, with student 
$7 doing the minimum of 41 and student $5 (who did most of his studying at the terminal) doing the high 
of 65. 4.1 Student Use of Inference Rules With only eight students in the course last spring, the data 
is of limited significance. However, we had the following main hypothesis about the use of the rules 
of inference: students who did better in the course would tend to use high-level rules of inference, 
and students who did rather poorly would tend break up these inferences into smaller steps, using rules 
elementary rules. These rules are available in the checker, but not emphasized in the instruction. This 
hypothesis has not been disconfirmed in the data. For example, student $4, who received a grade of PASS, 
tended to avoid using the rules that we intuitively thought of as "high-level", and instead used the 
"low-level" rules most frequently. On the other hand, student $6 who received a grade of A+, generally 
had the opposite pattern. A few of these data are shown in Table 2 below. TABLE 2 Usage of Rules by 
Student $4 and $6 "High-level" Rules Rule Use by $4 Use by $6 Average over 8 students IMPLIES and 
 RIMPLIES together 26 204 150.25 Application of a theorem in VERIFY rule 52 74 100.88 Application of 
 a definition in VERIFY rule 17 92 62.88 Two rules for equality replacement (RE and RER) 4 30 43.51 
TAUTOLOGY 5 18 14.38 BOOLE 5 12 8.63 RF (Replace Formula) 5 19 9.75 "Low-Level" Rules AA (a logical 
rule for elimination of the logical implication symbol) 67 21 30.63 DIFF (another logical rule) 48 
5 8.25 The data thus far do not disconfirm our priori beliefs about the importance of the computationally 
complex rules. It is interesting to note that some computationally simple rules, especially those for 
manipulating conjunctions, were clustered with the higher-level rules in terms of usage. In examining 
the actual student proofs from the spring quarter (1975), we discovered that the conjunction rules were 
being used as auxiliaries to the IMPLIES rule. We have since modified the IMPLIES rule to incorporate 
these uses of the conjunction rules. 5 Future Extensions Our main research interest is to study the 
role of natural language and computer-generated audio in the context of the EXCHECK system. Informal 
mathematical reasoning is an example, in a relatively structured domain, of complex dialogues about semantically 
rich objects. Informal proofs, as given in classrooms and textbooks, are highly linguistic in character 
in that the fragment of English used exploits the ability of natural language to provide stress, ellipsis, 
pronominal reference, and so on, to produce readable and convincing proofs. Now that EXCHECK is operation~l 
for Stanford students and several additional curricula are being implemented, we are concentrating our 
efforts on developing computer models of the expression of mathematical arguments. STUDENT at the Terminal 
TEACH ING AS S ISTANT  Proof Data Lexical Information Generated Proof Procedures CURRICULUM: Axioms, 
Theorems, Definitions Input System Context-free Parser PROOF CHECKER Output System Output Grammar Display 
Functions 1, History and Student Context Support Curriculum Driver  CURRICUrUM: Lesson Text Exercises 
 Figure 1. EXCHECE instructional system. Command Parser Evaluator for Commands Axioms, Theorems, and 
Definitions l  High-levelTheorem Prover Rules of Inference (e.g., Implies, Tautology) l  Pattern MatchingLow-level 
Rules Substitution Procedures Resolution Theorem Prover (fork) Tautology Checker Decision Methods  
(e. g., Boole) Decision Procedures (e. g., Boole) Figure 2. EXCHECK proof checker. 285 Figure 3 shows 
a proof from an advanced part the ability to accept heuristics and strategies for of set theory, the 
theory of ordinal numbers. It is a proof by induction over the ordinals. The commands of the current 
checker are sufficiently powerful to make the proof of manageable size, but the structure of the proof 
is not perspicuous. Figure 4 shows an analysis of the structure of the proof in Figure 3, generated 
by a program we have developed. Notice that the structure has been made clear by finding the important 
parts of the proof, and printing out the relationship of those parts. We are incorporating this proof 
analysis program into EXCHECK, as a part of a routine to summarize and explain the parts of a student's 
developing proof. The explanation will combine graphic display with computer-generated audio. Underlying 
this effort to explain and summarize the proof is a search for a better language for expressing the proof. 
This summarizing should involve a theory of the significant structure of the proof --what has to be said 
and what can be left unsaid. We believe that this theory will be formulated in terms of a basis of strategies 
for doinc proofs. For the proof in Figures 3 and 4, this would amount to saying that the proof is an 
induction on M(b). This is the usual information for doing this proof, and it would be expected that 
the program and/or student would have the capacity to set up a proof by induction. Instructional Uses 
of EXCHECK We envision a system for mathematics instruction that can help the student understand and 
construct a complex and informal mathematical proof. With EXCHECK, it is possible for the student to 
present proofs informally and naturally, but have the program check for correctness as the proof progresses. 
 There are, of course, totally different approaches to teachinc mathematics with a computer, and most 
of these are not axiomatic at all. A common approach is to provide the student with a simple but powerful 
programminc language, such as LOGO (Feurzig et al., 1969), and encourage him to write interactive programs 
that manipulate displays, TURTLE-type devices, and so on. We see this as a valid approach, but not as 
a substitute for teaching inferential reasoning and proof construction in the manner of EXCHECK. There 
are also implications for the instructional staff. Teaching assistants have remarked to us that they 
have more opportunity to interact directly with students in this context since the computer is handling 
the rote grading of the "homework". We also have the goal of advising and helping the student with the 
computer, both in terms of particular problems (when he needs "help"), and in terms of general structural 
comments about how to express what the student wants to say. Before this will be possible in any serious 
way, it is necessary for the program to have a general model of mathematical reasoning in terms of the 
semantic and linguistic components involved, combined with the theory at hand. Derive: Lim(a) &#38; 
b > 0 -> Lim(a . b) WP (I) Lim(a) ABBREVIATION (2) M(d) <-> d > 0 -> Lim(a . d) VERIFY Using: Df. Greater, 
Th. 5.1.18 (3) M(O) WP (4) M(al) WP (5) a1" > O VERIFY Using: Df. Otimes (6) a . a1" = a . al รท a I 
VERIFY Using: Th. 5.4.10  (7) Lim(a . al + a) 7,6 RER I  (8) Lim(a . a1") 5,8 CP (9) M(a1") 4,9 CP 
(10) M(al) -> M(a1") 10 UG (11) (A al)(M(al) -> M(a1")) we (12) Lim(c) &#38; ~A b)(b > c -> M(b)) we 
(13) c > 0 I VERIFY Using: Df. Limit ordinal, Th. 5.1.13,  Df. Greater, Df. Less (14) a > 0 12,14 
IMPLIES Using: Th. 5.4.20  (15) Lim(a . c) 13,15 CP  (16) M(c) 12,16 CP (17) Lim(c) &#38; (A b)(b 
> c -> M(b)) -> M(c) 17 UG (18) (A c)(Lim(c) &#38; (A b)(b > c -> M(b)) -> M(c)) 17UG (18) For all c, 
If Lim(c) &#38; (A b)(b > c -> M(b)) then M(c) 3,11,18 IMPLIES Using: Th. T3-induction (19) (A a2)M(a2) 
19 US b for a2  (20) M(b) 1,20 CP  (21) Lim(a) -> M(b) 21 TAUTOLOGY  (22) Lim(a) &#38; b > 0 -> Lim(a 
. b) *** QED ***  Figure 3 Proof of a Theorem from Ordinal Number Theory Prove: Lim(a) &#38; b > O 
-> Lim(a . b) Abbreviation M(d) <-> d > 0 -> Lim(a . d) Show: Lim(a) &#38; b > 0 -> Lim(a . b) By tautology 
 Show: Lim(a) -> M(b) By conditional proof I .................... IShow: M(b) I Using Th. T3-induction 
 I .................... Show: M(O) By logic Using Th. 5.1.18, Df. Greater Show: (A al)(M(al) -> M(a1")) 
By conditional proof I Th. 5.4.10 I Df. Otimes Show: For all c, If Lim(c) &#38; (A b)(b > c -> M(b)) 
then M(c) By conditional proof Th. 5.4.20 Df. Limit ordinal Th. 5.1.23 , Df. Greater i , Df. Less 
i I .................... I .................... Figure 4 Program Generated Graphic Analysis of a Proof 
of the Limit Ordinal Theorem References <RefA>I. Feurzig, W., Papert, S., Bloom, M., Grant, R., &#38; Solomon, 
C. Programming languages as a conceptual framework for teaching mathematics (Report 1889). Boston: Bolt 
Beranek, &#38; Newman, 1969. 2. Quam, L.H., &#38; Diffie, W. Stanford LISP 1.6 Manual (Operating Note 
28.6). Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Stanford University, 1967.  3. 
Smith, N. W. ~ question-answering system for elementar F mathematics (Tech. Rep. 227). Stanford, Calif.: 
Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University, 1974.  4. Smith, R.L. 
TENEX SAIL (Tech. Rep. 248). Stanford, Calif.: Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, 
Stanford University, 1975.  5. Suppes, Patrick. Axiomatic Set Theory, Dover Publications, New York, 
1972.  6. Tesler, L. PUB: The document compiler, Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Operating 
Note 70, September, 1972.  7. Van Lehn, K. SAIL users manual (Artificial Intelligence Memo 204). Stanford, 
Calif.: Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Stanford University, 1973.  8. Wolpert, T. M. TENEX 
UCI-LISP. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, 1975.  </RefA>
			
