
 Proceedings of the 199.2 Winter Simulation Conference eel. .7. J. Swain, D. Golclsman, R. C. Crain, 
and .7. R. Wilson A MONTE CARLO BASED SIMULATION NETWORK MODEL FOR A CHRONIC PROGRESSIVE DISEASE: THE 
CASE OF DIABETIC RETINOPATHY Joseph K. Canner, M.H.S. Yen-Pin Chiang, M.A. Jonathan C. Javitt, M. D., 
M.P.H. Worthen Center for Eye Care Research, Center for Sight, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC 20007, U.S.A. ABSTRACT PROPHET (Prospective Population Health Event Tabulation) is an 
epidemiology-based network simulation program, written in Pascal, for modeling the progression of a chronic 
irreversible disease. It is designed to model multiple clinical and quality of life endpoints simultaneously. 
The program combines features of decision trees, Markov processes, and Monte Carlo simulation to produce 
a flexible and powerful micro-simulation tool. Transition from one state to another is determined by 
a set of probabilities which are taken from population-based time dependent incidence rates. Tools have 
been developed to estimate incidence from prevalence where needed. Mortality is based on U. S. life tables 
and is adjusted for the additional risk imposed by one or more disease states. Alternative strategies 
for detecting and treating disease can be modeled in medical and economic terms. Net costs or savings 
are determined in each cycle and present value analysis is performed. Sensitivity analysis can be performed 
on any variable or group of variables. The benefit of screening and treatment can be assessed in terms 
of person-years of quality of life saved. 1. INTRODUCTION Early detection and treatment are often the 
only effective means of reducing the morbidity and/or mortality of many chronic irreversible diseases. 
However, the costs of screening and treating these diseases can be substantial and decisions concerning 
screening strategies and targets are often made based on the costs involved and the benefits accrued. 
Although a variety of approaches to medical decision-making have evolved since Pauker s (1975; 1976; 
and 1980) original works with clinical decision trees, few have been proposed that adequately address 
the unique issues raised in modeling the course of a chronic irreversible eye disease. In conditions 
such as diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, and macular degeneration, patients may be at risk for multiple 
ophthalmologic complications and may be eligible for more than one therapy. Individuals with chronic 
eye disease are frequently elderly and may have a greater mortality risk than non-diseased individuals 
of the same age (Podgor, Cosset, and Kannel, 1985). Furthermore, chronic eye diseases are generally bilateral, 
outcomes must be assessed in terms of the ultimate binocular vision of the patient. 1.1 Bayesian Decision-Tree 
Approaches Previous investigators have attempted to model screening and treatment interventions inpatients 
with glaucoma and ocular hypertension using Bayesian decision trees (Gottlieb, Schwartz, and Pauker, 
1983; Eddy, Sanders, and Eddy, 1983). This approach, based upon Bayes Theorem, multiplies the probabilities 
at each branch of a tree in order to determine the net probability of any ultimate outcome. While this 
is the most commonly used decision-analytic tool for many applications and by far the simplest and fastest 
in terms of computational complexity, constraints of the model impose major limitations upon its usefulness 
in chronic eye diseases. The principal constraint is that every individual in the model must be assigned 
to an unique state to the exclusion of all other states. Thus, the model begins by a twiori dividing 
patients into normals, ocular hypertensive, and glaucoxnatous individuals. This structure imposes difficulties 
in modeling individuals who move from one category to another or who can be assigned to more than one 
category at a time. A second constraint of the tree approach is that the number of states increases geometrically 
as more 1041 1042 Canner, eventualities are added. In general, given n possible outcomes, the number 
of states necessary to include in a decision tree can be as many as 2 . While this is a small portion 
of a much larger model, it is easy to see that the tree can rapidly become too complicated for ready 
comprehension by clinicians and others involved in the decision-making process to be a useful decision-making 
tool. This constraint becomes especially important in modeling eye diseases, because of the need to consider 
outcomes in each eye. Including the possibility of having an outcome in one or both eyes doubles the 
number of states for each outcome included. Examination of other recent real life applications of decision 
trees quickly reveals how quickly even simple conceptual models can become complex trees (England, Halls, 
and Hunt, 1989; Phelps and Phelps, 1989). The third major constraint of Bayesian decision trees is their 
insensitivity to the passage of time. While this is not an issue in a short term decision, such as whether 
to operate on a patient who presents with abdominal pain, it limits the utility of the approach in modeling 
chronic eye diseases. Screening and treatment interventions in diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, 
glaucoma, and macular degenerations must be made over a period of years and the benefits of that intervention 
are similarly obtained over a prolonged interval. Additionally, during the course of the disease the 
patient is subject to risks of mortality and vision loss from other causes that may curtail the benefit 
of screening and treatment. Thus outcomes are most appropriately expressed in terms of person-years 
 of benefit. Standard probability trees do not allow for this level of complexity.  1.2 The CAN*TROL 
Approach The above limitations of Bayesian decision trees are widely recognized among cancer epidemiologists. 
Cancer, like many blinding eye diseases, follows a chronic course during which the patient is subject 
to multiple competing risks. In order to better model the effect of cancer screening and treatment strategies, 
the National Cancer Institute funded the development of CAN*TROL (Eddy, 1986a; Eddy, 19S6b; Levin, Gait, 
and Kessler, et al., 1986). This modeling approach incorporates Markov processes to analyze the likelihood 
of state to state transitions during each passing time interval. Life expectancy is calculated by projecting 
each patient s passage through a series of health states to death. The Markov model is expressed via 
differential equations that must be solved mathematically. While the CAN*TROL model is extremely useful 
in formulating cancer control strategies, it has Chiang, and Javit t limited applicability to eye disease. 
Under this model, living patients must be classified as either non-diseased or diagnosed with a particular 
stage of disease. All future events depend upon the initial disease state. The model does not allow for 
transitions from one disease state to another which is appropriate for cancer models, in which the initial 
staging of malignancy predicts all future events. This is not the case in chronic eye disease. In the 
example of diabetic retinopathy, a valid model must allow for transition from background to proliferative 
disease. Future events can only be predicted based on the patient s current state, ~t the state at entry 
to the model. Allowing for these inter-state transitions in the CAN*TROL model would necessitate a major 
revision. Even if it could be accomplished, the model would still be limited by the fact that it can 
deal with only two outcome variables. Valid modeling of ophthalmologic diseases often requires that we 
incorporate multiple outcome variables, such as severe vision loss, reading vision loss, and mortality 
in the case of diabetic retinopathy.  1.3 The Coronary Heart Disease Policy Model Weinstein and co-workers 
(Weinstein, Coxson, and Willams, et al., 1987; Goldman, Sia, and Cook, et al., 1988) have developed a 
decision-analytic model that does allow for state to state transitions. In constructing their model of 
coronary artery disease, they incorporated the risk factors associated with the underlying disease process 
in order to model the probability of moving from one risk-category to another. The model tracks risk 
factors for groups of individuals and applies known survival probabilities based upon those risk factors 
in each disease interval. The effects of preventive and therapeutic interventions can be studied in terms 
of prolonged survival and economic consequences. Because the model deals with only one outcome variable 
(survival), groups of individuals can simply be allocated as living or dead based upon the probability 
of surviving each passing interval. If, however, multiple outcome variables are to be considered, a simple 
allocation cannot be made. Rather, individuals with exactly the same risk factors must be combined with 
individuals of like characteristics and considered as a group. When multiple risk factors for multiple 
outcomes are considered, this model quickly grows in complexity. The Weinstein model makes the simplifying 
assumption that risk factors have a fixed effect, regardless of disease duration. This assumption imposes 
substantial limitations in considering a condition such as diabetic retinopathy, where the annual risk 
of retinopathy increases with longer duration of disease. 1.4 The MISCAN Approach Habbema and co-workers 
(1983), in their attempt to evaluate the effects of screening and treating chronic diseases such as cervical 
cancer, realized that simulations based on Markov processes lacked the sophistication to handle complicated 
situations which often occur in real life mass screening programs. To account for interrelations between 
factors and complex person level variables, Habbema developed MISCAN, a model based on the Monte Carlo 
simulation of individual life histories, to perform a micro-simulation of a cohort of individuals. 
Parkin (1985; 1986) used a similar approach to model cervical cancer screening programs in a single community 
instead of a cohort. While these models begin to address the complexity found in chronic eye disease, 
they are still limited with regard to modeling multiple morbidity outcomes prior to death as well as 
taking into account the need to consider two eyes. 2. THE PROPHET SIMULATION SYSTEM To address some of 
the limitations listed above we developed a computer program, PROPHET (Prospective Population Health 
Event Tabulation) to model chronic eye disease. The program was originally written in VMS Pascal and 
runs on a Digital Equipment Corporation VAX machine using the VMS Operating System. It has subsequently 
been ported to Sun and Sun-compatible workstations using the SunOS operating system and the Metaware 
Pascal compiler (Metaware Inc. , Santa Cruz, CA). PROPHET is similar to the Weinstein policy model in 
that it follows a cohort of individuals through a series of state transitions based on their underlying 
risk factors. While the Weinstein model deals with groups of patients in aggregate and assigns them to 
different outcomes in a deterministic manner, PROPHET uses the micro-simulation technique employed by 
MISCAN to model each patient as a separate individual. This allows for multiple outcome variables to 
be considered, along with the incorporation of duration-dependant risk factors. PROPHET further differs 
from the Weinstein model in that the epidemiology and natural history of the underlying disease process 
is simulated as well as the effects of screening and treatment. Thus, the life expectancy and likelihood 
of ophthalmic complications change based upon age, duration of diabetes, level of retinopathy, and previous 
treatment. In the PROPHET system, the course of a chronic irreversible disease is modeled as a multiple 
re-entry Markov process that is solved probabilistically Retinopathy 1043 rather than through the solution 
of closed-ended equations. The length of the time interval used in the model can be chosen according 
to the rate at which a particular disease is likely to progress. 2.1 Components of Model All the individuals 
in the population being simulated start in one state, usually an undiseased or normal state, relative 
to the condition being studied. All members of the population can start at the same age (e. g., newborn) 
or the initial age distribution of the population can be specified. While alive, this population remains 
at risk of moving from the initial state to two other types of states. (1) A disease state is a condition 
which is not normal but which does not necessarily entail an increased risk of morbidity that would impact 
on quality of life. It may, however, be a prerequisite for progressing to a more advanced state of disease. 
It also has the potential of being screened for and treated if possible, which may have implications 
for progression to more serious conditions. (2) A ~ state is a condition which results in a reduction 
in quality of life sufficient to warrant a change in lifestyle. 2.2 Simulation Technique A random number 
generator is used to determine whether a person will progress from one state to another. For each state 
that a person is at three things must be determined: (1) the set of states that any individual could 
possibly progress to from that state; (2) of those states, which ones have not already been reached; 
and (3) the probability of progressing to those states, For each state to which a person could possibly 
progress, a random number between zero and one is generated and compared to the probability of progressing 
to that state. If the random number is less than that probability, then the person progresses to that 
disease. This process is repeated at predetermined intervals, usually monthly or annually. This process 
is the same for disease states as well as sink states with one exception. The probability of progressing 
to a sink state is multiplied by a treatment factor before being compared to the random number. A treatment 
factor of one indicates that no treatment has been done or that it had no effect and a value of zero 
eliminates the possibility of progressing to the sink state. Values between zero and one lower the probability 
of progression to the sink state indicating the Yalue of treatment. There are three other special purpose 
states. A treatment state is used to indicate if a person has received a particular treatment. A death 
state is a sink Canner, Chiang, and Javit t state that overrides all others and eliminate the individual 
from future cycles of simulation. A screening state describes various parameters associated with particular 
screening methods. A list of probabilistic equations is shown in Appendix C which indicate the various 
factors which are combined to determine an event,  2.3 Initial Conditions Before the simulation can 
begin, the program must be given a number of items of information. This information is used to form a 
structure known as a network. Each state is called a node in the network and a directed path between 
two nodes is used to illustrate the possibility of progressing from one state to another. The information 
required by the program is divided into two sets, one which describes each node, and one which describes 
the paths between the nodes. These two data sets are described in Appendix A and B, respectively. Additionally, 
some information is gathered interactively from the user before each execution of the program. This includes 
information about the names of input and output files as well as other runtime parameters. These variables 
are also described at the end of Appendix B. 2.4 Mortality At the beginning of each cycle, before any 
determinations are made concerning disease progression, the individual enters the lifetable module. The 
probability of death is compared to a random number as with disease progression and a death results in 
removal from the simulation. The probability of death can be specified in several ways. In the absence 
of information, U.S. life tables are used to determine the age-specific probability of death (U.S. DHHS, 
1984). In addition, if a certain state carries with it a relative risk of death above the average population, 
that risk can be applied to the life table probability. If desired, the life table probability can be 
overridden with a specified probability which is constant for all ages. Since the relative risk approach 
may tend to overestimate mortality at older ages when mortality is high anyway, and since a constant 
risk may underestimate mortality at older ages for the same reason, these two values can be used together 
and an average of the two probabilities used. Since adjustments to the life table probability are specific 
to a particular state, if a person is at more than one state the maximum probability of death for those 
states is taken. 2.4 Screening The presence of many chronic conditions can only be determined by a physical 
examination andlor diagnostic tests. Hence, it is important to keep track not only of disease progression 
but also of whether the progression is detected by the person andlor their caregiver. At the beginning 
of each cycle the program determines if a screening visit is being performed during the interval. This 
is based on the specified screening frequency for each state. If an individual is at more than one state 
that person will be screened based on the state with the most frequent screening visits. It may also 
be desirable to delay screening for a specific amount of time based on the knowledge that the disease 
only progresses after a period of latency. In some cases, it may also be necessary to specify that a 
certain proportion of the population may never be screened and will never have disease detected. In some 
cases, it is possible that the screening test will yield a false negative result. In this case the screening 
test will fail to detect the presence of disease. Thus, disease progression is detected in a given interval 
if a screening visit is performed @ the visit resulted in the detection of disease. The false negative 
rate is specified in terms of the sensitivity of the test, that is, the probability of detecting disease 
when it, in fact, is present. Conversely, it is possible that the screxming test will yield a false positive 
result which can lead to unnecessary tests and even treatment. The false positive rate is specified in 
terms of the specificity of the test, that is, the probability of detecting disease when it, in fact, 
is not present. To make the implementation of features dealing with sensitivity and specificity more 
appropriate we have also added the ability to perform confirmatory screening tests based on the results 
of the initial test. Commonly, these tests have better sensitivity and/or specificity and are more costly 
to perform. Thus, we can simulate the real life situation of incurring extra costs as a result of the 
deficiencies in the screening method used.  2.5 Treatment If a person has a treatable disease a number 
of conditions must be fulfilled before the treatment can take place. First, the disease must be known. 
As noted above, a screening visit must take place and the disease diagnosed before the disease can be 
known. Second, the person cannot already have reached a sink state with regard to that disease. Third, 
the person must have a screening visit in an interval in which they are eligible for treatment. Thus, 
a person who progresses to a disease between screening visits cannot be treated until the screening visit 
at which the disease is detected, provided, of course, that they are still eligible for treatment (i.e., 
they have not reached a sink state in the meantime). Fourth, the person must accept the treatment. There 
may be a proportion of the population who will refuse treatment even if they are eligible in all other 
respects. This can be applied in one of two ways. The program can identify that segment of the population 
which will ~ receive treatment for as long as they are eligible. Alternatively, at each visit a proportion 
of those eligible for treatment will not receive treatment but will remain eligible for treatment at 
subsequent visits. Fifth, the person cannot already have been treated for the disease. If the person 
satisfies all of the conditions they receive a treatment factor which will provide some protection against 
subsequent progression to a sink state, The factor is derived from the probability of successful treatment 
as determined in treatment trials. If the treatment is applied to both organs in a two-organ system (e.g., 
eyes, ears, lungs, kidneys, etc .) a correlation factor can also be specified which determines the probability 
of successful treatment in one organ given the result of the treatment in the other. From this the probability 
of a successful treatment in at least one of the organs, which then becomes the treatment factor, can 
be calculated (Appendix C). 2.6 Costs If a person has a screening visit during a given time interval 
the cost of that visit is computed. If the cost of a screening visit is different depending on the state, 
the maximum cost of any screening visit that a person can have is used. If more than one visit occurs 
during a time interval the charge is applied the appropriate number of times. The total charges for each 
person in the simulation are added together to get a total screening cost. The cost of each screening 
episode can be specified as a constant cost or it can be a function of the screening coverage. Often, 
even though the actual cost of the test is constant, efforts to increase coverage will result in a proportionate 
increase in the cost per screening test. We can also specify that a certain proportion of the population 
will never be screened by using this feature. If a person is treated for a disease during a time interval 
the cost associated with that treatment is computed and added to the total treatment cost for the whole 
simulation. 2.8 Benefits Benefits are computed by determining if treatment was Retinopathy effective 
in preventing or putting off progression to a sink state, Since a sink state can be thought of as a k 
of qualityeffective can be said to EQYQ of life, treatment quality of life. Each year that a person spends 
in a sink state is known as a person-year of quality of life lost (PYQLL) and each year in which treatment 
is preventing a person from progressing to a sink state is known as a person year of quality of life 
saved (PYQLS). PYQLL is determined by adding up all the years that each person spends in a given sink 
state. In order to compute PYQLS we must first compute the person-years of quality of life that would 
have been lost had it not been for treatment (PYQWL). The likelihood of progressing to a sink state in 
a given interval depends both on the probability of progression and on the effectiveness of treatment. 
If we use just the probability of progression without taking into account treatment we can see what would 
have happened without treatment. Each year in which we can determine that a person would have progressed 
to a sink state had they not received treatment we add a year to the PYQWL. PYQLS, then, is the difference, 
PYQWL minus PYQLL. This quantity can be determined for each disease, treatment and sink of interest. 
 2.9 Cost-Effectiveness Analysis In order to compare the costs of screening and treating a disease with 
its benefits we need to know the cost of a PYQLL. This can be the cost of a year of disability, the cost 
of hospital care or any other cost associated with loss of quality of life. Since these costs are often 
associated with loss of earnings, three costs can be specified, one for each age group 0-18, 18-64, and 
65+. We can then turn this around to say that a PYQLS results in the savings of the cost of a PYQLL and 
is thus a benefit. Each year the cost of screening and treatment for that year is subtracted from the 
savings resulting from the total PYQLS for that year. This is the g@ benefit. The net benefits from each 
year are then added up to get the total benefit. Net benefits are expressed in terms of their present 
value. This analysis is performed as suggested by Weinstein and Stason (1977; 1986) to adjust for the 
relative value of dollars spent now, as compared with benefits to be regained in the future. Bradford 
(1983) has suggested that the appropriate discount rate for a government investment must consider not 
only preference for money, but the reduction in private capital caused by an increase in government spending. 
Most analyses using the PROPHET modeling system employ a discount rate of 5%, which is commonly used 
in similar analyses (Weinstein and Stason, 1982; Doubilet, Mcneil, and Weinstein, 1985), As seen below, 
however, this rate can be varied to Canner, Chiang, and Javit t assess its impact on the model s predictions. 
 2.10 Sensitivity Analysis Having established appropriate values for costs, benefits, and net benefit, 
we can look at the effect of changing certain parameters on these values. If desired, the user can specify 
a range of values for any parameter in the Network Node Deftition file or any probability in the Network 
Path Definition file. The simulation is then run for specific increments within the range, the size of 
the increments determined by the number of times the simulation is run. With this information one can 
then analyze the effect of varying a particular parameter on outcomes of interest, for example, PYQLS, 
Costs, and Present Value.  2.11 Variance Analysis Since the simulation is based on random number generation 
and each simulation starts with a different random number seed (except for sensitivity analysis, where 
the seed is held constant and the same sequence of random numbers is generated for all simulations within 
a single run) the results from a series of individual runs will be different. Comparing results from 
these runs we can determine the variance introduced by random variation in the random number generator. 
Clearly, increasing the size of the population simulated and doing more simulations will lower the variance. 
However, available computer resources may limit this ability so it is desirable to determine the variance 
given limitations on computer resources. It is also apparent that there could be substantial variance 
introduced by variation in the individual parameters used due to epidemiologic uncertainty. To determine 
the effect of sample variation in the parameters we can specify a variance for each parameter and each 
time the simulation is run values for the parameters are chosen from a normal distribution with the given 
mean and variance. Multiple runs done in this fashion will indicate the effect of sample variation on 
the results of the simulation. 3. CONCLUSION The PROPHET simulation system is a flexible yet powerful 
program for modeling the progression of multiple clinical and economic outcomes within the course of 
a chronic irreversible disease. Its application to the ocular complications of Type I diabetes has been 
described elsewhere (Javitt, Canner, and Sommer, 1989; Javitt, Canner, and Frank, et al., 1990). Although 
it was specifically designed to model chronic eye disease it may also be useful for modeling other human 
organ systems which come in pairs, such as lungs, kidneys, limbs, etc. Thus, for example, this model 
could also be employed to examine the effects of kidney disease secondary to diabetes. The paired-organ 
feature, however, can also be bypassed for more general chronic conditions. Additionally, this system 
would be useful to model any disease which has secondary clinical morbidity which presents before the 
primary morbidity or mortality of the disease have been manifest, For example, the disease AIDS has as 
part of its clinical spectrum many non-fatal events which have significant clinical and economic significance 
well in advance of the premature mortality common in those with AIDS. We look forward to applying this 
model to other chronic diseases as the appropriate epidemiologic and treatment data become available. 
Acknowledgments This study is supported by Grant #RO1-EY08805 from the National Eye Institute/NIH and 
Shared Instrumentation Grant #S 1O-RRO4O6O from the Division of Research Resources/NIH. Appendix A: List 
of Variables Required for PROPHET Node Definition The following variable are included for each state: 
Variable Name Variable Definition ID Unique number for node NAME Node description STYPE Node type: DISEASE, 
SINK, TREATMENT, DEATH, SCREENING The following variables are included if STYPE is DISEASE: REFNODE 
ID of reference node: INITSCREEN ID of initial screening method NUMDELAYPT Number of ordered pairs that 
make up the screening delay function as specified below PDELAY Proportion of people who will experience 
the following screening delay SCREENDELAY Number of months from onset The following variables are included 
if STYPE is TREATMENT: of disease to screening SCREENINTER Number of months between screening visits 
RR Relative risk of death for this node TRTD ID of DISEASE node being treated TRTS ID of SINK node that 
being treated will prevent PEFF Treatment efficacy, expressed as a probability PCORR Correlation (Range 
-1:1) between treatment outcomes in a two organ system (always 1 if one organ) PCOVER Treatment Coverage: 
Percentage of population who will accept treatment TRTPRICE Cost of treatment UNNEC_STATE ID of state 
that patient will proceed to if treatment is performed unnecessarily UNNEC_PROB Probability of proceeding 
to UNNEC STAT if treatment is performed unnecessarily SIDEFF_STATE ID of state that patient will proceed 
to if treatment causes adverse side effects SIDEFF_PROB Probability of proceeding to SIDEFF STATE if 
treatment causes adverse side effects The following variables are included if STYPE is SINK: REFNODE 
ID of DISEASE node that led to progression to this node RR Relative Risk of death for this node cosT_PYQLL(3) 
Cost of a Person-Year of Quality of Life Lost: used to establish benefit of saving a PersonYear of Quality 
of Life. Three values can be specified for age groups O-1S, 18-64, and 65+ The following variables are 
included if STYPE is Retinopathy SCREENING: NUMCOVPT Number of ordered pairs that make up the coverage-cost 
 function as specified below COVERAGE Proportion of pwple who will be screened at the given cost COST 
Cost of a screening visit SENS Sensitivity of screening exam SPEC Specificity of screening exam CONFIRM 
ID of SCREENING node to use to confirm screening result The following variable is the same regardless 
of the state: DISC_RATE Discount rate for discounting net benefits in future years The following variables 
are not in the node definition file but are input at the beginning of each run: TIMEUNITS Number of time 
intervals per year MAXTIME Number of years to run MAXSIM Number of simulations to run Appendix B: Structure 
of Network Path Definition File The following set of variables is repeated for each path: Variable Name 
Variable Descri~tion STARTNODE Starting node of path ENDNODE Ending node of path P Annual probability 
of transition across path TIME Number of years since arrival at REFNODE to which the probability is to 
be applied. This can be single time point or a range. VARIANCE (Opt.) The variance associated with the 
probability specified. This can be used to run a series of models to determine the variance associated 
with the input parameters Canner, Chiang, and Javitt These variables are stored in a three-dimensional 
array whose elements are the probabilities (P) and whose indices are STARTNODE, ENDNODE, and TIME. The 
time index is arranged in single year increments so if TIME is specified as a range, each year in the 
range is given au element in the array. Appendix C: Probabilistic Equations Pr{ One person-year of 
sight saved during interval i}= Pr{ (Having PDR at i-1) AND (NOT Progressing from PDR to blindness) 
AND (Treatment performed) AND (Treatment effective) }= Pr{ PDR at i-1 } * Pr{ NOT progressing} * Pr{ 
Treated } * Pr{ Effective } where Pr{ PDR at i }= { (Having PDR at i-1) OR ( (Having BDR at i-1) AND 
(Progressing from BDR to PDR) ) } = Pr{ PDR at i-1} + Pr{ BDR at i-1 } * Pr { Progressing } Pr (BDR 
at i } ={ (Having BDR at i-1) OR ( (Having IDDM at i-1) AND (Progressing from IDDM to BDR) )}= Pr{ 
BDR at i-1) + Pr{ IDDM at i-1 } * Pr { Progressing } Pr{ NOT progressing from PDR to blindness }= l-Pr{ 
 Progressing}  Pr{ Progressing from IDDM to BDR } =PIIDDM,BDR,Time since IDDM] Pr{ Progressing from 
BDR to PDR } =P[BDR,PDR,Time since IDDM] Pr{ Progressing from PDR to blind } =PIPDR,Blind,Time since 
PDR] Pr{ Treatment performed } =Pr{ (Disease is known) AND (NOT blind) AND (Agrees to be treated) }= 
Pr{ Disease is known } * Pr{ NOT blind} * Pr{ Agrees to be treated}  Pr{ Disease is known } = Pr{ Detecting 
disease ~ Disease exists } * Pr { Screened in i } Pr{ Detecting disease ~ Disease exists } = SENS  
Pr{ Screened in i } =Pr { No screen delay } * Pr { Screening visit interval falls in i } * Pr { Cost 
of screening is not prohibitive } Pr{ No screm delay } ={ 1 if time since onset > SCREENDELAY { O if 
time since onset < = SCREENDELAY Pr{ Screening interval falls in i }= { 1 if elapsed time MOD visits~er 
timeunit= O or if visitfler timeunit <1 { O else visits~er timeunit = SCREENINTER*TIMEUNITS/12 Pr{ Cost 
of screening not prohibitive } = { 1 if cost < $999.99 { O else Pr{ NOT blind ati} =1-Pr{ Blind ati} 
Pr{ Blind } =Pr{ (Blind at i-1) OR ((PDR at i-1) AND (Progressed from PDR to blindness)) } Pr{ Treatment 
effective }= Pr{ Preventing progression to sink state in at least one organ} = Pr{ Preventing progression 
to sink state in only one organ }*2 + Pr{ Preventing progression to sink state in both organs } Pr{ 
Preventing progression to sink state in both organs }= PEFF * (PCORR*(l-PEFF) + PEFF) Pr{ Preventing 
progression to sink state in only one organ } = PEFF -Pr{ Preventing progression in both organs } Pr{ 
Agrees to be treated } =PCOVER References <RefA>Bradford DF. 1983. The choice of discount rate for government 
investments, In: Haveman RH, Margolis J, eds, Public expenditure andpolicy analysis. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Co. PP. 129-144. Doubilet P, McNeil BJ, Weinstein MC. 1985. The decision concerning coronary 
angiography in patients with chest pain: A cost-effectiveness analysis. &#38;led Decis Making 5:293-309. 
Eddy DM. 1986a. A computer-based model for designing cancer control strategies. NCZ Monogr 2;15-82. Eddy 
DM. 1986b. Setting priorities for cancer control programs, J Natl Cancer Inst 76:187-199. Eddy DM, Sanders 
LE, Eddy JF. 1983. The value of screening for glaucoma with tonometry. W-v Ophthalmol 28:194-205. England 
WL, Halls JJ, Hunt VB. 1989. Strategies for screening colorectal carcinoma. Med Decis Making 9:3-13. 
Goldman L, Sia ST, Cook EF, et al. 1988. Costs and effectiveness of routine therapy with long-term beta-adrenergic 
antagonists after acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 319:152-157. Gottlieb LK, Schwartz B, Pauker 
SG. 1983. Glaucoma screening: A cost-effectiveness analysis. Surv Ophthalmol 28:206-226. Habbema JDF, 
Lubbe JTN, Van der Mods PJ, et al. 1983. A computer simulation approach to the evaluation of mass screening. 
In: MEDINFO 83. Proceedings of the 4th World Conference on Medical Znformatics. Van Belnmel et al. eds. 
Amsterdam North Holland. p. 1222. Javitt JC, Canner JK, Sommer A. 1989. Cost-effectiveness of current 
approaches to control of retinopathy in type-I diabetics. Ophthalmology 96:253-262. Javitt JC, Canner 
JK, Frank RG, et al. 1990. Detecting and Treating Retinopathy in Patients with Type I Diabetes Mellitus: 
A Health Policy Model. Ophthalmology 97:483-494. Levin DL, Gait MH, Kessler LG, et al. 1986. A model 
for projecting cancer incidence and mortality in the presence of prevention, screening, and treatment 
programs. NCI Monogr 2:83-93. Parkin DM. 1985. A computer simulation model for the practical planning 
of cervical cancer screening programs. Br.7 Cancer 51:551-568. Parkin DM, Moss SM. 1986. An evaluation 
of screening policies for cervical cancer in England and Wales using a computer simulation model. J Epidemiol 
Community Health 40:143-153. Pauker SG. 1976. Coronary artery surgery: the use of decision analysis. 
Ann Intern Med 85:8-18. Pauker SG, Kassirer JP. 1975. Therapeutic decision making: a cost benefit analysis. 
N Engl J Med 293:229-243. Pauker SG, Kassirer JP. 1980. The threshold approach to clinical decision making. 
N Engl J A4ed 302:1109-1117. Phelps DL, Phelps CE. 1989. Cryotherapy in infants with retinopathy of prematurity: 
A decision model for treating one or both eyes. JAMA 261:1751-1756, Podgor MJ, Cosset GH, Kannel WE. 
1985. Lens changes and survival in a population-based study. N Eng J Med 313:1438-1444. U.S. Dept. of 
Health and Human Services. 1984. Public Retinopathy 1049 Health Service. National Center for Health Statistics. 
Vital Statistics of the U. S.: Ll~e Tables. Vol II. Hyattsville, MD: DHHS Publ. No. 87-1104. Weinstein 
MC. 1986. Challenges for cost-effectiveness research. Med Decis Making 6:194-198. Weinstein MC, Coxson 
PG, Williams LW, et al. 1987. Forecasting coronary disease incidence, mortality, and cost: the coronary 
heart disease policy model. Am J Public Health 77:1417-1426, Weinstein MC, Stason WE. 1977. Foundations 
of cost -effectiveness analysis for health and medical practices. N Engl J Med 296:716-721. Weinstein 
MC, Stason WB. 1982. Cost-effectiveness of coronary bypass surgery. Circulation 66:256-260. </RefA>AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
JOSEPH K. CANNER received his M.H.S. in 1991 from John Hopkins University and is currently a Ph.D. candidate 
in Population Dynamics at John Hopkins University. He also serves as a computer and statistical consultant 
for the Worthen center for eye care research at Georgetown University Medical Center. YEN-PIN CHIANG 
is a research instructor in the Department of Ophthalmology at Georgetown University Medical Center. 
He received his M.A. in Political Science in 1988 and currently is a Ph.D. candidate in public policy 
at the University of Rochester. His fields of interest are U.S. disability policy, outcome research and 
cost-effectiveness analysis in health care technology and delivery. JONA I HAN C. JAVITT is an Associate 
Professor of Ophthalmology and Director of Glaucoma and Laser Service in the Department of Ophthalmology 
at Georgetown University Medical Center. He is also Director of the Worthen Center for Eye Care Research 
at Georgetown University Medical Center. He received his M.D. from Cornell University Medical School 
in 1982 and M.P.H. in Health Policy and Management from Harvard University in 1984. His current interests 
include health care technology assessment and outcome research utilizing Medicare database.  
			
