
 A NEW TECHNIQUE FOR SATELLITE BROADCAST CHANNEL COMMUNICATION F. BORGONOVO and L. FRATTA Istituto di 
Elettronica -Politecnico di Milano and Centro Telecomunicazioni Spaziali -CNR Piazza L. da Vinci 32 20133 
MILANO, Italy The goal of this paper is to present a multi~ac~ cess technique for Satellite Broadcast 
Channel Communi cation which extends the features of the Slotted-ALOHA system to higher Channel Utilization 
and presents a stable behaviour. The Reservation Upon Collision (RUG Technique consists on a S-ALOHA 
scheme with a super - imposed reservation technique which automatically operates when collisions occur. 
 The technique is designed to achieve a trans mission delay as small as the S-ALOHA for low channel 
utilization and to perform as a RESERVATION scheme for high channel utilization. The implementation of 
the RUC-Technique is based upon the knowledge of the origin of the collided packets at each time slot. 
 Simulation results show improved delay-throughput characteristics over S-ALOHA and in particular the 
suitability of this technique for systems with high channel utilization. Introduction The task of this 
work is to present a new system for utilizing a satellite broadcast channel considering an environment 
as assumed in the ALOHA System. l 2 3 4 Several multi-access schemes have been proposed in order to 
achieve an efficient dynamic sharing of the channel capacity among all stations. An absolute rating of 
the existing techniques is practically impossible because their performances highly depend upon the specific 
environment they are utilized. Moreover we can say that the S-ALOHA technique is very suitable for low 
traffic, single-packet, conditions even if a control scheme has to be used to guarantee the system stability. 
5 To achieve higher channel utilization, reservation techniques based either on S-ALOHA or TDMA schemes 
6 7 8 have been proposed. The technique we present in this paper consists on a S-ALOHA scheme with a 
superimposed RESERVATION technique, which automatically operates when collisions occur (Reservation Upon 
Collision Technique). This adaptive technique allows to achieve a transmission delay as small as the 
S-ALOHA for low channel utiliz- ation and to performe as a RESERVATION technique for high channel utilization. 
Furthermore it is intrinsi- cally stable and no control is required for its operation. The implementation 
of the RUC-Technique is based upon the knowledge of the origin of the collided packets at each time slot. 
Such an information is achieved by attaching an Identifier (ID) to the packet. The RUC-Technique The 
channel is devided into time slots of fixed length w. Each slot is further devided into two sub- slots: 
the first with a length T. is used as in a I S-ALOHA System. During the second one, of length T 2 = 
T -T., the packet ID! s are transmitted in such a way to be recognized whatever number of packets collide 
in the slot. The packet ID's coding and the effect of the corresponding overhead on the system performances 
will be considered later, while here we will simply assume that each ground station is able to recognize 
through the ID's the origin of all the col- lided packets. The channel can operate in two different 
states: - State A (S-ALOHA). Stations transmit into a slot whenever they have traffic to send. - State 
B (RESERVATION). Each time slot is reserved to a station to retransmit a packet previously collided. 
 The channel operation in State B requires to manage a common distributed queue of all collided packets. 
This can be achieved by means of "Channel ~eue Tables" (CQT) which are built up and updated by each station 
simply using the knowledge of the collided packets origin station. The above defined channel can be 
operated as follows: The channel remains in State A as long as a collision is detected. When k (k~2) 
packets collide all stations build up their own CQT which assigns the next k time slots to the k collided 
stations for the retransmission of their packets and the channel initiates a State B period. (*) The 
collided packets retransmission schedule is determined by each station following a priority assignment 
which may be time vary- ing to treat all stations in a "fair" manner. If R is the number of slots in 
a round trip time, collisions can be detected and CQT consequently updated, during the first R-I slots 
of a State B period. When CQT's are empty, i.e. all collided packets have been retransmitted, the channel 
returns to State A. All new packets arrived at stations during a State B period are scheduled at random 
for transmission in a State A slot. The slot is randomly chosen among the next K State A slots as it 
is performed in a S-ALOHA System. K is a system parameter but it is not as critical as in the ALOHA System. 
 As an example in Fig. 1 a possible pattern of State A and State B periods is shown. Upward and downward 
arrows represent the input packets and the out put packets, i.e. successful transmissions, respectively. 
 From the above description it appears that the RUC- Technique performs as the S-ALOHA system when the 
traf- fic is low (unfrequent collisions, long State A periods) and it automatically increases the time 
in State B (Reservation) when the channel traffic increases. Furthermore, as all packets are retransmitted 
at most once, it presents a stable behaviour and it can forward all the offered traffic up to a maximum 
system capacity. This value corresponds to the throughput when all stations transmit a packet per slot. 
In these conditions if M is the number of stations M collisions occur per State A slot and the channel 
will operate in State A periods of length x = R+I alternated with State B periods of length Y = M(R+I). 
 (~) We assume zero processing time at stations. This allows the channel to switch from State A to State 
B and viceversa the time slot immediately following the occurrence of the condition of changing. 2-i 
 state A '1" state B ~ state A _,stateB,_ state A _,stateBL state A r I- -i-I-rr , T TTT T l rrr-°' 
,. ABEl = S I L NP $ T C G J N Q 0 K Fig. 1 No packet is successfully transmitted in a State A slot 
and therefore the throughput is: S.~ __y___ = M(R+l) M (Packet/slot) (1) M y*x (ml)(a+l) =~TY Traffic 
Handling , .~±ities Let us consider a system with M (M>>l) ground stations generating a new packet per 
slot with probability ~i<<l. From (1) we have S M = 1 and the distribution of the number of new packets 
may be assumed Poisson with average value M S I = Z i a i (pkt/slot). 1 Further let us assume: I - 
The total number N of new and rescheduled packets (offered channel traffic) in a State A slot is statistically 
independent from slot to slot. II - The offered channel traffic in a State A slot is Poisson distributed 
with average value G. Let x and y be the average number of slots in State A and State B periods respectively. 
 The average number of packets successfully transmitted in a slot represent the throughput of the system 
and is given by S o = PAnA + PBnB (pkt/slot) (2) where: PA = --= State A channel probability x+y 
PB = -Y-= State B channel probability x+y = Ge -G = average number of successful transmissions n A 
in a State A slot n B = 1 number of successful transmissions in a State B slot. In steady state conditions, 
i.e. S_ = S = S < SM, the new traffic entering the system dluring°a "cycle" (State B period + State A 
period) is transmitted in the State A period. Therefore G = S x+y (3) From (2) and (3) we have: s 
= a (4) l+G(l-e -G) The average traffic, G', in the channel is G' = S + S(l-e -G) (5) In Fig. 2 the 
values S and G' are plotted as function of G and they favourably compare with the corresponding average 
channel traffic in a S-ALOHA System. G' = 2 is the maximum value of the average channel traffic and reflects 
the fact that each packet is transmitted twice: the first one acting as a reservation. Z.O   (Fkt/slot) 
1.5 / 1.0 0 .01 .1 S 10. 100. 0 (P kt/slot) Fig. 2  2-2 Packets ID's Transmission  A possible way 
to transmit the packets ID's during the T 2 subslots is to use a TDMA technique. Each station has a dedicated 
window of length w = T2/M(bits) where to transmit its ID which indicates the existence of a packet transmitted 
by that station in the T 1 subslot. As the length w has to be kept as small as possible in order to 
obtain an acceptable global overhead a coherent detection, which requires long bit seqUences for receivers 
synchronization, can not be used. In this case the packet ID may simply be the existence of the carrier 
in the window assigned to the station which is actually transmitting a packet. Its detection reduces 
to the well known ON-OFF keyed signal detection problem. The detector consists mainly of a matched filter, 
 an envelope detector, a sampler and a threshold decision box and if we assume exact window synchronization 
among all stations the error probabilities of missing an existing carrier and detec tlng a non existing 
one are respectively 9 -(l-s) 2 i  e (6) P1 : (l_s) 2 a -s P = e (7) O  where : 2E w (8) -e 
= N is the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) at the filter output ; -EV is the received carrier energy in 
the window w; -N/2 is the two-sided termal noise power density; b (9) --S = -- is the normalized 
threshold level; -b is the threshold level. Similarly the optimum error rate, c, in a coherent PSK 
(used for data packet transmission) for high SNR is given by 1 e-6/2 (lO) where 2% 8 = -- (ll) N 
 and E b is the bit energy. Assuming equal peak powers in T 1 and T2, from (6) (7) and (i0) it follows 
T 2 ~ = ~ --~-(12) If we require PI = Po = P, the probability PE that one or more of the stations will 
have errors in detecting all the ID's in a slot, is independent of traffic level and is given by PE 
= i- (I-p)M(M-I) (13) where P is given by (6) or (7) with  S = S o ~ + --e in . (lh)  In Fig. 3 T2 
is plotted as function of M for dif- ferent values of P= assuming a channel error rate equal l0 -6 (i.e. 
8 = 22,~). For a different channel error rate (8') the curves in Fig. 3 still yield with values of ~2' 
= T2 818'. / 35( 3Gt   ;iS 7 ///// 2.5! //" 201  7/X/ 150 ~o 6o 7o H ~ M Fig. 3 From Fig. 
3 it appears that when the number of stations is about 50 the overhead to achieve small PE becomes very 
heavy. This is a limit to the application of this technique to large systems. However the RUC- Technique 
may operate with relatively high values of PE (~ 10-2)' In fact the worst effect of a wrong ID detection 
is the introduction of collisions in a State B period which will delay only the collided packets, and 
reduce the channel utilization. Furthermore, as a small average number of stations, compared to M, are 
active at each time slot, most of the wrong detections have no effect at all on the system behaviour. 
 An exact evaluation of the degradation of the system performances as PE increases cannot be analytical 
ly performed and a detailed simulation would be required to find the optimum trade-off between overhead 
and system performances. To implement the above TDMA scheme a window synchronization among all stations 
is necessary. This requires smaller time guards than those for slot synchronization in a S-ALOHA System. 
The required time guards are feasible in a 50Kbits channel while it could become critical for very high 
channel capacity. More efficient techniques to code the packets ID's may be obtained by means of codes 
which take advantage of the fact that only very few stations transmit packets in the same slot. Delay-Throughput 
performances The analytical evaluation of the average delay, D, suffered by the packets requires the 
analysis of a non-markovian system with correlated channel traffic, being the correlation introduced 
by the round trip delay. In the following we report the results obtained by simulation. The system under 
consideration is a 50 Ebit satellite channel with a large M so that the global input traffic is Poisson 
distributed with at most one. packet/station/slot. The input packets, as in the 2-3 S-ALOHA are assumed 
of fixed length equal to 1125 bits. This corresponds to have R = 12 slots per round trip (270 ms) when 
T 2 = 0. Furthermore we have assumed PE = 0 and K = R. In Fig. h delay-throughput curves for the RUC 
techniques are plotted for different values of T 2. The delay accounts also for propagation and transmission 
 D ! I I I (see) S-ALOHA RUC 3.   JI//X 1/X// ////V I I 0. .2 . ~ .6 .8 1. Channel u|ilization 
Fig. h time. The curve for x2 = O corresponds to the ideal case where the packets ID's are transmitted 
with no overhead and it represents a lower bound to the performances of the RUC Technique.  The curves 
for T 2 = 100, 200, 300 and h00 represent the delay-throughput performances of the RUC Technique applied 
to a system whose number of stations M is limited by the required PE, as given in Fig. 3. As an example, 
assuming PE = 10-3 we have that the curve for 32 = 200 represents the performances of a system with hO 
ground stations. The RUC Technique favorably compare with the S-ALOHA System and the delay-throughput 
performances show that an almost double channel utilization is achieved at the same average delay. The 
simulation results support also the validity of equations 4 and 5 and show that the delay- throughput 
performances are not as strongly dependent on K as in the S-ALOHA System. Conclusions  A reservation 
upon collision technique for satellite packet-switching data communication has been presented. We have 
shown this technique has a stable behaviour by evaluating its traffic-handllng capability and by means 
of simulations its delay-throughput performances have been investigated. They prove the advantages of 
this technique and its suitability for quite large satellite systems. The bound to the number of stations 
is given by the overhead required for packet ID's detection and more research should be devoted to coding 
techniques which would result more efficient than the TDMA scheme here suggested. Further analysis and 
simulation are also needed to better understand the behaviour of the system when PE is no longer negligible. 
 Besides the technique here described other methods can be designed to take advantage of the information 
transmitted in the subslots 72, which can be seen as an independent signaling channel and may be util~ed 
also during the State B periods. Such a modified RUC techniques, which is presently under investigation, 
should provide improved performances by reducing the rescheduling delay. References <RefA>Abramson, N. "The 
ALOHA System - Another Alterna- tive for Computer Communications" Proceedings AFIPS 1970 FJCC, AFIPS 
Press, Montale, N.J. voi.37 pp. 281-285 Roberts, L.G. "ALOHA Packet System with and without Slots and 
Capture" ARPA Network Information Center, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, California, ASS Note 
8 (NIC 11290), June 1972 Abramson, N. "Packet Switching with Satellites" National Computer Conference, 
New York, June 1973 AFIPS Conference Proceedings, vol. h2, pp 695-702 Klelnrock, L, and Lam, S. "Packet-Switching 
in a Slotted Satellite Channel" National Computer Conference, New York, June 1973, AFIPS Conference Proceedings, 
vol. h2, pp 703-711 ~a~n, S., and Kleinrock, L. "Packet Switching in a MUltiaccess Broadcast Channel: 
Dynamic Control Procedures" IEEE Trans. Comm., vol.COM-23, pp891-904, Sept. 1975 Roberts, L.G. "Dynamic 
Allocation of Satellite Capacity Through Packet Reservation", National Computer Conference, New York, 
June 1973, AFIPS Conference Proceedings, vol. 42 pp711-716 Crowther, W., Rettberg, R., Walden, D., Crustein,S 
and Heart, F. "A System for Broadcast Communication: Reservation ALOHA", Proceedings of the Sixth Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, January 1973 Binder, R. 
"A Dynamic Packet-Switching System for Satellite Broadcast Channels" Proceedings of International Communication 
Conference, 41.6- 41.9, San Francisco, June 1975 Schwartz, M., Bennett, W.R., and Stein, S.: Communication 
Systems and Techniques, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1966</RefA>.  2-4  
			
