
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Siggraph 
76, July 14-16 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania AFFORDABILITYOF COMPUTER GRAPHICS FOR PLANNING NETWORKS IN 
DOD PROGRAM MANAGEMENT J. Potoczniak, M. Kosmin, R. Larkin LCDR J. Callahan, R. M. Dunn ABSTRACT This 
report represents data relative to the alternative consideration involved in selecting a configurationfor 
the Interactive Graphics Net­ working System, (IGNS). The IGNS permits a user to interactivelyview a 
network, modify it, if needed, analyze various management options and view their impact upon the data 
contained in the network, and, finally receive network plots and management reports. A prototype of 
this system was developed and tested for feasibility. Having proven the feasibility, the purpose of this 
report is to provide the data necessary for a user to decide the individual optimum system configurationwhich 
may be used to facilitate an interactive net­working reporting capability. INTRODUCTION This paper 
examines the affordability of implementing graphic links between a network display and a planning model 
in DOD program offices. The computer assisted capabilities include: update, change, and edit features 
 which permit easier maintenance of plans; a variety of display formats for assistance in the analysis 
of plans; a convenientmethod of investigating planningalternatives; and hard­ copy output options to 
facilitate the distribu­ tion of plans. Alternative configurations of hardware, software, data bases 
and organiza­ tional support are examined. An economic analy­ sis is conducted of these combinations 
to pro­ vide the basis for determiningaffordability. The purpose of the graphic links is to assist 
the management of weapons system acquisition by improving the planning and control capabi­ lity of program 
management offices through applied computer technology. By laying out the network of jobs to be done, 
the project manager can obtain an explicit visual repre­ sentation of the relationships among the tasks 
 involved. It would also permit the convenient simulation and evaluation of management options. Such 
a link can be established through the appli­ cation of computer graphics. Graphic links between a network 
display and a planning model require that the capability can be provided in a form useful to practicingprogram 
offices and in a manner affordable by the majority of DOD programs. HARDWARE/SOFTWARECONSIDERATIONS 
 The Interactive Graphics NetworkingSystem is capable of operating on many different hard­ ware configurations. 
Four basic system configura­ tions are presented from which extrapolation or modificationwill permit 
examination of other basic systems. The hardware, as shown in Figure 1, for the four configurationsare: 
 A. Remote mainframe with a local terminal B. Remote mainframe with a local minicomputer and terminal 
 C. Local minicomputerand terminal with a remote mainframe D. Local minicomputersystem with terminal 
 Each of the configurationswhich involve the us­age of a mainframe, share some similar operating characteristics. 
Some of these characteristics are: a. Deliverytime may be several hours to about two days.  b. Costs 
will be incurredwhich are directly dependent upon usage.  c. Data storage costs will be incurred.  
d. High level confidentialitymay not be fully achieved.  e. User has a schedule priority on the mainframe 
queue.  f. The user does not require special facilities to house equipment, etc.  ConfigurationA is 
the simplest hardware configu­ration, from the user's point of view. The user requires the least amount 
of local equipment with no highly skilled computer specialists required for operation. The user would 
interface with the mainframe via a graphics terminal and receive output from the mainframe (i.e. plots 
and reports) The necessary software located in the mainframe (Fig. 1) is comprised of algorithmic network 
functions, operating systems, graphics support, network plotting procedures, report generators, and data 
maintenance procedures. Configuration B is slightlymore complex than A. It has some additional equipment 
and allows the user a storage capabilityand off-line mode of operation. The user may extract some fundamental 
information from the mainframe, manipulate it, store it, and then later send back to the main­frame for 
a network plot or report. No highly trained personnel are required to operate this system, but the user 
will need some computer hardware and software background. This configuration has the networking software, 
 (Fig 1), housed on the mainframe which performs all of the major computational operations. The minicomputer 
housed in the user's facilities per­ forms low level computations and graphics support functions. The 
mainframe acts as the input and data processor, however, the user may store basic network data in his 
own facilities as well as on the mainframe. Configuration C utilizes the minicomputer as an intelligent 
satellite. It uses the mainframe for massive computation and storage as needed. Its operation entails 
using two people with a computer background to provide software and data base integrity. The mainframe 
would perform only initial calculationswhile all other operations (Plotting, Printing, Storing Data, 
etc.) would be performed at the user's facilities. The option to use the mainframe, however, for many 
user requests is still available. The configuration places most of the software for the IGNS System in 
the local minicomputerand its peripherals. The mainframe houses the management reporting functions and 
transforms initial data into the form acceptable to the IGNS System. In this case the mainframe acts 
only as a "front end" to the minicomputer and its peripherals. ConfigurationD requires the most user 
hardware and two operating personnel in addition to the configuration users. All operations would be 
per­formed at the user's facilities. Plotting, re­porting, data storage,modifications, etc., would all 
be implemented at the Project Manager's loca­tion. Itis a completely user housed/userdedicated system. 
It incorporates the necessary software and provides for the hardware needed to satisfy all networking 
and reporting requirements. It can be assumed that the configurations described are functionallyequivalent 
and that the hardware and software ascribed to each con­figuration fulfills only the minimum requirements 
for functional equivalence. (See Figure 1) ADVANTAGES OF AN INTERACTIVE GRAPHICS NETWORKING SYSTEM 
 The most notable differences between a fully interactive networking system and a mainframe based networkingsystem 
are: a. Changes to the network and data may be made quickly and repetitively.  b. Modified reports 
and network plots may be obtained in hours, or at worst, one or two days, on a fully operational sys­tem. 
 c. The user may directlyview his network on a graphics screen, select his level of detail for viewing, 
and if desired, modify his data and obtain a report or network plot.  The resultingmanagement improvements 
would be: faster planning, higher qualityplans and a com­ prehensive capability useful throughout all 
stages of the program life. This improved capability would be particularlyresponsive to the dynamic 
 needs of a project manager. The user has several options which may be select­ed from a graphic menu 
by the use of an electro­nic pointer in order to: (a) change a network view, (b) change a data base item, 
(c) produce a hardcopy. In option (a),change a network view, the user may select several different ways 
of viewing a net­work. These are: (1) slack view, (2) centered view, (3) top down view, (4) time phase 
view, (5) Gantt chart view. In option (b),changea data base item, the user may: (1) change an event 
or activity descrip­tion, (2) add an event or activity,(3) delete an event or activity. In option(cb 
produce a hardcopy, the user may: (1) obtain a network showing an overall view with no detail, (2) obtain 
a network showing a detailed view will all data shown, (3) obtain a management report tailored specially 
to his requirements. CRITERIA USED TO EVALUATE SYSTEM CONFIGURATIONS The following major criteriawere 
used in the evaluation: a. Cost -to acquire, implement, operate, and maintain both the hardware and 
soft­ware.  b. Capacity -the number of networks and reports the configurationcan throughput per unit 
time.  c. Turnaround time -the time required to obtain a network plot, management report, or fulfill 
a requirement using the con­figuration.  d. Privacy -provide user protection from unauthorized access 
to data.  e. Integrity -the data base is reliable from a data handling and operational point of view. 
  The overall criteriaused in the quantitative analysis of the configuration is whether or not a faster, 
more comprehensive and detailed means of project control would be realized by the user. EVALUATINGALTERNATIVECONFIGURATIONS 
 Assessment A user, in selecting a particular configuration, must map his inventory of, or accessabilityto, 
 computer hardware. This assessment will serve as the foundation upon which a configurationmay be established. 
For example, the availabilityof a mainframe (ex. IBM 360, CD6600, or equivalent) may serve as a beginning 
for configurationA, which requires only a mainframe, networking and related software, and a graphics 
console, or it may serve as the basis for configurationB or C. Once the user has completed his assessment 
of the hardware that he has available to him, he may then determine which type of a configurationwould 
most appropriatelysuit his needs. Sharing One Configuration If one configurationwere shared by a multi-user 
 group, then trade-offs must be considered. For example; if any of the configurationsare shared, then 
the acquisition costs, implementation,and maintenancecosts are evenly divided among the users, and, operating 
costs are defrayed to the extent personnel cost are evenly divided. Some costs are not diminished by 
sharing a configura­tion. The cost of supplies, for example, remains the same since this cost is dependent 
upon the quantity of usage per user, not on the number of users. Computer usage costs (i.e. for configura­tion 
A, B, or C) also remains the same since each user will bear this cost independent of the other users. 
Sharing also involves a loss of conven­ience and timeliness as a result of possibly having to enter a 
queue (if one exists), and wait for use of the configuration. Upgrading Characteristics If a user 
were not satisfied with a particular characteristic of a configuration,he should consider the cost of 
upgrading that characteris­tic before arriving at any final decisions regard­ing that configuration. 
 a. Turnaround Time: For example; a one to two day (i.e. the baseline is one day) turnaround time may 
be inadequate for some purposes and the cost of upgrading this characteristic may be the cost of having(a) 
courier or other person partially dedicated to this task. b. Capacity: If the number of reports and/or 
network plots a configurationcould output in one day were not sufficient, (i.e. the baseline is five 
per day) to meet the user's requirements, the cost of upgrading this characteristic (i.e. the cost of 
a second plotter or faster disk, etc.) should be added to the configuration cost (if any). c. Response 
Time: The baseline response time is ten seconds. That is, the time for a user to transmit, complete, 
and receive a response to an action which he has intiated, (i.e. this does not include changes to net­work 
logic which requires five minutes). If a faster response time is desired, then possibly a faster baud 
rate may be purcha­sed or a higher priority be bought or fas­ter I/O devices purchased. These costs should 
be added to the configuration cost. Thus, the cost of upgrading any configura­tion characteristic should 
be considered as part of the total configurationcost. In addition, a user should evaluate the potential 
cost of other quantitative and qualitative effects of sharingconfiguration d. Network Size and Update 
Rate: The base­ line network size used in this report is 100 events, 200 activities; and, the assumed 
update rate for one network is once per month. e. Amount of Networks Per User: The number of assumed 
networks per user is 100. DISCUSSION OF DATA COLLECTED A majority of the data collected involved informa­ 
tion categorized as hardware data, software data, or personnel data. Some of this data was conver­ tible 
to cost information found in subsequent tables. Table 1 summarizes the recurring costs of each of the 
four configurations,which include; personnel, usage, maintenance, and supply costs; the minimum software 
cost required for initial implementationof the configurationwhich may be subject to increases if other 
than basic system requirements are specified by the user; and the basic hardware costs to initiate 
a particularcon­ figuration which is also subject to user options and may increase. Table 2 summarizes 
four basic categories of cost data as they appear over a typical eight year pro­ject management cycle 
and a normalized cost. These categories are; acquisition of a configura­tion, implementation,operation, 
and maintenance. The data was generated by varying a particular parameter to examine its effect upon 
the basic costs shown. A common baseline cost figure for one application by one user for comparison 
on an annual basis was used. The project manager range was derived by dividing the single user cost 
by 3%1 Thus, the (first cost )in Table 2 is divided by 3% to obtain the project manager range. The 
project manager affordabilityof a system is termed "Project ManagerRange ($K)". It is the suggested lower 
bound, not an absolute innegotia­ble value of a dollar range for which a project manager may justify 
a configuration. In addition to this suggested lower bound, qualitative consi­derations must also be 
made which may weigh as heavily as the quantitative data. Some of the qualitative considerations are 
listed in the sec­tion "Criteria Used to Evaluate System Configura­tion". Others may involve the considerations 
 involved in sharing a configuration as opposed to owning one on an exclusive basis. Data In Tables 
 The data presented in Tables 1 and 2 are provided for use in evaluating each of the configurations. 
 Table 1 presents the anticipated costs of acquisi­ tion and usage for each configuration. This cost 
 data is fundamental to any decision a user makes. For example, the cost of an operator (part of re­ 
curring costs) need not necessarily be the cost of a person solely dedicated to using the confi­ guration. 
It may be a fraction of some employee's salary who, in addition to operating the configu­ ration, has 
other assigned duties as well. In configuration D, the cost of personnel is for dedicated personnel. 
The complexity of configura­ tion D demands full time dedicated personnel to maintain and operate it. 
In each case, the user must be aware that personnel costs will be asso­ ciated with each configuration 
and dedicated personnel may be needed and considered as part of the configuration cost. Table 2 compares, 
for each configuration,the cost effect of varying the number of applications (i.e. networkingplotting, 
management reporting, financial reporting, etc.), and the number of users from one user to eight. This 
table demons­ trates that eight users, employing eight indepen­ dent configurationsof the same type (A, 
B, C, or D), decrease the per user cost as compared to one user. Care should be taken to note that 
some costs proportionallyremain the same with an in­ crease in the number of users while others propor­ 
tionally decrease. For example, the implementa­ tion costs for one user increases for eight users, but 
not by a factor of eight as might be expected. The implementation cost for one application in­creases 
for eight applications, but again not by a factor of eight. The reader is cautioned here against assuming 
a direct proportionalityof cost to the number of users. Appendix A is provided to demonstrate the relationships 
which bear upon the costs given here. The reader should be aware of these relationships. SUMMARY Four 
configurations are examined in this paper. The first, called configurationA, is a mainframe computer 
with a graphics terminal attached via a communications line. The next two, called con­figuration B and 
C respectively are mainframe a computer connected to a small minicomputerbased graphics system and a 
mainframe connected to a medium size minicomputerbased system. Finally, configuration D, the fourth, 
is a dedicated large minicomputerbased system. All the data presented is based upon these four configurationsand 
the people, supplies, and hardware/softwareneeded to acquire, implement, operate, and maintain each. 
No conclusions or recommendationsare offered in this paper. The selection of a final configurationmust 
be tail­ ored to the user's requirements. This paper provides a structure for determining costs and affordability. 
The basis for examining the necessaryqualitative considerationsis also 216 provided. It is hoped that 
any bias toward one configurationor another is ommitted and that any judgements derived from this paper 
are the re­ sults of conclusions based solely upon the data contained therein. The cost data presented 
in the tables represent the upper bounds of costs. Economics may result with the sharing of resources. 
 For example, savings can result by eight users operating as a group on eight identical configura­ tions. 
Still further savings will result by a multi-user sharing one configuration. This sharing of costs 
would reduce the per user cost consider­ ably. BIBLIOGRAPHY <RefA>1. Archibald and Villoria, "Network-Based 
ManagementSystems (PERT/CPM)",New York: John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1967, pp.190-200  2. Potoczniak. 
"Affordabilityof Graphics Links  to Planning Models in Program Offices", ECOM Report 4406, April 1976 
 3. Clifford, "The Interactive Computer Network Graphics System", ECOM Report 4393, March 1976  4. 
Streeter, "Cost Benefit Evaluation of Scienti­ fic Computing Services", IBM Syst J, No. 3, pp. 219-233 
 5. Cotton, "Cost-BenefitAnalysis of Computer Graphics Systems", National Bureau of Standards Technical 
Note 826, April 1974  6. Chasen, "Economic Principles for Interactive Graphic Applications",Proceedings 
National Computer Conference, 1975, pp. 613-620  7. Dunn, "Computer Graphics: Capabilities, Costs, and 
Usefulness", Proceedings of SHARE XL, Denver, March 1973</RefA>   CONFIGURATION PARAMETER COMPARISON The 
following generalized graphicalparameters are meant to show the relative effects of each configurationupon 
a single parameter. 
			
