
 ABSTRACT Homogeneous coordinates have long been a standard tool of computer graphics. They afford 
a convenient representation for various geometric quantities in two and three dimensions. The representationof 
lines in three dimensions has, however, never been fully described. This paper presents a homogeneous 
formulation for lines in 3 dimensions as an anti-symmetric4x4 matrix which This tensor actually transforms 
as a tensor. exists in both covariant and contravariant forms, both of which are useful in different 
situations. The derivation of these forms and their use in solving various geometrical problems is described. 
 Key Words and Phrases: geometric calcula­tions, homogeneous coordinate's, computer graphics CR Categories: 
3.15, 5.14, 8.2 INTRODUCTION We will assume the reader is somewhat famil­iar with the homogeneous representationof 
points and planes in 3 space. A good introductionmay Briefly, a point is represented be found in [1]. 
 as as a four component vector, usually written A HOMOGENEOUS FORMULATION FOR LINES IN 3 SPACE James 
F. Blinn University of Utah  The dot product of a point (row)vector and a plane (column)vector is proportional 
to the distance from the point to the plane.  A special case of this is the fact that, if the dot 
product is zero, the point lies in the plane. If the dot product is non-zero, we can find the actual 
distance by the following means. Construct a three dimensional vector of unit length per­ (A B C) = (a 
b c)/ pendicular to the plane. 2+ bZ + c2. Scale it up by D and add it to the position of the point. 
 We should then have a point on the plane.  Since this point is on the plane, its dot product with 
the plane vector will be zero. We now have an equation which can be solved for D.  Any non-zero multiple 
of this row vector rep- The "real" components resents the same point. of the point may be discovered 
by dividing by the fourth component to obtain the three compo­nents:  The sign of D indicates which 
side of the plane the point was on. It can be ignored if only the distance is required. An object defined 
in terms of homogeneous points may be transformed by multiplicationof its points by a 4x4 matrix. A 
plane is representedas a four component Any combination of scaling, translation, rotation, column vector: 
 and perspective distortionmay be represented by the matrix T.  To determine the coordinates of a plane 
after it has undergone the same transforma­ tion we must pre-multiply by the inverse of T. vector rep- 
 Any non-zero multiple of this column The first three compo­ resents the same plane.  nents describe 
a vector normal to the plane and Thus the dot product of the transformed point and the fourth is related 
to its distance from the plane is the same as the dot product of the orig­origin. inal point and plane. 
The relationshipof a Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to 237 republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Siggraph 77, July 20-22 San Jose, California point lying on a plane is preserved. 
 Suppose we are given three points and we wish to determine the components of the plane vector through 
them. That is, we wish to solve for a, b, c, d in the equation:  Consider a fourth point not in the 
plane of the other three. Its dot product with the desired plane vector will then be non-zero. We will 
call it q. The resulting equation is then:  This equation may be solved by multiplying both sides by 
the adjoint of M. The adjoint is the transpose of the matrix formed from the co-factors of the original 
matrix. The co-factor of an element of a matrix is found by erasing the row and column containing the 
element and computing the determinant of the remaining smaller matrix, finally flipping the sign if the 
sum of the row and column indices of the element is odd. Thus the co-factor of the x4 term of M is: 
 The product of a matrix and its adjoint is the identity matrix times the determinant of the original 
matrix. The product of the adjoint with the right side of the equation is just q times the right hand 
column. Our equation is now:  Now, since any non-zero multiple of a plane vector represents the same 
plane, we can neglect the q and det M terms above. Finally, note that the co-factors do not contain any 
compo­nents of the arbitrarilychosen fourth point. This whole process can be representedin a short­ hand 
notation:  This is simply a generalizationof the more famil­iar shorthand notation of the cross product 
of two vectors in ordinary three space. The only problem that could arise is if the matrix M were singular. 
This only occurs if the three original points are co-linear, whereupon there is no solution. In this 
case, the four co-factors are all zero. We can take the appearance of four zeros when looking for a plane 
through three points as an indication that the three points were co-linear. There is a similar mechanism 
for determining the point of intersectionof three planes. That is, the homogeneous coordinates of the 
point of intersection is:  Again, the appearance of four zeros when solving for the point of intersection 
indicates that the three planes to not have a single common point. They, in fact, intersect on a line. 
 THE HOMOGENEOUS LINE REPRESENTATION We shall now construct a homogeneous rep­resentation of lines in 
3D taking the form of a 4x4 matrix we shall call L. It will have the property that any scalar multiple 
of it represents the same line. In addition, if a point vector is multipliedby L, a result of four zeros 
indicates that the point is on the line. The inspiration for this formulation comes from the Grassmann 
coordinate systems described in [2].  First re-consider the problem of finding the plane through three 
points. If the four co­factors in the solution are all zero then the three points were co-linear. We 
can re-interpret this as a condition upon a third point which will make it co-linear with two others. 
Thus for two given points P1 and P2, a third point is co­linear if:  238 intersection of the line with 
the plane:  we can write the four equations in matrix form:  The above anti-symmetricmatrix is then 
our desired line representation,L. Any non-zero multiple of L will still represent the same line. If 
a point is multiplied by L and four zeros result then the point is on the line. Furthermore, if the point 
is not on the line, the four coordinates obtained will be the same values obtained if all three points 
were solved for their common plane. That is, they will be the components of the plane common to the 
point and the line:  We need only to transpose the row vector to get the plane vector in its more familiar 
column format. There is an analagous process for generating the matrix representing the line formed 
by inter­ secting two planes. Given planes 1 and 2, the condition that a third plane contains their 
line of intersection is:  That is, the four equations must be satisfied:  The matrix K is an anti-symmetricmatrix 
which is a homogeneous representationof the line of inter­section of the two planes. Any non-zero multiple 
of K represents the same line. The product of K and any other plane vector will yield four zeros if 
the line is contained in the plane. If the line is not contained in the plane then the product will 
yield the homogeneous coordinates of the point of We need only to transpose the point vector to get 
 it in the more familiar row form. There is one somewhat surprising fact, however. For a given line, 
the matrix L formed by two points on the line is not the same as the matrix K formed by two planes 
intersectingon the line. We will now show this. THE DUAL LINE REPRESENTATION We first take note of 
another interpretation of the matrix L. Since each column yields a zero when multiplied by a point oh 
the line we can think of it as a plane containing the line. Similarly each row of K can be thought 
of as a point on the line which it represents. Thus L consists of four planes containing the line rep­resented 
by L and K consists of four points on the line represented by K. Let us take any three planes of L and 
attempt to find the point common to them. Since we know that the planes intersect, not at a single point, 
but at a line we expect to get four zeros.  In order to make x=y=z=w=0, as we know must be the case, 
we are forced to the conclusion that either s=q=p=0 or pu-qt+sr=0. By a similar operation on other choices 
of columns of L we find that the latter choice is correct, Thus, to reiterate, for any matrix L constructedfrom 
two point vectors to represent the line connecting them, the six coordinates will always satisfy the 
relation:  Given this relation we can construct the following matrix product:  The middle matrix is 
just L. The product is all zeros either identically or by virtue of relation 239 (*). How can we interpret 
the left hand matrix? Since each row multiplied by L yields four zeros each row must be a point on the 
line. The left hand matrix must then be the same as K, that is, four points on the line stacked into 
a 4x4 matrix. The matrix K thus contains the same numbers as the matrix L, they are just arranged differently. 
We can now match the names of the coordinates with their values if calculated as the intersectionof two 
planes:  Thus the homogeneous representationof a line exists in two dual forms generated by joining 
two points and by intersecting two planes. The six coordinate points generated in each case satisfy equation 
(*). DISTANCE MEASUREMENTS To further increase intuitive feel for the meaning of these six coordinates 
let us see where a given line intersects the plane at infinity. We multiply the K form of the line with 
the plane at infinity and get:  The intersection is the point at infinity (-s -q -p 0). That means 
that the 3D vector (s q p) points parallel to the line. Now let us determine the plane containing the 
line and the origin. We multiply the L form of the line with the origin and get:  This means that the 
3D vector (-r t -u) points perpendicular to this plane. The dot product of these two vectors is zero: 
this is just relation (*). Thus (s q p) lies in the plane containing the line and the origin. If we 
 compute the cross product of the two vectors we will get a third vector which is perpendic­ular to 
the line and pointing directly toward it.  By making use of (*) it can be shown that the length of T 
is  We can now compute the perpendiculardistance, D, from the origin to the line. Place the normalized 
T at the origin and scale it up by the factor D. We should now be at the point on the line which is closest 
to the origin.  Multiplying out and solving for D we get:  This is the perpendiculardistance from the 
origin to the line L. TRANSFORMINGLINES A homogeneouspoint is transformed by post­multiplyingby a 4x4 
matrix. A homogeneous plane is transformedby pre-multiplyingby the inverse of the point'transformationmatrix. 
We shall now derive the process whereby a homogeneous line is transformed. This procedure should preserve 
dot products just as the plane transformation does. That is, given the relationship:  we wish the transformed 
quantities to also satisfy the relationship:  We can express the primed point and plane in terms of 
the unprimed by  Combining these  Comparing this with the original point, line, plane relation we can 
state that a solution is:  Matrices which represent quantities which trans­form in this way are called 
tensors. In addition, since the transformationmatrix used is the inverse of the point transformationmatrix, 
it is a contra-varianttensor. By applying the analagous process to the K form of the line we get  This 
is another tensor. This time the trans­formation matrix is the same as the point trans­formation matrix 
so it is a covariant tensor. INTERSECTING LINES We have so far examined the problem of whether a point 
is on a line and whether a line is in a plane. There remains the question of whether two lines intersect, 
and, if so, where. 240 This can be solved by taking the point form of one line and multiplying it by 
the plane form of the other.  Each row of 1, being a point of line 1, will generate a plane through 
that point and through line 2. If the two lines intersect, each of these will be the same plane. The 
plane containing the two lines. Likewise each column of L2, being a plane containing line 2, will generate 
a point at the intersectionof that plane and line 1. If the two lines intersect, each of these will be 
the same point, the point of intersectionof the lines. Thus each row of N is a plane vector for the plane 
common to the lines. Each column of N is a point vector for the intersectionof the lines. N is the outer 
product of the point and the plane:  Since the point of intersectionalways lies in the plane of intersectionthe 
inner product will be zero. This can be calculated as the trace of N. In terms of the components of 
K 1 and L2 the trace of N has the value  Note the similarity to relation (*). For lines which do not 
intersect (skew lines) the trace of N will be proportional to the perpendicular distance between them. 
This can be seen in the following manner. First consider the cross product of the direction vectors of 
the two lines.  This vector will be perpendicular to both lines. A plane having (s3 q3 p3) as its (a 
b c) compo­nents will be parallel to both line 1 and line 2. We can find the particular such plane which 
contains line 1 by solving for di in  The perpendicular distance between the two planes and the perpendicular 
distance between the lines is  If the trace is zero, the lines intersect. If the trace is non-zero, 
the perpendicular distance is as shown. What, then, are the six homogeneous coordinates for the line 
along which this distance is measured? We already have the direction of the line as (S3 q3 3 It remains 
to find r3, t3, and U3. This can be accomplishedby using the three facts that line 3 intersects line 
1, line 3 intersects line 2, and the coordinates of line 3 must satisfy relation (*).  These three 
equations may then be solved for r3, t3,and u3.  CONCLUSION The line representationdeveloped here can 
be used to solve many geometric problems in three dimensions. Its form, however, does lead to much redundant 
calculation for many problems of interest. Its main use may therefore be as a conceptual tool to generate 
formulas for desired geometrical quantities which are then simplified based on other knowledge of the 
problem. REFERENCES <RefA>1. Newman, W. and Sproull, R. Principles of InteractiveComputer Graphics, McGraw-Hill, 
1973, pp. 467.  2. Hodge, W.V.D. and Pedoe, D. Methods of Algebraic Geometry, Cambridge University Press, 
1968, pp. 286.   </RefA>This yields four equations all of which can be shown to have the common solution 
 Similarly, the plane parallel to line 1 which contains line 2 has  The perpendicular distance of each 
of these planes to the origin is 241 
			
