
 A LOGIC PROGRAMMING MODEL OF THE GAME OF SPROUTS Ralph M. Butler, Selden Y. Trimble, Ralph W. Wilkerson 
 ABSTRACT The game of Sprouts has intrigued mathematicians for nearly twenty years. This paper describes 
a repre- sentation scheme which simplifies much of the geom- etry of the game. Using this representation~ 
we develop a Prolog program which will play Sprouts. It is hoped that the program will prove to be a 
useful research tool in finding the key to a winning strategy for Sprouts and that the representation 
will serve as a useful model for studying planar graphs. 1. INTRODUCTION The game of Sprouts was introduced 
in 1967 by two British mathematicians, John H. Conway and Michael S. Paterson [l,p 564]. It is a two-player 
game in- volving the construction of a graph. (A graph is a non-empty set of vertices, i.e., points, 
and a set of edges, i.e., curves joining pairs of vertices.) The game begins with a graph that contains 
only vertices, the exact number being decided by mutual agreement. If n is this number, the game is called 
an n-point game. The players take turns moving. A move always consists of joining two existing vertices 
by a curve or of joining one existing vertex to itself by a curve. In either case, a new vertex is then 
put somewhere in the middle of the curve. The net effect is that one new vertex and two new edges have 
been added to the graph. There are two restrictions: First, no vertex can have an order greater than 
three. (The order of a vertex is the number of edges coming into it.) Second, the graph must always be 
planar. (A planar graph is one which can be drawn on a plane so that its edges intersect only at vertices.) 
 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are 
not made or distributed for direet commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/ or specific permission. 
&#38;#169;1987 ACM 0-89791-217-9/87/0002/0319 75¢ It is convenient to think of a vertex as having three 
sockets into which the ends of edges may be plugged. Using this terminology, an n-point game begins with 
3n sockets. Two sockets are used up each time a player puts in a new curve. However, since the player 
must put a new vertex in the middle of the curve, he creates one new socket. (The new vertex instantly 
has two edges coming into it, so it has only one socket left.) The result of a move is to reduce the 
number of sockets by one. Since there must be at least two sockets available in or- der to make a move, 
the n-point game cannot last more than 3n-i moves. The game ends when it becomes im- possible to move. 
The winner is the last to move. (A variant is that the loser is the last to move; this needs to be decided, 
of course, before the game begins.) An example of a 2-point game, won by the second player, is given 
below: 1 * * 2 1 *~.__._.-- -~--~ ~ 3 4 4 3 3 4 3 Figure i. 319 Note that, in the final position, 
vertices 4 and 6 each have an unused socket. However, any curve joining them would have to cross an already 
existing edge, thereby violating the condition that the graph be planar or that no order of a vertex 
be greater than three. It is known that the number of moves in an n-point game must be between 2n and 
3n-l, and that these bounds are sharp [l,p 564]. However, it does not seem to be known in general whether 
the first player or the second player has a forced win. The following is known: Player with n forced 
win 2nd 2nd Ist ist Ist 2nd Table i. Some of this information has not come easily. The original 
proof that the 2nd player has a forced win in the 6-point game was forty seven pages long [l,p 5681. 
2. LIST MODEL OF SPROUTS Before discussing the Prolog representation of Sprouts, our list model of Sprouts 
and a description of the legal moves based on this model must be pre- sented in some detail. As an aid 
to understanding this, we shall refer to Figure 2, a 6-point game after six moves have been made. 9 
3l __ ~ ~ _ / 5 "- -c.-~ 8 Figure 2. an open, connected set. In Figure 2, there appear to be six such 
regions. The first is the unbounded or outside region. Next, there are two on the left, one an annulus 
(doughnut) and the other a disk. Then there are the two half-disks in the middle. Finally, on the right 
there is a disk with a radius sticking into it. Any move made in Figure 2 must be made entirely inside 
one of these six regions. For example, vertex 1 could be joined to vertex 2 by drawing a curve inside 
the annulus. But vertex 2 could not be connected to vertex 8 because it would be necessary to draw a 
curve that crossed then outer circle of the annulus, thereby making the new graph non-planar. However, 
it can be misleading in Sprouts to say there are six regions in Figure 2. Neither of the half-disks in 
the middle can have any moves made inside it because there are not enough available sockets. Vertices 
4 and Ii have been completely used up, and vertex 12 has only one available socket left. So, as far as 
Sprouts is concerned, these two regions don't exist, i.e., Figure 2 consists of four regions. In Sprouts, 
a region may be completely determined by specifying its boundary. The simplest region in Figure 2 is 
the disk on the left that is inside the annulus. It's boundary is just the circle on which are vertices 
1 and i0. From the standpoint of Sprouts, the only significant thing about the boundary is that it contains 
these two vertices. So, we represent this boundary by the list (i I0). The annulus is more complicated. 
It has three boundary components, i.e., its boundary is broken into three disconnected pieces. These 
components are represented as (9 3), (i0 i), and (2). The unbounded region has two boundary components, 
 (9 3) and (8). This needs explaining. First of all, it is not necessary to list the two half-disks in 
the middle because vertices 4 and ii cannot be used in making a move in Figure 2. Next, the represen- 
tation, (8), is of the same type as the represen- tation of the isolated vertex, 2, which is a boundary 
component of the annulus; yet (8) appears to be more than just an isolated vertex. But in fact, in the 
Sprouts game of Figure 2, (8) acts ex- actly as though it were just a point; so it is suf- ficient to 
represent it that way. Vertex 5 is topologically part of the boundary component, but it has no available 
sockets and so can be ignored. The final region has only one boundary component, but that component 
is rather complicated. We rep- resent it as (8 7 6 7) or as any cyclic permutation of this. This representation 
is determined by mov- ing inside the region, but almost on the boundary, in either a clockwise or a counterclockwise 
direc- tion. (Follow the dotted curve.) Notice that ver- tex 7 is listed twice. A later example will 
show the necessity for this. Also notice that vertex 5 is not listed at all. The requirement that the 
graphs which appear in Sprouts should all be planar means that every move in Sprouts must be made inside 
a plane region, i.e., Using the list representation of Sprouts, the position in Figure 2 is described 
as follows: Ri: (Cl) R2: (el C2 C3) R3: (C2 C4) R4: (C5) Cl: (1 10) C2: (9 3) C3: (2) C4: (8) 
 C5: (8 7 6 7) Table 2. Here, "R" stands for region and "C" for (boundary) component. To use this 
representation of Sprouts, we must reformulate the legal moves of Sprouts within this new context. While 
the "paper and pencil" mode of playing Sprouts is very straightforward (i.e. con- nect 2 points whose 
degree is less than 3 with a line that does not cross a line), the method of play now proceeds in a stepwise 
fashion. First, a region must be specified in which the move is to take place. Two cases arise. In 
the first, two different components from this region and a point on each component are selected. The 
two points are joined creating a new component which replaces the two original components. No new re- 
 gions are created. In our representation, the move is interpreted as follows: Let Cl = (Pi P2 ... Pn) 
 and C2 = (QI Q2 ... Qm) be the boundary components being connected and suppose furthermore that Pj 
is being joined to Qi. Let R denote the newly added point on the curve joining Pj and Qi. Also let 
Pk ... Pt (or Qk ... Qt), for k and t any values, stand for all points from Pk to Pt except when Pk 
= Pt and in this case it will stand for just Pk. The order may be either increasing or decreasing depending 
 upon whether k < t or not. There are four possible subcases which can occur. If Cl = (Pi) and C2 = 
(Qi) consist of just singleton points then the new com- ponent will be the list (Pi R Q1 R). The next 
two cases are when only one of the components consists of a single point say Cl = (Pi) and C2 = (Qi 
... Qm) then the new component will be the list (Pl R Qi ... Q1Qm ... Qi R). Lastly, if both components 
contain more than one point then the new component will be- come the list (PI ... Pj R Qi ... Qi Qm 
... Qi R Pj ... Pn). After the new component has been constructed, the old components are deleted from 
the region in which the move was made. Furthermore, it helps to keep the representation free of unnecessary 
information by deleting all points whose socket counts are zero. Also, all regions that contain only 
0 or 1 open sockets may be deleted since a move cannot be made in a region unless there are at least 
2 open sockets available. In the second case, one boundary component and two points on this component 
are selected. (In this case, the points may be the same provided that the point has at least two open 
sockets available.) Two new regions will be created, so begin by giving them names. The unused boundary 
components of the old region may be assigned in any manner to the two new regions, provided that each 
such component goes to exactly one of the new regions. Again, relative to our representation suppose 
the boundary component selected is C = (Pi ... Pn) and we wish to join Pi to Pj where i = j is permissible. 
Three situations can occur in this type of move: (I) a point with a socket count of 3 is connected to 
itself, (2) a point with socket count of 2 is con- nected to itself, and (3) separate points are con- 
nected. In the first ,case, the new components formed are identical. That is, if C = (PI) then the two 
new boundary components are Cl = (Pi R) and C2 = (PI R) where R is the new vertex on the curve joining 
P1 to itself. In each of the last two cases, the point(s) is (are) part of a larger component. In the 
second case, the first component formed is the same as the components formed in the first case,i.e. (Pi 
R). Then, to form the second new component, the list of points is split into a Head and a Tail (i.e., 
everything before and after the point being connected to itself). The second com- ponent is the list 
of points (Head Pi R Pi Tail) where either the Head or Tail may be null. Note that if both the Head and 
Tail are null then the second component is just (Pi R). In the third case, the two new boundary components 
will be Cl = (Pi ... Pj R) and C2 = (Pj Tail Head Pi R) where Head is all elements on the list up to 
but not including Pi and the Tail is all elements after Pj, It is assumed that Pi comes before Pj on 
the list C and as before the Head and/or Tail may be null. As before, we remove all points whose socket 
counts are zero and all regions that contain only 0 or I open sockets. Figure 3 shows a 4-point game 
after four moves have been made. 6 Figure 3. The bounded region has only one component, (5 8 2 8 7 
3 7 4). There are two ways to join vertices 4 and 8 in this region. Here, P8 = 4 and P4 = P2 = 8. Suppose 
P8 and P2 are joined. The result will be two new regions, each having one component. The new components, 
would be (8 2 8 7 3 7 4 9) and (4 5 8 9) before deletion of dead points or (2 7 3 7 9) and (5 9) after 
deletion. On the other hand, if P8 and P4 are joined, the new components, are (8 7.3 7 4 9) and (4 5 
8 2 8 9) before deletion or (7 ~ 7 9) and (5 2 9) after. The results of the two ways of joining vertices 
4 and 8 are very different. This example shows the necessity in certain cases of double-listing of a 
single vertex in the list re- presenting a component. 3. THE PROLOG REPRESENTATION Since our representation 
is intended to accu- rately model the game of Sprouts, a player should be able to draw a particular game 
on a piece paper as the game proceeds. Remember however, that the program does not represent the game 
strictly in terms of points and edges. Rather, the program maintains a database consisting of three entities: 
points, components, and regions. Each occurrence of an entity is represented by a sentence of a re- lation 
in the database. The regions represent the areas in which moves may be made and are defined by lists 
of components. The components consist of points and define the boundaries of regions. Like- wise, the 
points on a component define that compo- nent. A move is made by selecting a region in which to move, 
then selecting two components (which may be the same), and finally, selecting two points (which may be 
the same) from the respective compo- nents. Points, components, and regions are identified in the database 
by unique integers. Each point is said to have some number of "sockets". A socket is simply a location 
where an edge may be connected. At the beginning of a game, the relation describing the points shows 
each point to have three open sockets. If a point is used in a move, the open socket count for that point 
is decremented in the database. Table 3 is an example of how the relation representing the points may 
be viewed. It repres- ents a 3-point game after point I has been connected to itself isolating point 
2 from point 3, as in Figure 4. * 3 Figure 4. point number of number open sockets Table 3. Relation: 
point-has-sockets-open component points in number component (2)  (3)   (1 4) Table 4. Relation: 
component-has-points Note that the points in each component are main- tained in the database as a list. 
 The regions consist of components and define the areas in which moves may be made. The relation de- 
scribing the regions in the database for the above example may be viewed as listed in Table 5. region 
components number in region (2 4)  (3 4) Table 5. Relation: region-has-component  The components 
in each region are maintained in a list much the same as points on a component. Using these relations, 
it is possible to maintain a database that contains all points, components, and regions formed during 
the game. However, it is usually more convenient to play a game in which all "dead" points, components, 
and regions have been removed. For example, if a point has degree three, then that point no longer has 
any meaning in the game. The same is true for a region in which there is only one free socket. Our representation 
sup- ports the ability to request that all such dead en- tities be deleted from the database. Our implementation 
of the above representation is written in LPA micro-PROLOG Professional. The da- tabase consists of sentences 
that define the point, component, and region relations described in Tables 3, 4, and 5 above. The rules 
that define how to play a game and how to maintain the database during play are also implemented as Prolog 
relations. The cur- rent implementation supports several functions: i. building the initial database 
for an n-point game, 2. updating the database each time a move is made in order to reflect the current 
status of the  The components consist of points and form the game, regions. The relation describing 
the components the database for the above example may be viewed listed in Table 3. in as 3. deleting 
dead information from the database if that option has been selected by the user, 4. the ability to have 
the computer select and  make a move heuristically or randomly, and  5. the ability to have the computer 
play an entire game by itself, using 4 above.  The code to implement these functions requires ap- proximately 
700 lines of Prolog. The code to main- tain the representation without the deletion option is roughly 
half of the total. The program has been written and tested on an IBM PC personal computer. Thus, it is 
easily ported. As stated earlier, the program currently selects a move at random if the user wishes. 
However, the code can be modified to include the user's own strategy. Separate strategies for the first 
and second players might even prove useful. The code is modularized so that such modifications should 
prove to be relatively simple. We hope that others will develop an interest in attempting to discover 
a winning strategy for the game of Sprouts and will find our representation and program to be useful 
tools towards that end. For those who are interested, we would be happy to share a copy of our program. 
 REFERENCES <RefA>[i] E.R. Berlekamp, J. H. Conway, and R. K. Guy, Winning Ways for your mathematical plays, 
Aca- demic Press, New York 1982. [2] J.H. Briggs, LPA micro-PROLOG Professional User Guide, Logic Programming 
Associates Ltd, London 1985. [3] K.L. Clark and F.G. McCabe, micro-PROLOG: Pro- gramming in Logic, Prentice/Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 1984. [4] Martin Gardner, Mathematical Games: Of sprouts and Brussels sprouts; 
games with a topological flavor, Sci. Amer. 217 l(July 1967) 112-115. [5] Gordon Pritchett, The game 
of Sprouts, Two-Year Coll. Math. J. 7 4(Dec. 1976) 21-25. Ralph M. Butler, Department of Computer Sci- 
ence, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, Florida, USA 32216 Selden Y. Trimble, Department of 
Mathematics, University of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, Missouri, USA 65401 Ralph W. Wilkerson, Department 
of Computer Science, University of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, Missouri, USA 65401  </RefA>
			
