
 "Teaching Systems Design through Systems Documentation" John P. WALTER, D.Sc. Accounting/ Computer 
Information Systems / Law CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, DOMINGUEZ HILLS CARSON, CA 90747 213 / 516 3556 
 ABSTRACT This paper describes a teaching methodology, illustrating: e Use of case studies having general 
appeal to full-time students and professional persons,  Generally-accepted system documents,  A prototype 
sequence for presentation of each document type,  Measures of success of the methodology, and  o 
Pitfalls. CASE STUDIES The following case studies are in active usage:  An order-entry system for 
an electronics wholesaler (ref. 3),  An order-entry system for a pharmaceutical supply firm (ref. I), 
  A personnel/payroll system for a computer service organization (ref. 2), and  Various real estate 
applications (ref. 4) -multiple listings -appraisal, and -property management.  DOCUMENT TYPES Each 
of these systems may be characterized by a number of documents, which include: ® organization chart 
 system flowchart  HIPO charts  detailed logic flowchart ¢ data flow diagram  o WARNIER-ORR diagram 
 NASSI-SCHNEIDERMANN diagram  decision table  interview package ® questionnaire  checklists ® 
table of correspondence for data codes ® output media specifications  input media specifications  
 turnaround media specifications  CRT screen specifications  record layout  data element dictionary 
  o file specifications e standard procedures document  sample contract  project budget and schedule 
contingency plan  run cost estimate  specifications for security and controls  data processing 
insurance survey  audit trail  software test documentation  PROTOTYPE SEQUENCE The "standard treatment" 
for each document type contains: o motivational material (using economic or other arguments),  explanation 
of the underlying principles, e how to read the document,  how to prepare one,  a written assignment, 
  how to evaluate one's own efforts,  discussion points,  glossary items,  bibliography.  MEASURES 
OF SUCCESS Good results are evident, viz, i. The hire rate of graduates, whose curricu- lum contains 
this approach to systems design, exceeds 90%, 2. Starting salaries of these graduates frequently exceeds 
that of the full-time faculty who have taught them, and  3. Numerous requests for information, from 
current and prospective employers, frequently exceed the resources required to process them.  151 PITFALLS 
 All of the above is not without drawbacks, to wit i. The classroom environment, with limited access 
to field study experience, necessarily compromises the realism of this approach. 2. Instructional support 
resources are neces- sarily severely limited in public univer- sities at this time.  3. There is a high 
grading overhead, requiring considerable faculty preparation and follow- up outside of the classroom. 
 4. A uniform top-down leaves the novice student with many unfilled gaps; bottom-up bores the experienced 
ones. Treading the fine line in between, a custom-tailored treatment for each document type has proven 
necessary.  BIBLIOGRAPHY i. DAWSON, Peter P. &#38; GALLEGOS, Frederick Case Study II: MEDCO~ Inc. 
CHICAGO: SCIENCE RESEARCH ASSOCIATES, 1973 2. DAWSON, Peter P. &#38; WALTER, John P. Systems Design 
and Documentation: An Experiential Approach TORRANCE, CA: TAM'S, 1982  3. SCIENCE RESEARCH ASSOCIATES, 
INC. Case Study in Business S~stems Design PALO ALTO: SRA, 1970  4. WALTER, John P. Systems Case Studies 
in Real Estate Applications LONG BEACH, CA: KINKO, 1981  
			