
 KING KONG VERSUS GODZILLA : A TEAM APPROACH TO TRAINING ON INTERNET RESOURCES Vicki L. Pengelly, Computing 
and Information Services Bar~ N. Brown, Mansfield Libra~, The University of Montana Missoula, MT Am I 
Godzilla or King Kong? I m not certain, but in reality the team approach to teaching Internet resources 
that I will describe here has gone ve~ smoothly, not at all like the movie whose title 1[used for this 
paper. You may not get the entire picture in living color, but I hope you ll get a vivid image of our 
approach. Here at The University of Montana our curriculum on wide-area network resources comprises three 
courses (with a fourth to be added soon): 1) Introduction to Wide Area Networks, 2) Library Catalogs 
and Databases, and 3) Computer Conferences and Electronic Journals. Our team approach to presenting this 
material has proved valuable on our campus. RAISING MONTANA : THE SETTING The University of Montana is 
located in Missoula, a community of about 50,000 people in the western part of the state. Despite the 
forbidding names of some local points of interest, like Hellgate Canyon and Rattlesnake Wilderness, students 
are flocking to UM like never before. Last year s record high enrollment of 10,800 will easily be eclipsed 
by this year s predicted count of 11,700. When they aren t sending e-mail or telnetting to library catalogs, 
our faculty, stafT, and students may be kayaking, mountain climbing, skiing --well, you get the idea. 
Oh, and watching movies, too. Of course, they also teach, study, do research, ancl keep the University 
going. THE BAUDFATHER : A BRIEF HISTORY OF OUR NETWORK ACCESS About four years ago, the strdT of Computing 
and Information Services (CIS) arranged for uucp access on our campus. Access was available only through 
our Unix machine (at the time a VAX n/785) and we exchanged e-mail by making a phone call in the middle 
of the night to transmit messages (first to UC Davis and later to Apple.tom). We didn t teach any classes 
on wide-area network resources then, but helped people get started through one-on-one consultation. Sometimes 
we got the feeling that the faculty wanted to send their Mafia friends to visit us, because it was so 
frustrating for them to have to wait (at least overnight or sometimes a few days) for a response to their 
e-mail. Then, about two years ago, we got full Internet access through a research grant obtained by a 
professor in the School of Forestry, and we have recently joined NorthWestNet. At present, anyone with 
an account on our central computers has access to most of the Internet resources (the exceptions are 
explained later). The general-purpose central systems are a DECsystem 5500 running Ultrix and a VAXcluster 
running VMS. The clustered machines are VAX 6000, model 510s. Numerous other machines, such as VAX 3400s, 
provide specialized service (e.g., to the Residence Halls stafll For the past two years the University 
President has allocated fimds to provide every faculty member with a microcomputer. During the past year 
we have witnessed the installation of a fiber-optic backbone on campus and now are striving to hookup 
all the offices during the next couple years. Our library has been hooked up to the backbone to expedite 
the automation of their holdings and the delivery of catalog information to the rest of campus. A couple 
other crucial buildings have also been wired in the last few months. In the meantime, people dial in 
via phone lines, use the computer labs on campus, or obtain access to the central computers (and thus 
to Internet resources) through existing hard-wired lines. Permission to copy without fee all or part 
of this material is granted provided that the wpies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantoge, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publi.eatwn and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Associatwn for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a f= andlor specific permission. Copyright 1992 ACM 0-89791-546-1 J92J(X111 
/0181..$1.50 stepping into the future      ACM SIGUCCS xx 1992 181 A CLASS IS BORN : HOW WE DECIDED 
TO COLLABORATE When we first obtained full Internet access, we taught one class, which focused mainly 
on exchanging electronic mail. It also briefly mentioned such resources as ftp and telnet, but we weren 
t really sure how many people on campus would have a need for those tools. Certain faculty members seemed 
very interested in the resources (in fact they had been begging for network access for years), but it 
seemed hard to convince other people that these tools might prove useful to them, One of the people who 
attended an early class on network mail was Barry Brown, our science librarian. After taking that class, 
Barry approached me about a cooperative effort between the library and CIS. He proposed that he and I 
offer a series of classes on Internet resources. I liked his idea for several reasons: 1) Traditionally 
there had been little interaction between the staff in CIS and the library. Without knowing anything 
about the history of relations between our two departments, I knew I wanted to contribute toward increased 
cooperation. 2) I anticipated that people would be asking about bibliographic information, such as library 
catalogs &#38;nd databases, that I wasn t very familiar with but that Barry and other librarians would 
be well acquainted with. 3) I had limited experience teaching with another instructor and thought it 
would be beneficial to improve my teaching methods by observing someone else s style and by being part 
of a team. For the last six quarters, beginning in the spring of 1991, then, Barry and I have offered 
a series of three classes, mentioned previously. This fall we plan to add another course to the series; 
the new course will be devoted to gopher, wais, world wide web, etc. We haven t made it big in the entertainment 
industry yet, but we are enjoying the classes. A ROOM WITH NO VIEW : THE LAB AND EQUIPMENT We offer all 
our classes in a computer lab in the library. We usually have an overhead projector and screen so that 
we can display instructions. Participants are expected to do hands-on exercises, trying out the instructions 
we give. When we first started giving these classes, the lab had 16 Zenith Z-29 terminals, which sometimes 
worked. The room was not configured well for instruction (with some terminals facing the outside walls 
and others facing each other in the center of the room). Last year the lab was revamped. We now have 
20 DECstation 212P 286 PCs, each with a VGA monochrome monitor, a hard drive, and a 3,5 floppy drive. 
Until recently, the connections to the central computers were been handled via Kermit and LATservers 
(which presented various problems, such as garbage characters appearing on the screen while people tried 
to work during class). Just a few weeks ago, new wiring was installed and the connections now are handled 
via Pathworks. This semester marks the first time we will have tried offering the classes with Pathworks 
connections. I should be able to give an update on the performance of the equipment at the SIGUCCS conference. 
AROUND THE WORLD IN A DAZE : OUR APPROACH Our approach is briefly outlined here. More detailed class 
outlines and sample handouts will be provided at the end of my talk at SIGUCCS. Thus far we have been 
dividing up the material into three separate classes. Participants are not required to take all the classes 
or to take them in any particular order. However, we strongly recommend that they take all three, with 
the introduction preceding the others. We find that many people do enroll in the entire sequence in a 
given quarter. We teach people how to log in, how to connect to a database or how to sign onto a LISTSERVer, 
But, beyond the mechanics, we stress the use of directories and finding aids, the way catalogs and databases 
are organized, bibliographic searching techniques, We stress the functions of the Internet, not just 
the procedures of getting to a particular bit of information. We try to show people how they can begin 
to teach themselves about the resources. 1) Introduction to Wide Area Networks The first class is presented 
in two sessions, each 80 minutes long (and usually held two days apart). I have been teaching this class 
by myself, although Barry and I recently decided that we should both be present to introduce the resources 
in the first session. The initial meeting covers the instructions for logging into the central system 
and gives the details of exchanging electronic mail. If the participants have accounts on both the Ultrix 
and VMS systems, then we go over the mail programs on both systems. We talk about various types of networks 
and the e-mail addresses needed for each type, such as MUSEnet (Montana University System Education Network), 
BITNET, and Internet. The second session briefly introduces fkp and telnet, and also mentions supercomputer 
sites. The telnet examples usually include a campus-wide information system and another interesting site, 
such as Cleveland Freenet. I make use of a handout produced by Merit Network, Inc., and entitled Getting 
Started with Networking, Using the Internet. The ftp example usually involves copying a small README 
file from another site. Here is a brief outline of the plan for the introdu~ctory class. More detailed 
outlines and class handouts will be provided at SIGUCCS (for all of three classes). I. Introduction/opening 
remarks A. What are wide area networks, how and when did we get access B. What can we do with them, a 
few examples 1. send mail 2. participate in discussions 3. lookup information in library catalogs&#38; 
databases 4. transfer files we are interested in 5. caution re networks are dynamic; things change 
 6. people log in 7. read technical details from one of the help files  II. Housekeeping A Whereto 
get additional informatiodhel]p B. Policies and ethical considerations for using networks HI. Overview 
of our hardware configuration ami network links IV. Procedures for sending and receiving network mail 
on various systems (MUSEnet, Intemet, BITNET, UUCP A read mail received from me (sent before class) 
B. send mail from their Lewis accounts to my Selway account or vice versa (as example of MUSEnet) C. 
send mail to IntemeW31TNET addresses they bring with them or to my colleague at the University of Wisconsin-LaCrosse 
D. additional hints for customizing mail (aliases on Unix, logical definitions on Selway, cutting &#38; 
pasting responses, etc.) V. Procedures for remote logins via telnet, brief overview A explanation of 
command syntax&#38; addresses B. try one example of a campus-wide information system  W. Procedures 
for file transfer via ftp  A explanation of command syntax&#38; addresses, directory structure B. try 
one example of transferring a short file C. discuss archie &#38; try if time VIL~o~h procedures, as time 
allows (all very briefly A listservers &#38; computer conferences B. supercomputer access C. Usenet news 
groups VIII. Anticipated improvements in network access and services 2) Searching Library Catalogs and 
Databases via Internet This is an 80-minute class that Barry and I teach together. It is usually held 
two weeks after the introduction, to give people a chmce to practice the skills they learned in the first 
class. Here is the brief outline: L Introduction (given by the librarian) A Welcoming comments, purpose 
of the class B. Get participants logged in II. Overview of network resources (librarian) A Intemet, 
BITNET, MUSEnet, other B. Information resources III. Computer-related issues (computing services staff) 
A Policies on use of telnet, ftp, file storage B. Role of computing center staff vs. library staff (what 
kind of assistance given by each) C. Terminal-specific commands 1. PCs vs. terminals (differences in 
procedures) 2. Special keys for scrolling, deleting, etc. 3. Unix system case sensitive  D. Overview 
of ftp and telnet 1. ftp directory structure&#38; commands 2. archie 3. directed example of file transfer 
 4. telnet commands  IV, Why search library catalogs? (librarian) V. Problems searching library catalogs 
(librarian) VI. Guides to library catalogs (libratian) A Art St. George and Billy Barron B. ftp commands 
for accessing the guides C. Hytelnet VII. General features of library catalogs (librarian) A terminal 
emulation B. quitfexit C. help D. search commands VIII, Directed examples A Hytelnet B. Australian Dynix 
catalogs C. CARL 3) Computer Conferences, Electronic Journals, and Publicly Accessible Files This 80-minute 
class is held about 2 weeks after the class on library catalogs. The outline for this class is as follows: 
I. Introduction (librarian) A Welcome, purpose of class B. Log in II. Overview of networks and resources 
(librarian) III. Mail commands &#38; procedures (computm center stafll A Specific commands for cut and 
paste, reply, etc. B. Directed example C. If necessary, demonstrate both Unix and VMS systems of mail 
 W. Computer conferences (librarian) A. BITNET vs. Internet B. Moderated vs. unmoderated C. How to access 
a list- D. Etiquette E. BITNET LISTSERV commands (e.g., subscribe, unsubscribe, set nomail) F. Directed 
example V. Electronic journals and newsletters (librarian) A-Type B. Lists and how to access C!. General 
command D. Directed example VI. Local conferencing sof%ware (computer center stafl) A VAX Notes VII. 
Usenet news (computer center stx@ VIII. Future improvements anticipated (both instructors) PLANES,TRAINS,AND 
AUTOMOBILES : GOING OUT OF OUR WAY TO GIVE EXTRA HELP In addition to our regularly scheduled short courses, 
we also provide follow-up individualized consulting for people who want more details than we can provide 
in class. Our front-line help desk in CIS has seen a tremendous increase in the number of questions related 
to Internet resources. By implication our consultants at the help desk are assiduously learning as much 
as they can about these resources, and they have been some of our most active users of the Intemet. Another 
service we offer, whenever we have time, is to provide special presentations for individual departments. 
For example, Barry and I gave a class for the faculty in Foreign Languages and Literatures. Other departments 
receiving special presentations include the School of Business and the Division of Biological Sciences. 
Some of these presentations are intended to pique the interest of the faculty; we want them to consider 
these resources as a way to enhance their tools for research (e.g., using library catalogs and databases 
via telnet) or as a way to collaborate with colleagues (via e-mail) without the expense of a 1~ eACMSIGUCCS 
xx 1992 0 a e a e e o phone bill or a plane ticket. These specialized presentations also allow us to 
focus on tools of interest specifically to a particular group. For example, the faculty who teach German 
and are training K-12 teachers might be interested in the Usenet news group k12.lang.deutsch-eng. One 
technique we use is to sign onto a relevant LISTSERV ahead of time and then display some of the more 
interesting messages and responses. In preparing for these presentations, we boost our knowledge of the 
Intemet, and we provide a service to the faculty by filtering some of the information they might otherwise 
have to wade through themselves. THE WIZARD OF AWES : HOW HAVE WE BENEFITTED FROM THIS JOURNEY? Our 
approach has proved beneficial in a number of ways. Like Dorothy on her way to Oz, I have been very thanki%l 
to have a fiend to travel with on the yellow-brick road of Intemet resources. Barry is an energetic colleague 
with a good sense of humor and good organizational skills. I have learned a lot from his teaching style 
and his knowledge of the Intemet. I am thankful that he took the initiative to get our cooperative effort 
going. I like to think our efforts have contributed toward greater cooperation between the libra~ staff 
and CIS. For example, staff members from our two departments have recently launched a VAX Notes discussion 
group to begin planning a campus-wide information system. The staff in both departments are interested 
in managing, transmitting, cataloging, and otherwise processing information; it makes sense that some 
cooperative efforts could benefit us all and the rest of our campus. During class I am Barry s built-in 
teaching assistant. I can go around the room and see whether people are following his instructions. If 
someone gets stuck, I can try to help out while he continues with the instructions for the other members 
of the class. Similarly, he plays the TA s role when I m giving my spiel. You might say we have each 
received a heart, a brain, and some courage along the way. Now, if I could just get some sparkly red 
shoes! THE SEVEN YEAR GLITCH : WHAT CAN GO WRONG? So far the whole experience has sounded pretty rosy. 
However, we do run into a few glitches now and then. At the end of some of our classes, we have occasionally 
found ourselves quoting Marilyn Monroe: Golly! We have reorganized the courses several times and  eoe@e*ee 
00 gmrntng frm * pd, have reshuffled the topics covered in each class, The main problems we ve encountered 
include the following 1) Mixed audience: We don t have enough stti or time to offer more than one series 
of classes. Thus, in one group we might have some individuals with Unix accounts and some with VMS accounts. 
The operating system commands are different and the way people address their network mail is different 
(for example, on our VMS system we run NIX fcm sending network mail). The mail features and file features 
differ a great deal on the two systems. Furthermore, up to this point, some resources have been restricted 
to one system or the other. We have had Usenet news groups only on our Unix machine and the VAX Notes 
conferencing program only on the VMS system. This intermingling invariably causes some confhsion. We 
have tried various ways of dealing with this issue (such as having the VMS people simply tune out while 
the Unix people try a few commands or having each group sit on a different side of the room). Our solutions 
have been less than satisfactory and we are in the midst of deciding whether we should offer completely 
separate classes to the two groups. 2) Equipment problems: The lab we use has equipment problems at times. 
The problems are intermittent and unpredictable (of course) but sometimes render the equipment totally 
useless. We are in the process of installing new connections and network software that we hope will alleviate 
these problems. In spite of the difficulties we keep using the same lab because it is best suited to 
our needs (because of the number of machines provided, the access to central computers, and the proximity 
to our offices). Besides, our labs are so heavily used on campus that it would be difficult to switch. 
3) Redundancy: So far we have not required that people take the Introduction to Wide Area Networks before 
coming to the classes on library catalogs and computer conferences. Thus, there is some unavoidable redundancy 
in the classes. For example, in the class on computer conferences we go over the procedures for electronic 
mail, since people must use mail to subscribe to LISTSERVS. We don t give as much detail on mail in that 
class as we do in the introductory session, but for someone who attends both classes, there is redundancy. 
(Of course, I like to think of it as helpful review.) 4) Lack of time: One comment we consistently receive 
on our class evaluations is that people would lilke the classes to be longer so that they can spend more 
time going over the resources. We would like to offer longer classes or perhaps more sections, but we! 
simply do not have the staff to do so right now. As it is, Barry and I are stretched so thin that we 
find it difficult to meet often enough to discuss revising our course outlines or to do some of the research 
into new resources that we want to do. At the present time, we are just striving to give the best, albeit 
brief, introduction we can. BACK TO THE FUTURE : OUR GOALS FOR IMPROVEMENT We re always learning, always 
revising our courses, always striving to improve. Some ideas we re currently considering are 1. This 
semester we plan to add another course to the series; the new course would focus on gopher, wais and 
other network information services. 2. We are considering whether to hold completely separate classes 
for people on the Unix system vs. those on the VMS system. 3. We may want to make the introductory class 
a requirement for attending the later classes. Or we might have one 8-hour class that people could sign 
up for if they have no experience with the resources. And then we would also keep offering the current 
series of classes for those who need to pick and choose (perhaps someone already knows mail and just 
needs to learn about library catalogs). In fact, it would be easy to envision a semester-long course 
for academic credit. 4. We sincerely hope the equipment problems are behind us, because they have been 
a major source of frustration. 5. We are looking for ways of improving service on campus, which will 
have implications for our classes. For example, we are considering gatewaying LISTSERV conferences to 
e-mail. We are planning for a campus wide information system and will have to decide how to incorporate 
that into our classes once it is built. We have alternative mail programs (elm and pine, in addition 
to the usual mail program) and news readers (vnews and trn) on our Unix machine, Which of these should 
we emphasize? Should we present all of them?  THE PRINCESS FRIED : COURSE EVALUATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS 
COMMENTS At the end of every class we hand out evaluation forms and ask the participants to return them 
to us. A sample evaluation form will be provided with the course outlines. Generally our evaluations 
have been quite positive. People often comment that they would like to spend more time learning about 
the Intemet resources. Some information from the evaluations will be included with the course outlines. 
We usually have a pretty good mixture of faculty, staff, and students in our classes. So far, we have 
seen more graduate students than undergraduates. This trend is partly a result of the undergraduates 
having limited access to the central computers in the past (they had to be enrolled in a class that required 
getting an account or they had to request an account through their major department). Undergraduates 
now have the ability to build their own accounts (once they officially register) and, as a result, we 
are seeing increased interest in the Internet resources among undergraduates. If or when instructors 
start using the Internet as a teaching tool, we may get a demand for instruction that far exceeds our 
capability to provide it. IT S A MAD, MAD, MAD, MAD WHIRL : CONCLUSION What have we learned from all 
this? In today s environment of networked information libraries and computer centers are natural allies 
and their stafF have complementary talents and expertise. Our goal has been to proactively provide enough 
instruction to enable individuals to begin exploring the Internet and continue independent learning. 
With my harried schedule (which is just like yours, I m sure) and with the overwhelming, and ever-increasing, 
amount of information on the Internet, I feel as frantic as some of the characters in the movie whose 
title I have alluded in this section. But, it s been edifying and fun to be involved in teaching these 
classes. And I definitely believe there are treasures to be found on the Internet. I will continue to 
search them out, not just for me, but for o,uy clients on campus, whom Barry and I want to serve by inviting 
them along on the treasure hunt. I look forward to hearing what people at other schools are planning 
for their Internet training in the next few months or years (who can plan that far ahead in this field?!?). 
 
			