
 A CHIP FOR LOW-COST RASTER-SCAN GRAPHIC DISPLAY Philippe MATHERAT, Ecole Normale Sup~rieure 45 Rue 
d'Ulm 75005 PARIS ABSTRACT Lowering the cost of graphic display units for use in personnal computers 
and as time-sharing consoles suggests the use of TV sets. Display electronics for such a raster-scan 
unit will inclu- de a screen memory containing the state of all dis- playable points, that is up to 256 
Kbits for 512 x 512 B&#38;W display and more for colour applications. Technological advances in NMOS 
memories make such memory sizes cheaper and cheaper. The control part ensuring screen refresh, memory 
management, vector and character generation, and computer coupling re- mains very complex. A microprocessor-oriented 
Large-Scale-Integrated circuit including all these functions has been designed at the Ecole Normale Sup~rieure. 
 Versatility has guided the design, as well for screen memory organization as for microprocessor interface. 
Display resolution from 64 x 64 to 512 x 512 are possible, with any number of colours or grey levels, 
depending only upon the memory size. Microprocessor interface is standard: an eight bits bidirectionnal 
data bus, a four bits address bus, a read-write signal and an interrupt request. These signals control 
the vector and character ge- nerators which execute microprocessor's commands during the idle phasis 
of the display controller. This permits an always clean diplay and yet a de- cent average speed of one 
point every 1.3 ~s. In addition, a light-pen or crosshair circui- try allows interactive graphic use. 
 KEYWORD S Integrated circuit; Graphic display; Raster- scan display; Colour graphic; Screen buffer 
ma- nagement; Vector generator; Character generator; Graphic and microprocessor; Low cost graphic. Classification: 
3.81; 6.35; 8.2. INTRODUCTION Due to technological improvements in the field of logical integrated 
circuits, one can foresee home use of cheap and nevertheless powerful compu- ters. Such computers will 
be handled by non- experts using very high level programming langua- ges, most probably graphic oriented 
as it is a na- tural method for man-machine communicatipn (i). As for now, use of graphic systems has 
been hampered by their high cost, which includes as much software development as hardware costs. Nevertheless, 
a first step towards increased use of graphic systems is the existence of a low cost graphic display 
unit allowing a wide diffusion. Such units will today permit the expansion of graphic uses of time-shared 
computers and will tomorrow be part of the home computers. Dramatic lowering of display unit cost can 
be achieved by the use of widely used parts (as TV sets) and/or very cheap parts (as LSI circuits). 
A TV set is a raster-scan unit. The curve followed by the spot does not depend on the dis- played picture. 
This accounts for the higher so- phistication of the command electronics, which ex- plains that the raster-scan 
solution has been re- jected until recently except for a few high-cost high-quality displays (2). Improvements 
in IC technology makes this solution very attractive as it is highly suited to digital implementation. 
Raster-scan has got a number of advantageous featu- res: -no limitation on the number of displayed vectors 
 -selective vector erasure capability -easy implementation of grey shades or colours -light-pen facility. 
 Moreover, a very interesting feature is that, whatever the future improvements in display screen technology 
may be (such as solid-state flat screens based on LCDs, LEDs, plasmas...), they will be adapted to TV 
requirements, due to the very large market. Graphic display units using standard TV sets will benefit 
at once of these improvements, without the least expenditure. The main reason for the complexity of 
the com- mand elctronics of raster-scan display units is that the video signal sent to the TV receiver 
is the value of the logical function "The current po- sition of the spot belongs to the displayed figu- 
re". For a 500-points horizontal resolution, this function must be evaluated in less than a hundred nanoseconds. 
This fact prevents the refresh memo- ry from being organized as a vector list, or any other structure 
of comparable complexity. For ge- neral purpose graphic units, the only solution is to have a buffer 
containing a point by point des- cription of the screen. Generating the video si- gnal then merely consists 
of sequentially reading the whole buffer once per frame. It should be no- ted that this solution can 
be avoided for special applications where the image displayed is made of repetitive patterns without 
zoom nor rotations~ It is then possible to represent the picture as two 181 lists (3): -point by point 
description of basic patterns -and coordinates of pattern occurencies. This brings an improvement only 
for very specia- lized applications. Besides the display and refresh logic, an image updating logic 
is necessary. Some display units (such as made by MATROX (4) or MOTOROLA (5)) in- clude in this logic 
only the ability to modify point by point the display. The processor control- ling the display must then 
include programmed vec- tor and character generators. In these conditions, the writing time is very high 
in comparison with the hardwired analogic generators available in cur- ent display units. All this leads 
to the definition of the control unit functions permitting the use of a standard TV set as graphic display 
unit. These functions will be implemented on a single LSI chip, excluding the image buffer and will consist 
in: (Fig.l) -image buffer reading for video signal generation -TV synchronization -wired vector and 
character generation -light-pen circuitry. Moreover, this IC should be versatile so as to lend itself 
to various applications. Screen format This chip will be processed using MOS N-channel Si-gate technology 
and should be commercialy avai- lable by mid-79. For application developments, a model simula- ting 
the logical function of the IC has been made, using standard TTL MSI chips. SCREEN BUFFER MANAGEMENT 
 Current state-of-the-art in technology makes the use of high-density sequential-access memory devices 
(65 K CCDs) rather attractive for realiza- tion of the screen buffer. But the impossibility of fast random 
writing of new points for image up- dating when using such devices has led us to pre- fer the dynamic 
Random Access Memory (now 16 Kbits per chip) which are especially suited to random writing associated 
to sequential reading (because of the need of a periodic refresh of these memo- ries). The maximum power-of-two 
resolution for a standard TV set is 512 x 512 points. For black and white pictures, this needs 16 packages 
of 16 Kbits each. For colour or grey shades applica- tions, this number of packages is to be multiplied 
by the base-two-logarithm of the number of diffe- rent states of each point. The time between two horizontaly 
neighbouring Fig.l video signal to and from TV set synchro signal li~t-pen | ,. I I vector character 
I i generator generator i I I X and Y registers ~I screen adresses buffer / x, i ........ iii I I 
g I I refresh controller I  L synchro F generator ~ I ~light-pen ~ | _j will allow 64 x 64 to 512 
x 512 points resolution. It will permit any number of colours or grey shades and will allow separate 
images to be overlaid on the display screen, with only a modification of screen buffer size. Microprocessor 
coupling capa- bility will give full versatility for linking the display unit to various processors. 
 With all these points in mind, an LSI chip has been designed at the Ecole Normale Sup~rieure. It has 
2,000 gates equivalent complexity (6). Topo- logical layout and mask design is made by SESCOSEM. points 
of the screen (512 x 512:70 ns; 256 x 256:140 ns) is usually lower than the minimum cy- cle time of 
the RAMs (around 350 ns). Thus, it is imperative to parallely read a block of memory points differing 
only by the lower bits of their horizontal address, and load them in a fast shift register for serialization. 
The screen buffer is organized in words the length of which is the num- ber of bits of the shift register: 
4 bits for 256 x 256 (=four 16 Kbits packages), 8 bits for 512 x 512 (=eight pairs of 16 Kbits packages). 
The chip outputs memory addresses in multiplexed format ac-  182 chip selects E~  F data in 4 x 
16 Kbits | write enable memories addresses jl format Ju D  "white forcing synchro sync J 4 bits 
shift-regist.~ black forcing clock seria~ output I CE video~.~ <  Fig.2:256 x 256 B&#38;W application 
I+4 carr~ fQc OU 4 to i | I . decode  I 11,1 I en ANDs read data in "~-~-t~eenable 16 x 16 Kbits 
memories ===~addresses buffer forcing black forcing 8 bits shift register  cK white 'CK serial 
carry +8 load ~K video Fi~.3:512 x 512 B&#38;W application 14 MHz synchro 183 cording to the normalized 
specification of the 16 K RAMs (and 4 K RAMs for small applications, as 64 x 64). These addresses can 
come from the display lo- gic or from the write system (Fig.2,3). On the contrary, when writing new 
points in the memory, each bit of a word must be individually ac- cessible. Four complementary address 
signals are used for this purpose, decoded for 256 x 256 and lower resolutions, and coded for 512 x 512. 
The distinction is made by the chip according to the FORMAT input. This input also modifies the functi- 
onning of the synchronizing generator, as frames must be interlaced in 512 x 512 format, and non- interlaced 
in 256 x 256 and lower resolutions. DISPLAY LOGIC Internally, the image display controller is con- 
stituted of an 18 bits counter, 15 outputs of which directly addresses the RAMs. The normalized syn- 
chronization signal is a combinatorial function of the state of the counter. WRITING SYSTEM Screen 
image refresh uses only 57% of the time (64 cycles out of 112 cycles of the external conti- nuous clock). 
The remaining time is free for wri- ting and updating the image. It is possible to write one point per 
free cycle, which gives an ave- rage time of 1.3 ~s per point (Fig.4). L~II2 cycles ~I '-- 64 Us --I 
sY c n f] [3 J Write \ I_~ ~I. Read _I  IXg -164 I ~ cycles cycles Fig.4: Detail of a line The write 
address is made of two 12 bits re- gisters, X and Y coordinates, giving an addres- sing capability of 
4096 x 4096 points. Only a part of this space is memorized and displayed, de- pending upon memory organization 
and FORMAT input pin. Points written outside the displayed area are ignored. This virtual addressing 
scheme is never- theless interesting as it automatically solves most simple window-clipping problems: 
as all figures can be described by relative addresses, changing the position of the displayed window 
consists only in changing the origin of coordinates (Fig.5). The X and Y registers are externally accessi- 
ble. All write operations are relative to the ad- dress contained in these registers which are auto- 
matically updated when using vector and character generator. VECTOR GENERATOR Vectors are defined by 
their horizontal and vertical components AX and AY, with IAXI<~255, and IAYI<-~-255. IAx I and IAYI 
are two externally acces- sible 8-bits registers. Vectors are drawn by sen- Fi~.5: Window-clipping 
I I ! actual scneen ! | addressable ~ screen ding to the chip a command specifying signs for AX and 
AY. It is also possible to draw small vectors (without modifying IAKI and IAYI) by using a sin- gle command. 
 Let us describe the method used to draw vec- tors in suP(IAXI,IAYI) cycles. In order to sim- plify, 
let us assume: (AX~Y~O {Ax#o and[Xo=Y0=0 as vector origin. Let f. be the clock frequency. Vector is 
 in drawn by incrementlng X at f. frequency and Y at frequency, with Ay In lout f =~f. .out ~LX. 
l~ The drawing time is thus mmnlmal and equal to AX. The frequency divider f. +AY/AX f. is inspired 
by in in the one presented by Oberman (7): A modulo-AX counter is incremented by AY at each clock 
cycle (AY-tuple counter). The coun- ter's overflow occurs with f _ frequency, and is as evenly distributed 
as pos~le with a digital system, as the time between two successive over- flows is q or q+l, q being 
the integer quotient of AX by AY. Such a counter can be implemented using a re- gister, 2 adders and 
a multiplex. The register is incremented by AY at each cycle excepted when overflow occurs, where it 
is incremented by AY-AX. Oberman has shown that the register should be ini- tialized to -AX/2 (Fig.6). 
 It is very interesting to compare this method with the now classical vector generation algorithm of 
Bresenham (8) (9) (Fig.7): nAx:=0 ; y:=0;' a:=-AX/2; X do plot(x,y); x+:=l; a+:=AY; if a~ then y+:=l; 
a-:=AX fi od end The a variable in this algorithm is exactly the register of the counter. We can thus 
deduce from this that the counter generates the same vec- tors than the algorithm and that all generated 
 184 Fig.6: Oberman's divider Fig.7: Bresenham's algorithm fo i I ~ AY Kin logical AX (l's complement) 
f.in CK Ay (=13 AX (=19) ~-I x)Y CK X CK Y 'CK register adder CK multiplexer Fig.8: Our vector generator 
r~Yl>I~xf out "-/ IAYI adder logical "I" IAX[ (l's complement) 185 points lie between the two lines 
of equation: X(AY)=(Y-1/2)(AX) X(AY)=(Y+I/2)(AX) Starting from Oberman's design, we have tried to 
make the roles of AX and AY sy~netrical, so as not to have to swap IAX] and lAY I when [AY]>IAX I . This 
is done by using one's complement of all va- lues in this case. The counter becomes a IdXJ-tuple modulo 
lAY I decounter. The register then contains a value from 0 to AY -i. The carry from the adder calculating 
AY -AX is used as the comparison signal that changes working mode. A full logical description is given 
in Fig.8. The signs of AX and AY are used only as con- trois for up/down signals of the X and Y counters. 
 Vectors can be drawn in four kinds of line: normal, dotted, dashed, and dot-dashed. CHARACTER GENERATOR 
 The character generator draws the 96 printable characters of full ASCII code as 5x7 dot matrices to 
which are applied scale factors in X and Y, using p and q ratios in X and Y respectively, p and q going 
from I to 16. Character generation is made by zig-zag scan- ning the 5px7q points (Fig.9). The spot 
goes from (X0,Y0) to X0+6p,Yo) and is thus positionned for a new character. Using 512 x 512 resolution, 
maxi- mum screen capacity is 64 lines of 85 characters. It is also possible to draw two kinds of rectan- 
gles: -an alphanumeric rectangle of 5px7q, -a graphic rectangle of 4px4q after which the spot is at 
location (X0+4p,Y0). .~- 5p points r~i ! ! i -i'nft~al" p;siti;;" of- the spot Vectors and characters 
can be drawn with spot on or off and writing or erasing points. This per- mits selective erasure and 
eases the progranm~ing of moving pictures. It is also possible to clear or preset the who- le screen 
memory. LIGHT-PEN The light-pen itself is made of a phototransis- tor the output of which is connected 
to the LIGHT- PEN input of the chip. When a light-pen com~nand is entered, the following frame is forced 
to white and the value of the addresses of the currently dis- played point is stored in two special registers 
on the rising edge of the LIGHT-PEN input. With the same basic circuitry, it is possible to use an ex- 
ternally generated crosshair. In this case, the frame is not forced to white. MICROPROCESSOR COUPLING 
 The bus structure is the classical 8-bits mi- croprocessor's one: 8-bits bidirectionnal data bus, 4-bits 
address bus, Read/Write signal, timing Chip- Enable and interrupt line. There are three causes of interrupt: 
frame completion, writing ready, end of light-pen. The chip is oriented on memory mapped I/0 and uses 
13 memory locations selected by the micropro- cessor's address bus and used as follows: -4 locations 
for X and Y -4 locations for vectors and characters specifi- cations ]AXI, IAYI, p, q -2 locations 
for light-pen registers -i location for a control word specifying type of line, spot and interrupt -i 
location used as write only for commands, and read only for status -I location in order to simplify colour/grey- 
shade application. REFERENCES i. Kay, A. C., Microelectronics and the person- nal computer. Scientific 
American, 237 (Sept. 1977), 231-244. 2. Ramtek 9000 Series, Graphic and imagery display systems.  3. 
Op Her Veld, S. J., Microprocessor-controlled video games, Euromicro 1977.  4. Matrox TV controller 
family.  5. Motorola catalog, VDG 467 circuit.  6. Matherat, P., Conception d'un circuit int~gr~ pour 
la visualisation graphique, th~se de 3~me cycle, Institut de Program~nation de Paris, Mai 1978.  7. 
Oberman, R. M. M., A flexible rate multiplier with uniform pulse distribution output, IEEE trans, on 
Comp., Vol. C-21, (1972), 896.  8. Bresenham, J. E., Algorithm for computer con- trol of a digital plotter, 
IBM systems J.4, (1965), 25-30.  9. Horn, B. K. P., Circle generators for display devices, Computer 
graphics and image proces- sing 5, (1976), 280-288.  186   
			