
 CAROLYN D. TOBIN is the manager of the Dallas/Fort Worth office o[ Pritsker &#38; Associates, inc. She 
holds a 8S degree in Industrial Engineering and Management from Oklahoma State University and a MS degree 
in industrial Engineering from Purdue University, She is a member of lIE and the Society for Computer 
Simulation. P, O. Box 610829, Dallas, TX 75261, (817) 268-5318 NEAL N. McCOLLOM is the supervisor of 
the Advanced System section of the Manufacturing Development group of General Dynamics/Fort Worth Division. 
He holds BS and MIE degrees in Industrial Engineering and Management from Oklahoma State University and 
a PhO in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&#38;M University, He is a member of lIE, American Association 
for Artificial Intelligence and Texas Society for Professional Engineers. P. O. Box 748, Fort Worth, 
TX 76101, (817) 777-5071 Proceedings of the 1984 Winter Simulation Conference S. Sheppard, U. Pooch~ 
D. Pegden (eds.) A CONCEPTUAL DESION FOR SIF!ULATION IN A REAL TINE CONTP.OL TOOL Carolyn D. Tobin 
Neal N. McCollom, Ph.D. Pritsker &#38; Associates, Inc./Dallas General Dynamics/Fort Worth ABSTRACT This 
paper discusses the use of simulation as an evaluation technique within an automated or semi-automated 
real time control system. Within this con-trol system, simulation will be used to play out possible scenarios 
emphasizing various objectives of system control. The simulator will be, as much as possible, a deterministic 
model utilizing factory data bases to more accurately forecast results. The struc- ture of the simulation 
model, including typical inputs from appropriate data bases, will be detailed. As a result of including 
a simulation model in the control system, an evaluator would examine the simula- tion outputs. This evaluator 
can be automated, human or a combination of the two. Through the control system, this evaluation would 
then be employed to direct the physical system. An ideal application of this approach is in the manufacturing 
environment. The advent of automated and computerized equipment makes the implementation of an automated 
control and evaluation system a feasible and practical enhancement to a manufacturing system. This paper 
will discuss the authors' thoughts on how such a control system could be implemented and what form it 
would take. Special emphasis will be given to the structure of the control system. The structure of the 
system will include description of the actions and interactions of appropriate factory data bases, the 
simulation model, evaluation criteria and the physical scheduling or control of the system. The overall 
control structure will be detailed as an integrated system. Different roles or utilizations of human 
interfaces will also be investigated. The final dis-cussion will include an analysis of an implementation 
environment and a suggested implementation strategy. 1.0 Introduction Simulation is not a new dimension 
in manufacturing. Models and languages are available to study invento-ries, distribution and warehousing 
strategies, and product mixes (1,2,3). Simulation has also been used for some time in analyzing work 
flows, bottlenecks, and alternative solutions to these types of manufac-turing problems in flow shops, 
process shops, and job shops (4,5,6). However, the use of simulation as a real time control tool is relatively 
new to manufac-turing. This paper will outline the use of simulation as a real time control tool. Within 
this concept, system simulation would work to make the controller 'smart' by giving it the ability to 
evaluate control strategies before they are implemented. This paper will document a typical structure 
within manufacturing that can employ simulation within the control strategy. The logical factory data 
base con- nections will be constructed. In addition, the systems necessary to integrate simulation into 
the control structure and have it employed as a viable tool will be outlined, Typical environments where 
this type of control strategy may be implemented will also be described. Finally, an outline of how such 
a control system could be implemented and the form it would take will be presented. 2.0 Why Simulation? 
Many manufacturers today have or soon will implement sophisticated, computer controlled manufacturing 
sys-tems. These systems can include numerical controlled machines, robots, automated storage and retrieval 
systems, etc. Integrating these separate computer controlled systems into one large control system where 
each component works in conjunction is now a possi- bility. This integrated controller works on-line 
with the complex manufacturing system to provide quick feed-back or real time control. Future steps are 
being taken to include simulation in the integrated control system. This inclusion gives the control 
system the ability to evaluate its own instructions before passing them to the manufacturing system. 
The simulator will play out the operation of the manufacturing system using the control system's instructions 
before the instructions are directed to the manufacturing system. With this approach the simulation outputs 
can determine the effectiveness of the control instructions and identify any problems the instruction 
may cause if implemented by the manufac- turing system. Following the initial execution of the simulation, 
the control instructions can be accepted, or altered and re-simulated. 2.1 The Simulation Model The 
simulation model within the control system should accurately replicate the workings of the physical manufacturing 
system. The model will be discrete and will simulate the movement and processing of the parts in the 
manufacturing system. The model will be popu- lated to represent the parts that are currently in the 
manufacturing system. The model will also account for the resources in the manufacturing system. Availabil-ity 
of the equipment including maintenance will be modeled. This type of information will be available from 
the factory information data bases, detailed in Sections 3.1 through 3.3. The model will receive as input 
a factory floor sched-ule, typically orders and the sequences in which they are to be processed by the 
manufacturing system. The model will produce measures of effectiveness of these control instructions. 
These measures can include manufacturing system throughput, resource utili-zation and order lateness. 
After these measures are predicted by the simulation model and evaluated, the control instructions are 
accepted and implemented by Carolyn D. Tobin, Neal N. McCollom the manufacturing system or the control 
instructions are altered and re-simulated. 3.0 The Structure of the Control Model The overall structure 
of the control system is pictured in Figure i. This is a structure adapted from previous work outlined 
by Duket &#38; Pritsker (7). The factory information data bases include an Order Data Base, a Resource 
Capicity Data Base, a Scheduling Rules and Constraints Data Base and a Work-ln-Process Data Base. These 
data bases will 'drive' the system with their information flow. They will determine existing conditions 
and interface these conditions with demands and constraints in order to create the schedule to meet the 
objectives of the company. The company objectives will be reflected in the control system by the scheduling 
and evaluation procedures and the operator interfaces. Following is a general des-cription of the structure 
of the control system and how it functions as an integrated entity. ACCEPIABLE SC"EnU~ E CURR(NrOROERS 
-r tuRKi'ig:[.ff~ Figure I. The Str~cture of the ConLrol Model 3.1 The Order Data Base The Order Data 
Base will contain the information nec- essary to produce parts. This type of data will include key information 
such as part number and order number. The part number references back to process planning which provides 
the routing of the part through the system along with the standard times al- lowed for the part in each 
stage of the process. It will also provide any machine data necessary to make the part on numerical control 
machines and the inspec- tion data necessary to verify the correctness of the part. If the control system 
resides in a more manual environment, the part number will provide references to the procedures necessary 
to make the part--whether they be assembly procedures or fabrication procedures. The order number will 
reference order information such as the start date of the order in each working area assigned by the 
process plan. The quantity of the part to be produced will also be part of the order information along 
with when and where the inspections on the part during the process should occur. The Order Data Base 
contains the current orders in the system and some finite capacity for future orders that are to be released 
to the system during some future horizon (one to two weeks). The Order Data Base will provide the scheduling 
procedure with the current planned orders, due dates of the orders and the prior-ity of the orders (if 
more than .just a function of the due date). An additional function of the Order Data Base will be to 
track past history (performance) on orders and report discrepancies (actuals vs. standards) to the appropriate 
manufacturing function. This is an impor-tant part of the system as the simulation model will be forecasting 
manufacturing on standard times and the accuracy of the model will be impacted by the accuracy of the 
times used. 3.2 The Resource C a~ac!t_ji_Data Base The Resource Capacity Data Base provides the Simula-tion 
Model with the capacity of the system in which the orders will be processed. This information will include 
machine capacity and availability, manpower availability and capability, and alternate acceptable manufacturing 
processes (if applicable). The resources available to manufacture an order are usually serial in nature 
(in a flow shop) or centrally located (in a job shop). Different production pro-cesses may use some of 
the same resources and must compete for these based on the priority of the order. From this information 
and information from the Order Data Base, the Simulation Model will be able to ana-lyze the loading of 
the system over the order horizon to examine the meeting of schedule and priorities. In a job shop the 
Resource Capacity Data Base will de-scribe the processes used for the order and any alter- native processing 
available to the Simulation Model. 3.3 Work-ln-Process Data Base The Work-ln-Process (WIP) Data Base 
will provide the Simulation Model with an updated 'snapshot' of the existing work in the system. This 
information will include the status of work orders (how many pieces are through, how many are left, what 
stage of the process they are in, and so forth). Also included will be the status of the resources (what 
people are currently working, what men and machines are available, and so forth), and the updated priority 
of the order. The WIP Data Base is intended to complement the Order Data Base by giving detailed information 
on the cur-rent jobs in the system while the Order Data Base gives the history of these jobs. When a 
job finishes one of the specified sequences, the WIP Data Base updates the Order Data Base with the appropriate 
data. 3.4 Scheduling Rules and Constraints The Scheduling Rules and Constraints module of the control 
system must serve two basic functions. In the first case it serves as source of user supplied re-quirements 
to the scheduling procedure. These may include the relative importance among order due date, equipment 
utilization and part throughput. These rules and constraints are initially set in accordance with the 
objectives of management. A C~Iceptual Design for SilmaLation in a Real Time Control Tool The second 
basic function of the Scheduling Rules and Constraints module is to direct future analysis if the evaluation 
procedure does not accept the current set of control instructions. In some cases this may sim- ply be 
the alternation of the relative importance factors that are associated with order due date, equipment 
utilization and part throughput. In other cases this may be the initiation of a heuristic that alters 
order by order the previously simulated sched- ule. The first approach concerning relative impor-tance 
factors for the inputs to the scheduling proce-dure is preferable. This approach is more generally applicable 
to all kinds of manufacturing and is flexi-ble enough to follow changing management objectives. This 
type of Scheduling Rules and Constraints module is a typical example of what is known as an "Expert System". 
The application of Artificial Inteligence in scheduling is an emerging technology and will be seen more 
and more as the methods mature.  3.5 Scheduling Procedures The Scheduling Procedures employed by a control 
system will vary depending upon the objective of the manufac- turer. Scheduling jobs by their due dates 
or some function of due dates (i.e., critical ratio) are typi-cal of batch and job shop manufacturing 
while flow shops may schedule jobs to maximize throughput or machine utiTization. It is also not unusual 
for a single firm to use various scheduling philosophies depending upon different environments within 
the firm. ~owever, scheduling jobs, especially in a batch manu-facturing environment is more complex 
than the appli-cation of one or more of the classical sequencing rules. The effective scheduling of 
jobs depends on more than an initial sequencing. In scheduling jobs through a manufacturing area, the 
typical shop floor supervisor will take many different 'system' variables into ac-count when he receives 
his ordered list of jobs to accomplish. These system variables include the avail- ability of the resources 
necessary to do the job (men, machines, tools, fixtures, cutters, process planning, material and so forth). 
The possibility of reducing set-up time by sequencing like tasks is another vari- able that may also 
be included. The experience of the people performing the tasks may also be a factor taken into account. 
How do all these variables--some of them critical in meeting scheduling objectives--get included in the 
decision making process in a real time control system? The authors contend that the utilization of simulation 
combined with the effective integration of a decision methodology based on the many system variables 
is the piece missing from effective real time control. 3.6 Evaluation Procedure The evaluation procedure 
of the control system must examine the outputs of the simulation analysis and determine if the control 
instructions are acceptable and should be imp]emented by the manufacturing system. The evaluation procedure 
may be totally automated, totally operator controlled or a combination of auto-mated and operator controlled. 
For most U.S. manufac-turing environments today it is recommended that a combination of automated and 
operator controlled be employed. Within this type of evaluation procedure the automated system will perform 
an initial analysis giving the operator the final approval or disapproval. In addition, the operator 
will play a part in the selection and importance of the performance measures and evaluation criteria. 
The evaluation procedure will compare the performance of the simulated system against a set of performance 
criteria. These performance measures and criteria that will be compared are highly dependent on the physical 
system and the objectives of the management of the manufacturing system. One specific performance measure 
(i.e., part throughput) may not be the only evaluation criteria. A combination of several perfor-mance 
measures (i.e., part throughput, order late-ness, and resource utilization) may be included in the evaluation 
procedure. When more than one performance measure is included in the evaluation procedure, it is likely 
that the per-formance measures will be weighted and the sum of the weighted performance measures will 
be compared to the performance criteria. The weighting factors for the performance measures as well as 
the performance cri-teria are dependent on the objectives within the con-trol system. In addition to 
the evaluation of the performance meas-ures, the evaluation procedure must select the present control 
instructions or trigger the generation of new control instructions for simulation and evaluation. If 
the evaluation procedure identifies the schedule as acceptable, the control instructions are implemented 
by the manufacturing system. If the schedule is not found to be acceptable, inputs for altering the sched-ule 
are directed to the Scheduling Rules and Con- straints Data Base. 4.0 Installation Environments and Implementation 
The installation of a simulation model as a real Lime control tool may be accomplished in many different 
types of manufacturing environments. However, the level of success of the simulation model in a control 
system is a function of the environment. For example, the highly automated environment is typified by 
fairly advanced computer systems and data bases. The inte- gration of simulation into this type of environment 
will have a higher success rate due to the accuracies of the data utilized within the model (automated 
sys-tems have more predictable process times than manual ones). These types of manufacturing tend to 
be pro- cess (chemical, petro-chemical and the like), and modern manufacturing (automated assembly lines, 
flex-ible manufacturing systems and so forth). Unfortu-nately, most manufacturing is not process or highly 
automated. In a semi-automated environment, care should be taken to assure the integrity of the data 
used in the simulation model. The implementation of a simulation model in a real time control system 
is also a function of the manufac- turing environment. Most automated or semi-automated systems have 
existing data bases such as the ones previously described. However, most systems do not have a sophisticated 
Scheduling Rules and Constraints module--this is usually a function of the shop floor supervisor. It 
is possible that an expert "operator" (detailed as the Operator Review in Figure 1) may act as the Evaluation 
Procedure and the Scheduling Rules and Constraints module while these modules are under development. 
In this manner, the effect of the Simu-lation Model and the design of the other procedures are integrated 
into the system utilizing feedback from the use of simulation within the control system. Carolyn D. Tobin, 
Neal N. MoCollc~n Conclusion use of simulation in a real time control system is relative new to manufacturing. 
Its successful appli-cation depends upon the degree of automation within manufacturing environment and 
on the information data bases available. However, with the present push towards the integration of factory 
data bases and further automation and control with this data, the use simulation to help predict outcomes 
and anticipate avoid problems is the next logical step in real time factory control. REFERENCES McCollom, 
N. N., and L. T. Blank, "Simulation Model for Multi-Level Distribution System Planning", Proceedings 
of the 1982 Winter Simulation Conference. Mellichamp, J. M., "Simulation Models Are a Flexible, Efficient 
Aid To Productivity Improvement Efforts", Industrial Engineerin% August, 1984. Pritsker, A. A. B., 
Introduction To Simulation and SLAM II, John Wiley ~-1-984. Standridge, C. R., "Building Decision Support 
 Systems for Operational and Management Control With Simulation Techniques," Proceedings of the 1983 
Fall Industrial En~ine__erin~ Conference. Chen, P. H., and J. Talavage, "Production Decision Support 
System for Computerized Manufacturing Systems", Journal of Manufacturing, Vol. i, No. 2, 1982. Maani, 
K. E., "Analysis of Production Facilities-- A Network Simulation Approach", Simulation, November, 1980. 
 Duket, Steven D., and A. Alan B. Priktsker, "Simulation and Real Time Factory Control", SME Conference, 
June 21-232 1983, Southfield, Michigan  
			