
 A COMPUTER SCIENCE CURRICULUM FOR A TWO YEAR UPPER DIVISION UNIVERSITY Toby S. Berk and Malcolm H. Gotterer 
Department of Mathematical Sciences Florida International University Miami, Florida 33199 The Environment 
 Florida International University is a two year upper division University in the State University System 
of Florida. The University has been open since the Fall of 1972, and now has 10,625 students enrolled. 
FIU is an urban University, located in Dade County, which has a population of 1,420,000. The University 
operates on the quarter system, and all courses described here, except as noted, are 5 credit courses 
which meet twice a week for 2 hours per meeting. The Mathematical Sciences Department is located within 
the College of Arts and Sciences, and offers three undergraduate major programs: mathematics, computer 
science, and statistics. Computer science is the largest of the three programs, with approximately 109 
majors. Of the 17 faculty members in the depart- ment, 6 consider themselves to be primarily computer 
scientists. All of these have Doctoral degrees. In addi- tion, there are four instructors on the faculty 
who also teach the elementary service courses in programming from time to time. The computing facilities 
available are quite good. The computer center operates a UNIVAC 1106 with an adequate array of peripherals, 
terminals, and memory. In addition, the department owns a NOVA 2/10 mini-computer and an IMLAC PDS-4 
intelligent graphics system. The general concept of the upper- division university is based upon students 
completing two years of work in a commun- ity college and then transferring to the university for the 
final two years. Under the Florida arrangement, which is typical of most such systems, the community 
college is responsible for providing the required "general education courses (54 quarter hours distributed 
in English Composition, Humanities, Social Science, and Natural Science--which includes Mathematics). 
According to the articula- tion agreement between the State University System and the Community Colleges, 
the universities may not ques- tion the adequacy of the general education sequence taken by a student 
at a community college, provided the student has earned an Associate of Arts degree. The general education 
requirement accounts for about 60 percent of the lower two years, with the rest used for a major area 
leading to an Associate degree. In principle, the upper division university should not duplicate any 
courses which are given at the community college, but should offer only advanced courses. Unfortunately, 
this does not work in fact. It is extremely difficult to clearly identify "upper-division" courses. This 
is a problem, not so much in major courses, but in various service courses. Because of the need to provide 
electives as well as required courses for majors outside of the mathematical sciences, the department 
at FIU offers a full range of courses including intro- ductory programming (for students majoring in 
business, sciences, nursing, technology, and others), pre-calculus mathematics (for students in business, 
nursing, and others as well as students who may have a general education deficiency) and elementary statistics 
(for students in business, psychology, economics, etc.). Furthermor~ there are always some students who 
either have not taken the appropriate major in the community college, or have transferred to the university 
from some other place, and thus are not prepared for upper- division work in computer science although 
they have the necessary number of hours for admission to the university. Conse- quently, some "deficiency" 
courses must be offered. These are: Introductory Programming, (FORTRAN), Assembly Language Programming, 
and COBOL for students who already can program in some high level language. The major source of students 
entering FIU to major in computer science is the business data processing major at Miami Dade Community 
College. MDCC is one of the largest community colleges in the 15 United States, with three campuses 
and over 40,000 students. Like most community colleges, they offer two degrees: the Associate of Arts, 
which is designed as preparation for transfer to a university; and the Associate of Science, which is 
designed to prepare the student for immediate employment upon completion of the two year course of study. 
A number of AA students do not, however, continue at a university. This fact has some influence on the 
MDCC curriculum. The business data processing curriculum at MDCC is of high quality, and has earned 
a good reputation among local employers. The program is aimed at providing good, entry level, program- 
mers to serve the needs of local data processing installations, the vast majority of which are of a business 
data processing nature. The typical AA grad- uate from the MDCC curriculum will take, in addition to 
the general education requirements, a 3 semester hour intro- duction to EDP, 8 hours of assembler, 8 
hours of COBOL, one hour of ~ORTRAN, 2 hours of introduction to operating systems (OS/360), 3 hours of 
systems design and development, and college algebra. Some Problems As an urban university, FIU has 
a large number of students who are employed full time. Consequently, it is necessary to provide programs 
for both day and night students. This is done, of course, by offering some courses both day and night, 
and by alternating others between day and night. Unfortunately, one consequence of the upper-division 
concept is that full time students are in residence for only two years, and a class which is offered 
only once a year will be unavailable to a number of students--either because of time schedule conflicts 
or because of conflict with employment. Because of the time necessary to get needed prerequi- sites, 
most students cannot take certain courses ~ntil their senior (second) year, and therefore may have only 
one chance at a course. The result is that any impor- tant course must be offered a minimum of twice 
a year, more often if possible. Another problem caused by the upper- division concept has been alluded 
to earlier. Because one person's freshman course may be another's bold elective as a senior, there is 
still a need to offer a full range of courses. Although, in theory, a student desiring a lower- division 
course can take it at the commun- ity college, the fact that the two instit- utions are on different 
calendars and different time schedules makes it essentially impossible to do so. Further- more, there 
is usually an upper limit on the number of lower division credits that can be accepted toward a bachelor's 
degree Since any course taken at the university is, by definition, upper-division and any course taken 
at the community college is, by definition, lower-division, students are reluctant to return to the community 
college. In addition, there is certainly an element of self perception and status involved in returning 
to the community college to take courses while enrolled in the university. These factors combine to 
make the student who takes electives or deficiency courses at the community college while enrolled in 
the upper- division university almost non-existant. The effect of this is to require the offering of 
lower-division courses at the upper division university, sometimes with low enrollments. In computer 
science, these courses include the introductory programming course, the assembly language programming 
course, and the one quarter course in COBOL--all of them taken by majors with deficiencies--as well as 
another COBOL course for accounting students and a BASIC course for other business students. As has 
been mentioned, the curriculum in data processing at MDCC is of high quality, but nevertheless it naturally 
has clearly different objectives and a differ- ent emphasis from the computer science program at FIU. 
This causes some problems, although the faculty at MDCC have been cooperative as much as possible. The 
major difficulty lies in the area of mathematics. Many students entering the computer science program 
as juniors have had only a college algebra course. A minimum of polynomial calculus, one course in statistics, 
and a discrete mathematics course are required for graduation in Computer Science from FIU, and most 
students take one of these per quarter for their first (junior) year. Unfortunately, the mathematics 
cannot, therefore, be a prerequisite to very many advanced courses. The fact that the computer facilities 
at FIU and MDCC differ has both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage, of course, is that students 
have an opportun- ity to become familiar with both the IBM 370 and also the UNIVAC ii00 series. This 
helps them to avoid equating "digital computer system" with "IBM 370" and also allows them to develop 
some critical basis for comparing systems. The disadvantage is that in the later courses at FIU, some 
students have learned assembler at MDCC on the IBM 370 and others have learned it at FIU on the UNIVAC 
1100. Since the students from the community college have already taken 8 semester hours of assembly lan- 
guage and receive credit for it, we are hesitant in requiring and giving credit for still more assembly 
language 16 programming. This makes it difficult to assign assembly level programs in further courses. 
 The Curriculum Because of the factors described above: the need for day and night pro- grams, the existence 
of multiple input streams without anY effective control over them, and the need to let students start 
with a series of "remedial" courses and still graduate in two years, the curric- ulum has to be very 
flexible and limit the depth of prerequisite chains. The flexi- bility must make it possible for a student 
who is unable to schedule a course which is not frequently offered to graduate without having to wait 
until that course is reoffered. The limited depth is necessary because of the need to complete the degree 
in two years. Finally, because of the large number of credits in major course work taken at the community 
college and the university, the department at FIU feel strongly that a substantial number of free electives 
be allowed to each student. The curriculum which has evolved to meet these needs has four parts, as 
fol- lows: (all courses are 5 credits. Descriptions and prerequisites are given in the appendices.) 
I. Prerequisite Courses: Students without proper background are required to take the following courses 
as part of their electives. Introduction to Computers I (FORTRAN) Introduction to Computers II (Assembler) 
 Introduction to Data Processing and COBOL II. Mathematics Requirement: Calculus (Two options, either 
a terminal single course in poly- nomial calculus or the regular two term sequence) Statistics (Also 
with two options) Discrete Mathematics III. Major Coursework: All students must complete an additional 
30 hours (6 courses) from the following: Advanced Programming Languages Computer Hardware Fundamentals 
 Numerical Analysis Data Structures Mathematical Logic Operating System Principles Data Communications 
 Minicomputer Architecture and Applications Computer Graphics Theory of Computations Data Base Design 
(Graduate Level) Programming Systems (Graduate Level) IV. Electives: The remainder, normally 45 quarter 
hours are free electives. These can include additional computer science courses as long as at least i0 
hours are taken outside the Mathematical Sciences Department. Co-op and Internship Programs: The department 
has instituted two exter- nal programs, the internship program and the co-op program. In the first 
 instance students with outstanding academic records are, upon applica- tion, selected to serve for a 
term as a member of a professional group in a local company or government agency. They work with top 
level professionals gaining experience from the interactions. The level of activity is that which the 
student would normally expect to gain after 5 to I0 years of professional experi- ence. The co-op 
program, on the other hand, provides a student with the opportunity to earn sufficient money to attend 
school while at the same time gaining some professional ex- perience. It is administered in the usual 
co-op mode; a term of full-time work, followed by a term of full-time school. Appendix I Course Descriptions 
 MAS 311 - Introduction to Computers I (5) A course in the fundamentals of digital computer programming. 
The concept of an algorithm; flow charting; programming; testing and debugging. Numerical and non-numerical 
techniques. The syntax and semantics of FORTRAN IV. MAS 312 - Introduction to Computers II (5) Principles 
and techniques of digital computers, with emphasis on machine language and assembly language programming. 
Internal representation of numeric and non-numeric information; regis- ters, indexing and computer structure; 
arithmetic, logical and input-output instructions; fixed and floating arithmetic. Prerequisite: MAS 311 
or equivalent. MAS 313 - Advanced Pro ramming Language (5) Examination of higher level, procedure oriented 
programming languages such asALGOL 60, SNOBOL 4 and APL with emphasis on such concepts as recursion, 
dynamic storage, allocation, 17 parallel structure operations, string manipulation, block struc- ture 
and others of special sig- nificance to contemporary and future programming languages and techniques. 
Prerequisite: lower division EDP major, MAS 312 or concurrent enrollment in MAS 311. MAS 314 -(COT 302) 
Computer Hardware Fun- damentals (5) This course concentrates on two major areas. The first consid- ers 
computer number systems, logic gates and Boolean algebra. The second treats the arithmetic element, computer 
memories, input-output and computer organ- ization. Emphasis is placed on the latter topics. Prerequi- 
site: MAS 375. MAS 315 - Introduction to Data Processing and COBOL (5) A second course in programming 
oriented toward data proces- sing applications. Various techniques for organizing and processing files: 
Sequential random-access, indexed and in- verted files. File sorting and maintenance. Program documen- 
tation. Instruction in the COBOL programming language. A~plications of computers and data processing 
business. Pre- requisite: MAS 300 or MAS 311. MAS 365 - Numerical Analysis (5) Basic ideas and techniques 
of numerical analysis. Topics in- clude finite differences, inter- polation, solution of equations, numerical 
integration and dif- ferentiation, applications, in- troduction to applied linear algebra. This course 
will make extensive laboratory use of the computer facility. Prerequi- site: MAS 300 or MAS 311 and MAS 
302 or MAS 321. MAS 375 - Discrete Mathematics (5) An introduction to abstract mathematical structureswith 
special emphasis on theories and methods which are relevant to the study of computer science. Topics 
include: introduction to formal systems and techniques of proof; combinatorial vs. rela- tional structures; 
groups and graphs; Boolean algebras; ab- stract languages and machines. Prerequisite: MAS 311. MAS 405 
- Mathematical Logic (5) A study of formal logical sys- tems and their applications to the foundations 
of mathematics. Topics to be selected from the following: definition of math- ematical proofs; set 
theory; analysis formalized with the predicate calculus; theorems of Godel and Church; recursive function 
theory,-and idealized digital computers. MAS 415 - Operating Systems Principles (5) A study of the 
basic principles of modern m~lti-programming and time-shaDing systems. Inter- rupts and data channels, 
multi- processor system, memory man- agement, virtual memory, seg- mentation, process communication, 
deadlock and interlock handling. Prerequisite: MAS 314 and MAS 377. MAS 416 - Data Communications (5) 
Study of communications-based systems, common carrier facili- ties, tariffs, and related equipment. Analysis 
and design of communications networks utilizing various techniques. Uses of communications for data collection, 
remoted computing, message switching. Prerequi- site: MAS 314. MAS 417 - Minicomputer Architecture and 
Applications (5) An introduction to minicomputers, in which students will have direct access to a general 
pur- pose minicomputer system. Study of the architecture of a partic- ular minicomputer (including hands-on 
experience) followed by a comparison study of other minicomputer systems. Selected minicomputer applications 
in business, industry and science. Prerequisite: MAS 312 (or equivalent) and MAS 314. MAS 418 - Computer 
Graphics (5) The principles and techniques of interactive computer graphics. Characteristics of graphical 
de- vices, representation and man- ipulation of graphical data, light pens and other graphical input 
devices, data structures for interactive graphics, graphical languages, applica- tions of computer graphics. 
Prerequisite: MAS 314, MAS 321 and MAS 377. MAS 475 - Theory of Computations (5) An introduction to 
abstract machine theory, combinatorial systems, and computable func- tions. Topics include: finite- state 
machines, regular sets, Turning machines, the halting problem, phrase-structure grammars and languages, 
and 18 Post's correspondence problem. Emphasis is on surveying basic topics and developing an intui- 
 tive understanding of the theory of computation. Prerequisite: MAS 375 MAS 516 - Information Systems 
Analysis and Design (5) This course deals with the need for formal data organization, the system requirements, 
effects of storage, devices, file at- tributes, file organization, search strategies, privacy and security. 
Prerequisite: MAS 314, MAS 321 and MAS 377. MAS 518 - Programming Systems (5) Assemblers, loaders, MACRO 
sys- tems, basic techniques of com- pilation, self-compilers, syntax encoding and recognition, code generation 
and optimization. Prerequisite: MAS 377 and MAS 415. Appendix II Prerequisites  I Intro to Comp (FORTRAN) 
Intro to Comp II'  | (Assembler) Discrete Math i " ~Hardware of COmputationi IData Structure~ .  ~dvanced 
Prog] FundamentalsI ITheory Oe / S  I MinicOmputers i ~I (APs~e~leris &#38;g Compilers)I// n [' 
'CalculusL j  [ Numerical Anal~sis i~ 7% |Computer Graphicsi I statistics[ 20 Acknowledgement The 
curriculum described here was developed over a three year period through the combined efforts of all 
members of the Department of Mathe- matical Sciences at Florida Internat- ional University --especially 
John Comfort, Victor Ekong, Michael Gross, Bill Kraynek and David Su. 
			