
 ELDEN L. DEPORTER holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in Industrial Engineering from theArlzona State University. 
He also holds a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering and Operations Research from the Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University. He has served as an adJunc~t professor at the University of Maryland 
and has held various duty posts during twenty-one years in the U.S. Air Force. His positions includedresponslbilities 
as Director of Management Engineering Studies, Executive to the Director of Supply, and Industrial Engineer. 
He is presently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research 
at the University of Tennessee. Dr. DePorter's papers in technical journals include articles on simulation 
techniques, applications of variational calculus, inventory management, and nuclear fuel cycle management. 
His honors include various military honors and awards and membership in Alpha Pi Mu. He is a member of 
the American Nuclear Society, the American Institute for Industrial Engineers, and the American Society 
for Engineering Education. HAROLD A. KURSTEDT, JR. holds a B.S. in Civil Engineering from the Virginia 
Military Institute and an M.S. and Ph.D. in Nuclear Engineering from the University of Illinois. He 
has held faculty positions in Mechanical Engineering and Nuclear Engineering and he has acted as Chairman 
of the Nuclear Engineering Program at the Ohio State University. He has served as Principal Engineer 
in Systems Analysis for Babcock and Wilcox Company and as Research and Development Coordinator for the 
Ballistic Research Laboratories. With Industrial Nucleonics he served as Program Manager in the Federal 
Systems Department of the New-Ventures Division. At VPI &#38; SU, he is Chairman of the Nuclear Engineering 
Program. His papers in technical journals include articles on kinetics and control, mechanical and heat 
transfer effects in reactor systems, pulsed reactor systems, and nuclear fuel cycle management. His honors 
include the Maxwell Scholarship, Virginia Military Institute, Sigma Xi, and American Men of Science. 
He is a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, American Society for Engineering Education, 
the American Nuclear Society, and the Instrument Society of America. JOEL A. NACHLAS holds a B.E.S. 
in Industrial Engineering and Operations Research from the Johns Hopkins University and an M.S. and 
Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering and Operations Research from the University of Pittsburgh. He has 
held an instructional position at the University of Pittsburgh, and industrial positions with Kennecott 
Copper and the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company. He has served as a Systems Analyst for the 
Tare Technical Service and as a consultant to hospitals. His papers in technical journals include articles 
 on applications of Operations Research to health care delivery systems and nuclear fuel cycle management. 
He is a member of the Operations Research Society of America, the Institute of Management Sciences, 
and the American Institute of Industrial Engineering. 212 December 5-7, 1977 A COMBINED SIMULATION 
MODEL OF THE NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE ABSTRACT Strategies for dealing effectively with the complex nuclear 
fuel cycle are needed to assure the availability of the required nuclear energy portion of U.S. energy 
supplies. The vertical integration approach to assuring uranium fuel supplies is achieved through control 
or ownership of fuel cycle stages. Global system analysis is facilitated by identifying crucial control 
points in the fuel cycle. A GASP IV simulation model of the production and inventories of the sequentially 
produced nuclear fuel is developed and includes the optional feedback loop associated with the recycle 
of uranium from spent fuel. The model is verified to assure accurate fuel cycle representation by comparing 
derived material flows to 1970-75 historical data. The model is then applied to the 1977-1994 horizon 
to verify the practicality of vertical integration within the fuel cycle and to determine stages in which 
altered production capacity is appropriate. Results of the simulation analysis using a one-at- a-time 
search technique using four replications indicate that production capacities throughout the E. L. DePorter 
University of Tennessee Harold A. Kurstedt, Jr. Virginia Polytechnic Institute &#38; State Univ. Joel 
A. Nachlas Virginia Polytechnic Institute &#38; State Univ. fuel cycle should be increased, in some 
cases significantly. Additional milling capacity should be added every year and several new refining 
plants and reprocessing facilities will be needed to assure provision of planned nuclear generated electricity 
supplies. INTRODUCTION Within the nuclear power industry, increasing interest is being focused upon 
strategies for dealing with the nuclear fuel cycle. The primary reasons for this growing interest lle 
in the complex cost structure of the fuel cycle, the extensive lead times involved in obtaining the fabricated 
fuel assemblies used in a reactor, and the uncertainties associated with the management of the discharged 
spent fuel. Given the apparent importance of nuclear power generation to national energy goals, methodologies 
that lead to efficient interaction with the nuclear fuel cycle are quite timely. The nuclear fuel cycle 
which is shown below in Figure I (2), is the sequence of production stages that transform uranium bearing 
ore into URANIUM MINES CONVERSION ENRICHING CONVERSION and MILLS TO UF 6 ~ TO FUEL I RECOVERED URANIUM 
TAILS //I URANIUM STOCKPILE ! | ~ .'~ PLUTL1NIUM REACTOR REPROCESSING FUEL STORAGE ...... , / WASTE 
STORAGE -~ ........  Figure i. Nuclear Fuel Cycle ~inter Simulation Conference 213 Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
(continued) reactor fuel and back into the ground in the form of solid waste. As indicated in the figure, 
uranium ore is mined and milled to produce a raw material called "yellow cake". This yellow cake is 
proces- sed in a refinery which chemically converts it to UF 6 gas that goes to the enrichment plant 
where it is mechanically enriched in the radioactive U-235 isotope. The enriched UF 6 gas is converted 
to UO 2 powder that is pressed into pellets which are sintered and loaded into fuel rods. These opera- 
 tions and the aggregation of the fuel rods into matrices known as fabricated fuel assemblies occur 
at the fabrication plant. The fuel assemblies are used in a reactor core to generate electricity for 
approximately three years after which time the fuel is discharged, stored to cool, and then reprocessed. 
The reprocesslng plant separates the spent fuel into plutonium and uranium for recycle into the reactor 
 and solid wastes that are discarded. It should be noted that present federal regulations prohibit reprocessing 
of spent fuel. Much of the controversy over the advisability of using nuclear power re- volves around 
the question of how spent fuel should be managed. Nevertheless, reprocesslng or some other end disposition 
of spent fuel will soon be permitted to provide at least partial closure of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
 As was indicated in the above description, the nuclear fuel cycle consists of a series of produc- tion 
stages. Recently, reactor operating utility companies have indicated interest in controlling or owning 
various stages in the fuel cycle. Ownership can be defined either in the usual sense or as contractual 
control of production capacity. In either case, the question of which approaches to this vertical integration 
within the nuclear fuel cycle are best is important to utilities concerned about assuring the availability 
of reactor fuel. In view of the projected growth of the nuclear power industry and estimates of available 
uranium supplies, cost effective strategies for interacting with the nuclear fuel cycle to permit utilities 
to assure the supply of reactor fuel will be necessary. From a similar perspective the formulation of 
national energy policies should reflect nuclear fuel availability. The commercial nuclear energy indus- 
try including fuel cycle participants is heavily reg- ulated. Government policies and regulations should 
promote the expansion of those fuel cycle stages that may constrain the attainment of planned levels 
of nuclear reactor based energy generation. In this paper, approaches to addressing the question of how 
best to control fuel supply are examined from a production scheduling and inventory management perspective. 
 CONCEPTUALIZATION The basis of the model formulation is a conceptualization of the nuclear fuel cycle 
that is consistent with a production and inventory perspec- tive. This view of the nuclear fuel cycle 
is con- structed by treating each of the stages of the cycle shown In Figure 1 as a production facility 
and by associating with each such facility an inventory of output. In addition, exploration for uranium 
ore reserves is treated as a production stage with an associated inventory corresponding to the reserves 
located. Thus, each stage of the fuel cycle is represented as a basic building block of the type shown 
in Figure 2 below and first used by Zangwill (7). Stage Production I Product Facility ~ Inventory 
 Figure 2. Basic Stage Composition Under this concept of the stages, the nuclear fuel cycle and its 
material flows can be represented in the form illustrated in Figure 3. It should be noted that each stage 
can be expanded into several parallel plants and that the stages of enrichment and irradiation in the 
reactor can be represented as several stages each of which corresponds to a separate product enrichment. 
  i osooroo ]  Mine ] i I Fabrication Plant I ) Ener~ i Figure 3. Nuclear Fuel Cycle as Set of 
Production Stages  214 December 5-7, 1977 In addition, aggregation of several parallel facili- ties 
or several enrichments into a single represen- tative stage is also reasonable and thisapproach is used 
here. As is indicated in Figure 3, the output mate- rials from a given stage become the input materials 
for another stage. However, a model using this representation of the cycle will be "driven" by the demand 
for energy from the reactor. Thus, conceptually, the nuclear fuel cycle is represented as a cyclic multi-stage 
production-to-inventory system. THE SIMULATION MODEL  A GASP IV simulation model is constructed using 
the system conceptualization described. Although spent nuclear fuel is not presently being reprocessed, 
it is assumed that reprocessing will be reinitiated. This is reflected in the model by operating the 
reprocesslng plants in the future beginning on an input start-up date. BROWN's (i) polynomial forecasting 
technique is applied to projections (6) of U.S. nuclear power plant growth to estimate a continuous demand 
function for fab- ricated uranium fuel. Present production capacities of the various nuclear fuel cycle 
stages are obtained from published government documents.(5) Model plant sizes and capacities are developed 
using the "Environmental Survey of the Uranium Fuel Cycle".(3) The model is driven externally by demand 
for reactor fuel. Internally, each stage is driven by the production rate of the succeeding stage. Published 
government cost estimates (4) are used for the unit production costs at each stage. Inventory holding 
costs are assumed linear while production costs are quadratic functions of production rate. The simulation 
model is validated by comparison of predicted fuel material flows to those experienc- ed in the interval 
1970-1975. Validation is con- sidered successful because model predictions of uranium utilization and 
spent-fuel generation both fall within 3% of actual experience. Once validated, the model is applied 
to nuclear fuel requirements projections for the interval 1977- 1994. The objective of the experiment 
is to deter- mine the times at which additional plants of the model size should begin operation in order 
to minimize overall production and inventory costs. In addition, an indication of the most effective 
intervention points in the fuel cycle for a utility attempting to assure fuel supply are sought. ANALYSIS 
 The solution is approximated by applying the one-at-a-time search technique using four replica- tions. 
The search begins by using government plant capacity projections (5) as starting points. Using model 
plant sizes, production at any stage at a given point in time fixes the demand upon the preceeding stage 
at a defined earlier point in time. The search proceeds by varying the start-up dates of each new plant 
relative to those of other new plants until a minimum cost is found. The resulting capacity expansion 
scenario is then shifted in time until a minimum system cost is determined. The process is then repeated. 
Repetition of the experiment is continued until a new iteration yields a cost reduction that is less 
than i% of the total minimum fuel cycle cost. Subsequently, revised scenarios are assumed but over the 
various trials, no case led to a cost that was less than 118% of the minimum cost found using the original 
scenario. While the minimum cost determined may not be a global minimum, no better solution was found 
and continued application of the model may improve the confidence interval on the minimum cost. Specific 
results of the simulation experiment are: i. Additional uranium mill capacity equivalent to 1600 tonnes 
of ore per day should be created every year for the next 17 years except for 1983 in which two such mills 
should be added. 2. Refinery capacity of 5000 tonnes of uranium per day should start operation in 1979, 
1981, 1983, 1988, 1991, and 1994.  3. Uranium enrichment capacity should be increased in 1987 by 10,500 
tonnes of separative work units.  4. Fuel fabrication plants with capacity of 3 tonnes of uranium oxide 
per day should begin operation in 1981 and 1987.  5. Nuclear fuel reprocessing capacity should be increased 
in each of 1977, 1981, and 1988 by 900 tonnes per year.  6. Uranium fuel should be stockpiled as a basic 
resource and as enriched uranium hexafluoride gas.   Thus, the simulation results indicate that signifi- 
 cant expansion of fuel cycle production capacities is required to provide adequate supplies of uranium 
 fuel. In addition, the appropriate stockpile points in the fuel cycle are those that are either least 
 expensive or are close enough to the reactor to be accessed and utilized rapidly. SUMMARY  A GASP 
IV simulation model of the nuclear fuel cycle is constructed. Analysis of the model using a one-at-a-tlme 
search technique shows that the costs associated with the interactions of the production stages can be 
significantly reduced and possibly minimized by adding stage wise additional plant capacities in a coordinated 
complete cycle scenario. Utility companies can apply this model with company specific data to assess 
their own strategies for participation in the fuel cycle. Significant expansions of fuel cycle stage 
capacities appear necessary and stockpiling nuclear fuel can be used to help assure fuel supply. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 i. Brown, Robert G., Smoothing~ Forecastin~ and Prediction, Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 
 Winter Simulation Conference 215 Nuclear Fuel Cycle (continued) N.J., 1963.  2. Lewis, Wesley H., 
Text of Remarks, Nuclear Fuel Services, Inc., May, 1974.  3. United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
"Environmental Survey of the Uranium Fuel Cycl~" Directorate of Licensing, April, 1974.  4. United States 
Energy Research and Development Administration, Benefit Analysis of Reprocessing and Recycling Light 
Water Reactor Fuel ERDA-76- 121, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., December, 1976. 
 5. United States Energy Research and Development Administration, Nuclear Fuel Cycle~ ERDA-33~ A Report 
by the Fuel Cycle Task Force, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., March, 1975,  6. "World 
List of Nuclear Power Plants," Nuclear News, Vol. 20, No. 3, February, 1977, pp. 57-64.  7. Zangwill, 
Willard I., "A Deterministic Multi- product Multifacility Production and Inventory Model," Operations 
Research, Vol. 14, 1966, pp. 486-507.   216 December 5-7, 1977 
			