
 A COMPARATIVE STUDY BETWEEN MANAGERS OF CORPORATIONS IN GREECE AND THE U.S. REGARDING THEIR USE AND 
PERCEIVED VALUE OF COMPUTER-BASED INFORMATION SYSTEMS IN SUPPORTING DECISION MAKING George E. Vlahos 
and Thomas W. Ferratt Department of MIS and Decision Sciences, University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio 45469-2130 
vlahos@udqyton.edu, ferratt@udayton.edu ABSTRACT Through a comparative analysis of Greek and U.S. managers, 
this study adds to our understanding of how computer-based information systems (CBIS) support managerial 
decision making. Based on four views of decision making and various classifications of CBIS, the findings 
iudlcate that the Greek and U.S. samples have several similarities and a few significant differences. 
Similarities suggest that either information reporting systems (IRS) are inherently better than decision 
support systems (DSS) at serving managers information needs or the evolution in both types of systems 
has not allowed DSS to reach the value of IRS. Differences show the Greek sample used stand-alone PCs 
more. whereas the U.S. sample used PCS or workstations connected to a central computer system or local 
area network to a much greater extent. These and other results may indicate that the investment in CBIS 
to support managers has been targeted more at top managers in the U.S. and more at lower level managers 
in Greece. Keywords; Decision making, managers, information technology use, Greece, Europe, United States, 
managerial work, information technology value, information satisfaction, mental models, decision support, 
executive information systems, computer use INTRODUCTION In the past two decades considerable investments 
have been made in computer-based information systems (CBIS) to support managers. The underlying goals 
of these investments have been Permission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material 
for personal or classroom use is granied withoul fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage, the copy­ right notice., the (ille of Ihc. publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific permission and/or fee. SIGCPR/ SIGMIS 
96, Denver Colorado USA 01996 ACM 0-89791-782-0/96/04. .$3.50 to improve the speed and, more importantly, 
the quality of decision making. The question of whether these investments provide managers the support 
they need to do their work remains, for the most part, unanswered. Previous work has reported that there 
are m,anagers who use the technology to support their work (Rockart and Treaty, 1982; Lee, 1986; Ferrat~ 
Dunne. and Young, 1988; Rockart and DeLong, 1988; Batley and Mangos, 1988; Igbaria, Pavri, and Huff, 
1989; Mawhinney and Lederer, 1990; Vlahos and Ferratt, 1992a, Vlahos and Ferratt, 1992b, Igbaria, 1992; 
Rahman and Abdul-Gader, 1993; and Vlahos and Ferratt, forthcoming). Given that at least some managers 
use CBIS to support their work, the implication is that investments in CBIS do support managerial work. 
However, our understanding of how CBIS supports this work is unclear. This study focuses on clarifying 
our understanding of the value of CBIS in supporting different aspects of managerial work. It extends 
prior studies through a comparative analysis of independent samples of managers of corporations in Greece 
and the U.S. This analysis allows researchers and practitioners to understand better how managers use 
and obtain value from CBIS. Similarities and differences in these samples suggest hypotheses explaining 
how CBIS support managerial work within and across countries. These hypotheses provide direction for 
future research. LITERATURE REVIEW AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES Basis for Developing an Understanding of How 
CBIS Support Managerial Work As suggested by Rockart and DeLong (1988), managers continue to need support 
for their planning and controlling activities, which have been supported by traditional fixed­schedule, 
standard information reporting systems (IRS). more flexible decision support systems (DSS), and more 
recent, specially developed systems for higher level managers. viz., executive informations ystems (EIS). 
However, managers also need office support not provided by these types of systems; instead, office inforrnations 
systems (01S) provide support for these activities through word processing and electronic mail. The work 
of managers has been described from a variety of perspectives. The perspective underlying IRS, DSS, and 
EIS is that the work of managers is decision making. To assessthe value of CBIS in supporting decision 
making, this study uses four widely used, yet different views of managerial decision making and asks 
managers to rate the value of CBIS in supporting decision making as it is represented in these different 
views. Anthony s (1965) view represents decision making relative to the three management functions of 
strategic planning, management control, and operational control. Mintzberg s (1973) view represents decision 
making in terms of the four decision roles of entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource allocator, 
and negotiator. The third view represents an amalgam of writings on decision making (e.g., see Harrison, 
1987). This broad view of managerial work as decision making includes identifying problems or issues, 
generating alternative courses of action, evaluating the outcomes of each alternative, ranking the ahematives 
and choosing one, and implementing the chosen alternative. The fourth view represents Isenberg s (1984) 
and Rockart and DeLong s (1988) notion that a manager uses a mental model of the organization as a basis 
for decision making and that a critical role of CBIS is to support the development and use of this mental 
model. One could debate whether these decision making models encompass all the work that managers do. 
For example, one could debate whether these models encompass Kotter s ( 1984) view that managers develop 
an agenda, develop a network of people, and get the network to implement the agenda or whether they encompass 
Mintzberg s (1973) informational and interpersonal roles. Regardless of the outcome of such a debate, 
these four decision making views encompass much, if not all, of the work that managers do. Motivation 
for a Comparative Analysis In two separate studies the authors have used the same methodology to examine 
the use and value of CBIS in supporting managers of corporations in Greece and the U.S. A comparative 
analysis of the similarities and differences between these two samples is a natural next step. Prior 
research has identified the importance of cultural differences in managing, in general. and information 
systems in particulm (e.g., Hofstede, 1980; Ein-Dor, Segev, Orgad, 1993; Watson and Brancheau, 1991). 
This study may serve as a catalyst for further comparative studies of managers from different countries 
regarding their use of CBIS in supporting decision making. While the U.S. and most industrialized and 
economically advanced Western European countries have been using CBIS for the past two decades, smaller, 
less industrialized nations have just recently begun investing in CBIS for their corporations. It was 
impossible for such countries to computerize until microcomputers and microcomputer software made it 
economically feasible. Since this became possible, an increasing number of small and large organizations 
are acquiring powerful and cost-effective microcomputers and software for their administrative tasks. 
Besides having a lower investment in CBIS than in the U. S., corporations in Greece have additional differences. 
First, most Greek corporations are small and family owned, characterized by lack of formal organizational 
structure and a dominant owner-manager who controls the business. Second, because of Greece s strategic 
geographic location in southeastern Europe and the Middle East and its full membership in the European 
Union (EU), many European and other international corporations have subsidiaries and regional headquarters 
in Greece. Although these corporations may bring with them the advanced CBIS of their parent organizations, 
they have a problem finding trained managers and personnel who know how to use it. A study by Doukidis, 
Smithson and Libereas (1989) found that training was a major problem and many of their respondents expressed 
dissatisfaction with the training and advice provided by vendors. Specific Objectives of this Research 
The purpose of our research is to compare managers of corporations in Greece and the U.S. regarding their 
use and perceived value of CBIS in supporting their managerial work. The goal is to understand better 
how CBIS support managerial work. Such understanding should help increase the return on investment in 
CBIS for supporting managers. Thus, this study examines the following: 1. the amount of information technology 
(IT) use and its value relative to managerial decision making; 2. the types of IT components used and 
the value of various types of CBIS; and 3. the satisfaction of managers with their present CBIS and 
planned changes.  METHODOLOGY Sampling Procedure Our study is based on a survey of managers of corporations 
in Greece and the U.S. The data for the study was gathered via survey questionnaires. A preliminwy version 
of the questionnaire was reviewed by expert researchers in the area of CBIS. The questionnaire was also 
tested with samples of U. S. managers. The comments ,and suggestions of the researchers and managers 
regarding the clarity, validhy and consistency of the questions were incorporated into the final version 
of the questionmire. As noted later, scales derived from the resulting questionnaire demonstrate good 
psychometric properties. Five copies of the survey instrument (see Vlahos and Ferratt. 1992a) were sent 
to a top manager in each of 200 middle-to­large size corporations in Greece as well as 200 U.S. corporations. 
A cover letter (in Greek and English, respectively) explaining the purpose and importance of the TABLE 
1 Hours Per Week of Infonnatiou Technology Use* Greek Us. Groul.? Meitll&#38;QN MM!ISQN Overall Sample 
9.6 7.2 55 11.1 6.2 63 Level of Management First Line Supervisor or Manager 14.1 6.5 17 12.1 6.5 20 Mid-level 
Manager (Supervising other managers) 7.0 6.6 25 11.2 5.2 25 Executive (Top) Level Manager (e.g., VP, 
President) 7.2 6.6 11 9.5 7.1 16 *Overall 2-way analysis of variance shows significant difference beyond 
the .05 level, with the difference mainly due to three levels of management. survey was also included. 
Fifty-five managers from twenty-nine organizations in the Greek sample responded. At least 419Z0of the 
respondents were employed by foreign corporations in Greece. Sixty-four managers from twenty-one organizations 
in the U.S. sample responded. Measures of Variables Measuring Amount of Use. Participants indicated their 
use in hours per week of various types of hardware. These times were combined to yield total hours of 
use. Similarly, the weekly times for software were obtained. Another questionl asked respondents to indicate 
total hours of use per week. The average of these three totals provides a reliable measure of use. Cronbach 
s alpha (coefficient of reliability) is .91 for the Greek sample and .86 for the U.S. sample. Measuring 
Value of CBIS. Measures include questions on the value of CBIS for (1) Mintzberg s decision rc)les -­entrepreneur, 
disturbance handler, resource allocator, and negotiator, (2) specific decision steps --identifying probllems 
or issues, generating alternative courses of action, evaluating the outcomes of each alternative, ranking 
the ahernatives and choosing one, and implementing the chosen ahemative, (3) Anthony s specific decision 
making tasks --long term l(strate­gic). mid-term (tactical), and short term (operational) decisions, 
and (4) mental models. Abroad view of value was measured by an overall importance question. An overall 
value index was developed based on responses to five items selected through several factor and scale 
reliability analyses. Two of the items asked about the CBI used to support long-term and mid-term decision 
making. Another two asked about the value of the CBIS relative to the mental model. The fifth item is 
the overall importance question. These five items, after recoding to a common 7-point scale, were averaged 
for each respondent, yielding a reliable measure of overall value. Cronbach s alpha (coefficient of reliability) 
is .84 for the Greek sample and .82 for the U.S. sample. Identifying Types of Applications Used and the 
Relative Importance of Various Types of CBIS. Besides asking the types of hardware and software, the 
survey presented two listings of types of CBIS, The first type consists of both fixed and flexible systems; 
the second type consists of commonly known systems, e.g., Information Reporting System (IRS), Decision 
Support Systems (DSS), and Transaction Processing Systems (TPS). E~espondentsranked the listed sources 
of CBI in order of importance for their decision making. Measuring Satis@ction with CBIS and Identifying 
Planned Changes. Overall satisfaction with CBIS is based on a single item The identification of planned 
changes focuses on whether further development of the CBIS is to support informational needs of managers. 
RESULTS Research Objective 1: Amount of lT Use and Value of CBIS Amount of Use Table 1 shows that overall 
the U.S. sample used IT more than the Greek sample. Differences in IT use across levels of management 
are startistically significant. Even though first-line supervisors were tlheheaviest users for both samples, 
the Greek first-line managers used IT more than the U.S. At the middle and executive levels the U.S. 
sample used IT more than the TABLE 2 Value of CBIS Decision Roles Entrepreneur (Identifies and initiates 
changes) Disturbance Handler (Handles important and unexpected disturbances) Resource Allocator (Approves 
and allocates all organizational resources) Negotiator (Represents the organization at major negotiations) 
Greekt MX! ?!SL2.! 4.8 1.8 4.4 1.8 5.0 1.9 3.9 2.0 Us. ~ MeaUm 4.7 2.1 4.4 2.0 4.7 2.1 3.5 2.2 Decision 
Steps Identifying problems or issues Generating alternative courses of action Evaluating the outcomes 
of each alternative Ranking the alternatives and choosing one Implementing the chosen alternative 5.4 
5.0 5.8 5.4 4.7 1.4 1.7 1.4 1.5 1.9 5.4 4.7 5.1 4.8 4.2 1.5 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.8 Decision Making Tasks Long 
Term (Strategic) decision making Mid-Term (Tactical) decision making Short Term (Operational) decision 
making 2.9 3.2 3.4 1.4 1.3 1.3 2.6 3.0 3.3 1.5 1.4 1.4 *Significantly different beyond the .05 level. 
N= 55 for all means. N= 63 for all means. TABLE 3 Value of CBIS for Mental Model In Forming In Guiding 
or Revising Decisions w -1 Overall Sample 4.4 Level of Management First Line Supervisor or Manager 5.1 
Mid-level Manager (Supervise other mgrs.) 4.4 Executive (Top) Level Manager (e.g., VP, President) 3.4 
*Overall 2-way analysis of variance shows significant the two samples of managers. *N= 55 for all means. 
*N = 63 for all means. Greek sample. At both of these levels IT use by the Greek sample was about the 
same, while the middle level U.S. managers used IT more than the executive level managers. The greatest 
ditl erence in use between the two samples is at the mid­level: the Greek sample used IT 7 hours/week, 
whereas the U.S. sample used IT 11.2 hours/week. Value of CBIS Support for Decision Making Tables 2 and 
3 show the value of CBIS in supporting specific aspects of managerial work as encompassed in the four 
views of decision making. Table 2 shows that both san-q?les of managers rated the value of CBIS about 
the same for each of Mintzberg s four decision roles. Greek managers, in their roles asresource akators 
and negotiators, rated CBIS a little higher than the corresponding U.S. managers. Regarding the decision 
making steps, the Greek sample rated CBIS either the same (for identifying problems) or higher (for all 
other decision steps). Again, the Greek sample rated CBIS higher than the U.S. sample in making operational, 
tactical, and strategic decisions. Only the differences in mean ratings of evaluating alternatives and 
ranking and choosing an alternative were statistically significant between the Greek and US. samples. 
Table 3 shows that the overall sample and the first-line and mid-level Greek managers rated CBIS higher 
than their U.S. counterparts both for forming or revising the mental model of the corporation and for 
guiding decisions based on that model. * Based on Mode ~z (jjl ~z1 4.2 4.9 4.2 4.3 5.5 4.4 3.9 41.8 3.8 
 4.3 41.1 4.4  difference beyond the .05 level, with the difference mainly due to In contrast, the Greek 
managers at the executive level considered the value of CBIS less important than the U.S. executives. 
The overall difference in mean ratings between the two samples regarding the value of CBIS in guiding 
decisions based on the mental model were statistically significant beyond the .05 level. Research Objective 
2: Types of IT Used and Value of Various Types of CBIS Types of Hardware Used Table 4 shows that the 
most commonly used piece of hardware is the stand-alone PC for the Greek sample and the PC or terminal 
connected to a central computer system for the U.S. sample. One explanation for thk difference maybe 
that many Greek corporations do not have a central computer system, and a stand-alone PC may be their 
only computer hardware. At the time the Greek survey was conducted networking was almost non-existent 
in corporations in Greece which, by comparison, are much smaller than the average U.S. corporation. This 
may explain why the difference between the Greek and U.S. sample in their use of a PC connected to a 
LAN is so significant. Types of SofNare Applications Used Table 4 also shows that the most commonly used 
type of software is word processing for the U.S. sample and spreadsheet for the Greek sample. l%e difference 
in spreadsheet use is statistically significant beyond the .05 level. 107 TABLE 4 Hanlw,are and Software 
Use Greek 1 U.S. 2 J@.11 U&#38;! Hrs./wk. N!ka!dk &#38; Hrs./wk. Mean Use Hardware Stand-alone personal 
computer (PC) 56% 6.4 54% 4.8 PC or other terminal connected to a central computer system 49% 4.3 64% 
6.0 PC or other terminal connected to a distributed computers ystem 13% 1.9 19% 1.3 PC or other terminal 
connected to a local area network 5% 0.4 36% 3.2 Other o% 0.0 5% 0.5 Software Word processing 42% 2.2 
67% 2.1 Spreadsheet/financial report preparation* 62% 4.1 59% 1.7 Data base applications 42% 2.0 41% 
1.1 Graphics applications 40% 0.9 38% 0.9 Running other packaged or developed programs 34% 2.7 27% 0.9 
Electronic mail/communication* 9% 0.2 59% 1.7 Writing/debugging/numing own programs 16% 1.6 13% 0.3 Other 
applications 4% 0.2 6% 0.2 *Hrs./wk. mean use significantly different beyond the .05 level. N= 55. N= 
63. Again, the absence of networking in Greek corporations could be the reason for such a small use 
of e-mail by the Greek sample in comparison with the U.S. sample, which results in a statistically significant 
difference beyond the .05 level. Except for e-mail, the Oreek sample spends equal or more time per week 
using software, especially spreadsheets, pre-packaged programs, and database. Relative Importance of 
Various Types of CBIS Table 5 shows that the U.S. managers ranked the relative importance of fixed and 
flexible systems for making decisions related to their job the same as or higher than the managers of 
corporations in Greece. The greatest difference between the two groups occurs in their ranking of on-line 
and interactive systems. The lack of centralized computer systems and networking in the smaller Greek 
organizations may be the reason for this difference. Regarding the more commonly known systems, both 
samples rank Information Reporting Systems (fRS) as the most important for decision making. The Greek 
sample indicated that Executive Information Systems (EIS) are also important, whereas the U.S. sample 
also considered Office Information Systems (01S) very important. The higher relative importance of 01S 
for the U.S. sample may be the result of the higher use of word processing and e-mail by this group. 
Neither sample considered Artificial Intelligence/Expert Systems (AI/ES) very important for decision 
making. Research Objective 3: Satisfaction with CBIS and Planned Changes Table 6 shows that even though 
both samples of managers indicated the same overall satisfaction with their present CBIS, TABLE 5 Relative 
hnportance of Types of CBIS Greek .~ Type of % Weighted * Mean Rank .&#38; ~:::i:lk Fixed ,andFlexible 
Systems Reg.da.r (hourly, weekly, monthly, etc.) reports 89% 5.4 98% 5.4 Non-scheduled and non-interactive 
reports requested for specific needs 86% 3.7 92% 3.9 On-line, interactive, query/analysis reports obtained 
as needed for decision making 78% 4.1 90% 5.0 Commonly Known Systems Information Reporting System (IRS); 
i.e., a system that provides regularly scheduled reports 86% 5.2 84% 4.0 Office Information System (01S); 
i.e., a system that provides document/word processing and electronic mail/communications 51% 1.5 78% 
3.6 Executive Information System (EIS); i.e., a system that provides customized reports/analysis for 
top executives 62% 2.8 44% 1.5 Decision Support Systems (DSS); i.e., a system that provides randomly 
requested reports/ analysis for solving specific problems 54% 2.2 52% 2.1 Transaction Processing System 
(TPS); i.e., a system that collects, processes and stores data related to the organization s operations 
54% 2.1 54% 1.9 Artificial Intelligence/Expert Systems (AI/ES); i.e., systems that attempt to simulate 
human intelligence/make available the knowledge of expert(s) for decision making in specialized areas 
13% 0.2 21% 0.1 Other 2% 0.0 2% 0.1 TABLE 6 Summary Value and Satisfaction Overall Value Overall Index 
Satisf~ction GEXk!LL.&#38; SiEXk I.L&#38; Overall Sample 4.8 4.4 4.4 4.4 Level of Management First Line 
Supervisor or Manager 5.4 4.4 4.8 4.7 Mid-level Manager (Supervise other mgrs.) 4.8 4.3 4.4 4.0 Executive 
(Top) Level Manager (e.g., VP, President) 4.1 4.6 3.8 4.8 *2-way analysis of variance on the Overall 
Value Index shows no significant difference at the .05 level; however, paired comparisons of the Greek 
and U.S. samples show a significant difference beyond the .05 level for the first line managers, while 
paired comparisons within a sample show a significant difference beyond the .05 level for first-line 
and top level Greek managers. N= 55. N =63. the Greek sample valued theirs a little more. The first-line 
and middle level Greek managers were more satisfied and found more value with the present CBIS than their 
U.S. counterpwts. However, the top level Greek managers were satisfied the least and found the least 
value with their present CBIS, whereas the top U.S. managers were satisfied the most and saw the most 
value. The respondents described their current CBIS as being developed to serve one of three mutually 
exclusive purposes as follows (1) mainly to support the informational needs of managers (decision makers): 
67% Greeks vs. 49!% U. S.; (2) especially for the respondent s informational needs: 870 Greeks vs. 14% 
U. S., and (3) for other reasons: 26~0 Greeks vs. 379Z0 U.S. Respondents also indicated whether they 
intend to initiate any changes to their CBIS within the next twelve months. A positive response was given 
by78% of Greeks and 69% of U.S. respondents. The percentages of those planning to initiate changes in 
their CBIS were as follows: (1) mainly to support the informational needs of managers: 50% Greeks vs. 
61910 U. S.; (2) especially for the respondent s informational needs: 24% Greeks vs. 16% U. S.; and 
(3) for other reasons: 26910  Greeks vs. 23% U.S. Relationship among Value, Satisfaction, and Amount 
of Use Table 6 also shows that across managerial levels the first-line Greek managers have the highest 
overall value index and overall satisfaction while top managers have the lowest. For the U.S. sample, 
top managers have the highest overall value index and overall satisfaction, while mid-level managers 
have the lowest. The pattern of significant and nom-significant correlations among hours of use, overall 
value index, and overall satisfaction is similm for both Greek and U.S. samples. The correlation between 
the hours of use and overall value index is not significant in either sample (.17 for the Greek sample 
and .21 for the U.S. sample), Likewise the correlation between hours of use and overall satisfaction 
is not significant (.27 and .14, respectively). The only correlations significant beyond the .05 level 
are those between overall value index and overall satisfaction (.40 and .51, respectively). CONCLUSIONS 
AND DIRECTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY Similarities The findings reveal that there are many similarities between 
the Greek and U.S. samples of managers regarding the perceived value of CBIS: 1. Using Mintzberg s view 
of decision roles, both samples rated the value of CBIS in supporting the resource allocator role as 
highest (or tied for highest) and support for the negotiator role as lowest. 2. Using the view based 
on an amalgam of decision making writings, both samples rated the value of CBIS highest for its support 
in identifying prc~blems, evaluating alternatives, and ranking alternatives and the lowest in generating 
ahernatives and implementing alternatives. 3. Using Anthonjs view, both samples rated the value of CBIS 
highest in supporting short-term decisions and lowest in supporting long-term decisions. 4. For both 
samples, regularly scheduled standard reports provided the most value. Information reporting systems 
(IRS) were more valuable than decision support systems (DSS). 5. The majority of managers in both samples 
planned changes to their CBIS to support the informational needs of managers, including themselves. 
 DMerences The findings also reveal several differences between the Greek and U.S. samples: 1. Using 
the mental model view, first-line and mid-level Greek managers rated the value of CBIS for both mental 
model activities higher than the comparable U.S. managers. 2. Top-level Greek managers rated the value 
of CBIS lower than top-level U.S. managers. 3. The value of on-line, interactive systems and (11S for 
the U.S. sample was higher than for the Greek sample. 4. The Greek sample used stand-alone PCs more, 
whereas the U.S. sample used PCs or workstations connected to a central computer system or 10Cal area 
network to a much greater extent. 5. Managers in the U.S. sample used e-mail to a much larger extent. 
 Directions for Further Research Several hypotheses for future research may be gleaned from the results 
of this study. For example, two that arise from the correlation analysis are the following: 1. the perceived 
value of using CBIS is not relatecl to the amount of use. and 2. the perceived vahre of using CBIS is 
positively related  to satisfaction with CBIS. The similarities and differences between the two samples 
of managers me a source of further direction for future research. For example, the following two hypotheses, 
arising from these similarities and differences, could be investigated. 1. A Non-Muitive Hypothesis on 
the Value of IRS vs. DSS IRS pravide more valuable support for managerial work than DSS, particularly 
for the following kinds of managerial work: resource allocation, evaluating alternatives, identl~ing 
problenls, ranking alternatives, and short-lerrn decision making. This hypothesis appears to contradict 
Alloway and Quillard (1983), who reported that managers participating in their study indicated that their 
informational needs would have been better served with flexible inquiry and analysis systems; however, 
79% of the installed and frequently used systems were transaction-basedl processing systems (TPS) that 
monitored daily activities and produced fixed periodic or exception reports. The results of the current 
study suggest that either IRS are inherently better than DSS at serving managers information needs or 
the evolution in both types of systems has not allowed DSS to reach the value of IRS. An implication 
of the proposed hypothesis, if supported, is that investments directed at improving IRS will provide 
greater value than investments in DSS, particularly for specific aspects of managerial work. 2. AU Intuitively 
Appealing Hypothesis Managers of corporations wi~h greater investments in CBIS to support their work 
will perceive greater value. The question of whether investments in CBIS provide managers the support 
they need to do their work has been examined indirectly in this study. The greater use of on-line, centralized 
and LAN systems by U.S. managers suggests that U.S. corporations have made greater investment in networks 
and centralized IRS. If we assume these investments support top managers, that could explain why U.S. 
top managers perceive CBIS provide greater value than their Greek counterparts. Furthermore, this explanation 
and the greater value perceived by the tirst-line and mid-level Greek managers maybe telling us that 
the investment in CBIS to support managers has been targeted more at top managers in the U.S. and more 
at lower level managers in Greece. Given that corporations in Greece are also smaller and reiterating 
the findings that the Greek managers used more spreadsheets and less 01S (including word processing and 
e..mail), these results are also consistent with those of Heikkila, Saarinen andSaaksjarvi(1991), who 
found in their survey in Finland that small businesses use computers more as tools than as a medium for 
communication. Contributions and Closing Thought This study makes a unique contribution since it is the 
first to compare the use and perceived value of CBIS in supporting decision making bymanagers of corporations 
in Greece and the U.S. The survey instrument and results provide a basis for farther inter-or irma-country 
comparisons. Similarities across the two samples suggest that some elements of managerial decision making 
and CBIS support may transcend culture. This conjecture is worth further investigation. Although both 
samples of managers perceive value in using CBIS, significant differences within ,and across the samples, 
particulwly when comparing managerial levels, are also worth further investigation. Further research 
may build on our findings to improve our understanding of the types of CBIS that corporations should 
invest into support managerial work. REFERENCES Alloway, R. M. and Quillard, J. A., User Managers Systems 
Needs, MIS Ouart erly, June 1983, pp. 18-26. Anthony, R. N., Planning and Co tro Svste s. an ewo .~s, 
Cambridge, MA H~ar~ Univ~~it~~ess~ 196: Batley, T. W. and Mangos, T. P., Computer Use by Production and 
Operations Managers in New Zealand Industry, International Journal of O~erations &#38; Produ ction Manage 
ment, Vol. 8, No. 7, 1988, pp. 14-22. Davis, D., SMR Forum: Computers and Top Management, Slmm Management 
Review , Fall 1984, pp. 63-67. DeardelL J., SMR Forum. Will the Computer Change the Job of Top Management, 
.Sloan Manaszement Revie W, Fall 1983, pp. 57-60. Doukidis G., Smithson, S., and Naoum, G., Information 
Systems Management in Greece: Issues and Perceptions, Journal of Strateg c Information Svsterns, Vol. 
1, No. 2 (1992), pop. 63-75. Doukidis G., Smithson, S., and Lybereas, T., Approaches to Computerization 
in Small Business in Greece, Thirteenth Jnternato alCo ee ceonInformation SvstemsPr oceedin~8, in nfrn 
Dec 13-16, 1992, Dallas, Texas. Ein-Dor, P., Segev, E., Orgad, M., The Effect of National Culture on 
IS : Implications for International Information Systems, Journal of Global In formation Mana rzement, 
1993, vlnl, Winter, pp. 33-44. Feiratt, T. W., Dunne, E. J. and Young. S.. Managers Who Personally Use 
Information Technology Frequently A Profile of Some Jnvisible Computer Personnel, lwti@v-Fourth Annual 
Commter Personne lR esearch Conference Proceedin m , 1988. Frenkel, K. A., The European Community and 
Information Technology, Communications of the ACM, April 1990, vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 405-410. Georgopoulos, 
N. and Efthymoglou, P.. An Analysis of Greek Managers Opinions Concerning the Position of Information 
Systems in Competitive Strategies, Proceedings of the First European Co nference on Information Svstem~, 
1993, pp. 442­ 454. Harrison, E. F., The Managerial Decision-Mak in~ Process, Third Edition, Boston Houghton 
Mifflin Company, 1987. Heikkila, J., Saarinen, T., and Saaksjarvi, M., Success of Software Packages in 
Small Business: An Exploratory Study. Europm Joun lal of Information Svxtem~, Vol. 1, No. 3 (1991), pp. 
159-169. Hofstede, Geert, Culture s Consequences: Jntemation~ Differences in Work-Related Values. Beverly 
Hills, CA and London: Sage, 1980. Igbaria, M. , An Examination of Microcomputer Usage in Taiwan, Information 
&#38; Mana ~ernent, Vol. 22, 1992, pp. 19­ 28. Igbaria, M., Pavri, F. N., and Huff, S. L., Microcomputer 
Applications: An Empirical Look at Usage, Information &#38; Management, 16, 1989, pp. 187-196. Isenberg, 
D. J., How Senior Managers llink. H.acwud Business Revie w, Vol. 62, November-December 1984, pp. 81­ 
90. Kotter, J. P. What Effective General Managers Really Do, Harvard Business Revie w, Vol. 60, November-December 
1982, pp. 156-67. Lee, D. M. S., Usage Pattern and Sources of Assistance for Personal Computer Users, 
MIS Ouarte rly, (December 1986), 313-325. J-iscio, J., Europe 1992: A Truly Common Market? Barren s, 
October 3, 1988. Mawhiuney, C. H. and Lederer, A. L., A Study of Personal Computer Utilization by Managers, 
Information &#38; Manage ment, 18, 1990, pp. 243-253. Mintzberg, H., The Nature of Managerial Wo rk. 
Harper &#38; Row, New York, 1973. Nunamaker, J. F., Applegate, L. A., and Konsynski, B. R., Computer-Aided 
Deliberation Model Management and Group Decision Support, Journal of Manage ment Information $-6. Spring 
1987, Vol. 3, No. 4. Parker, T. and Idundu, M., Managing Information Systems in 1987: The Top Issues 
for IS managers in the UK, Journal of Information Techuolo SW, vol. 3, No. 1 (1988), pp. 34-42. Rahman, 
M. and Abdul-Gader, A,, Knowledge Workers Use of Support Software in Saudi Arabia, Information &#38; 
Manageme n~, Vol. 25, 1993, pp. 303-311. Rocks@ J.F. and DeLong, D. W., Executive Stmpo rt $@tems: The 
Emergence of Tor) Mana~ement co m~ Wer Use, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones -Irwin, 1988. Rockart, J. F. and 
lleacy, M. E., The CEO Goes On-Line, ard Busutess Rewe w, January-February, 1982, pp. 82-88. StrmsmU 
P., American Executives Spend Too Much Money on Computer Systems That Allow Them to Do the Wrong Things 
Faster, Inc. Masam ne, March 1988. Straub. D.W. and Wetherbe. J.C., Information Technologies for the 
1990s: An Organizational Impact Perspective, .. Communlcatlons ACM , Vol. 32, No. 11 (1989), pp. 1328­1339. 
Vlahos, G. E. and Ferratt, T. W., Information Technology Use by Managers in Greece to Support Decision 
Making: Amount, Perceived Value, and Satisfaction: Information &#38; Manazeme nt, Vol. 29 ( 1995), pp. 
305-315. Vlahos, G, E. and Ferratt, T. W., lhe Use of Information Technology by Managers of Corporations 
in Greece to Support Decision Making: Froceedinm of tlle 1992 ACM SIGCPR ~, 1992a, pp. 136-151. Vlahos, 
G. E. and Ferratt, T. W., The Use of Information Technology by U.S. Managers to Support Decision Making, 
Proceed@s of the 1992 DSI Co nference, 1992b, pp. 894-896. Watson, Richard T. and Brancheau, James C., 
Key Issues in Information Systems Management : An International Perspective, Inforrnat ion &#38; Manage 
ment, 1991, v20n!i, Mar,, pp. 213-223.
			