
 A Data-driven visual simulation of fire phenomena Moohyun Cha*, Jaikyung Lee*, Byungil Choi*, Hyokwang 
Lee**, Soonhung Han** * Korea Institute of Machinery and Materials, ** Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology 1. Introduction  In order to simulate and visualize natural phenomena, especially fluid 
behavior such as smoke and fire, many novel studies have recently been conducted. Usually these methods 
use CFD (computational fluid dynamics), which calculate Navier-Stokes equations in real-time to generate 
realistic fluid motion and interactions, as well as high-performance GPU technologies. We proposed a 
new approach to the visual simulation of fluid flow by combining the use of pre-calculated CFD data with 
the real-time processing of such data. As the domain-specialized CFD solver predicts detailed fluid dynamics 
to an accuracy of a guaranteed error range, we could provide nearly actual behaviors of a fire-driven 
fluid flow. Moreover, this CFD data includes physical quantities such as temperature distribution, which 
can provide useful information to the training evaluation process. However, the data-driven method requires 
appropriate data processing techniques to create and manage large data sets. In this study, we developed 
a firefighter training simulator to demonstrate our proposed methods and explore related research issues. 
2. The Data Driven Method  Among the training and emergency response systems, ADMS (Advanced Disaster 
Management Simulator, ETC corp.) is one of the most well-known commercialized solution which provides 
fire driven accident scenarios and virtual training environments. This system visualizes fire phenomena 
through simple particle systems, which are not based on fluid dynamics model, like most other commercialized 
training software because of the expensive calculation cost for the large virtual space such as road-tunnel. 
However, our data-driven method can provide the training system with the pre-calculated visual simulation 
of fire based on specific fire scenarios occurred in such a large virtual environment. As this approach 
requires off-line simulation data sources, we first designed numerical fire models such as grids, boundary 
conditions, combustion parameters, obstructions and other external forces. These can have very fine grid 
resolution and unlimited volume size. Next, we calculated Navier-Stokes equations by utilizing the FDS 
(Fire Dynamics Simulator, developed by NIST) [McGrattan et al. 2008], which puts an emphasis on smoke 
and heat transport from fires. The resulting data is non-uniform grid data that consists of many kinds 
of physical quantities, such as soot density, volume fraction of oxygen and carbon monoxide, gas temperature, 
heat release rate and so on. Next, we re-sampled the result in a uniform grid suitable for volume rendering, 
and performed an axis alignment between the solver and the rendering system. In addition, as the size 
of the data set can be extremely large, we used traditional octree-based space partitioning and multi-resolution 
techniques. In the on-line step, stream files are partially mapped onto the main memory and each nodes 
of tree are traversed with view-dependent LOD selections according to multiple distance parameters and 
data-dependent culling. At this point, the traversal process can be used not only for rendering but also 
for accumulating physical quantities around the user. This enables us Figure 1: Real-time rendering 
of firefighter training simulator based on our data-driven method, using a road tunnel traffic accident 
scenario. to evaluate the safety achievement based on the trainee s trace. Finally, volume data are interpolated 
in time space to generate continuous input values for the transfer function used for splat based volume 
rendering. 3. Results and Future Works  * e-mail: {mhcha, jkleece, cbisey}@kimm.re.kr ** e-mail: {adpc92, 
shhan}@kaist.ac.kr The FDS result for a road-tunnel fire scenario that takes 30 minutes consists of 
1800 ASCII files of around 72 GBytes in total. Data for a single time-step consists of 288000 voxels(800x24x15). 
We converted these into 16.4 GBytes binary streams, which represent 5 hierarchical octree levels. Memory 
management was run on a different process from main one to maximize the efficiency of recent multi-core 
CPUs. By means of parameterized multi-resolution options, we could guarantee regular performance under 
various hardware conditions. The experiment maintained a minimum performance of 30 fps under an NVidia 
QuadroFX5600. In addition, we could visualize a great deal of invisible but useful data of fire phenomena 
by applying opacity and color mapping based on the important value ranges related to user safety. From 
the perspective of human interaction, the data-driven system can represent macro-scale fluid flow mainly 
caused by heat transfer interacting with ventilation or obstruction conditions. Thus, users can experience 
pre-calculated fluid flow from different viewing perspectives in real-time, but cannot interact with 
fire or smoke itself by means of user inputs such as extinguishing a fire. We are currently researching 
this issue by utilizing a hybrid method, which synthesizes global motion calculated off-line using CFD 
solver and local details which are calculated in real-time using simplified fire dynamics model. So that 
we could achieve some interactivity while preserving global accuracy of fire phenomena. References McGrattan 
K., Klein B.,Hostikka S. and Floyd J.. 2008. Fire Dynamics Simulator User s Guide. NIST Special Publication 
1019-5, NIST. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the Korean National Emergency Management Agency 
(Korean NEMA). 
			