
 A Data Mining Application: Customer Retention at the Port of Singapore Authority (PSA) KianSing Ng Huan 
Liu HweeBong Kwah Dept of Info Sys and Comp Sci Dept of Info Sys and Comp Sci Port of Singapore Authority 
National University of Singapore National University of Singapore #04-01 Tanjong Pagar Cpx Lower Kent 
Ridge Rd, Singapore 119260 Lower Kent Ridge Rd, Singapore 119260 7 Keppel Rd, Singapore 089053 ngkiansl 
@iscs.nus.edu.sg liuh@iscs.nus.edu.sg hbkwah@hq.psa.com.sg 1. ABSTRACT Customer retention is an important 
real- world problem in many sales and services related industries today. This work illustrates how we 
can integrate the various techniques of data-mining, such as decision-tree induction, deviation analysis 
and multiple concept-level association rules to form an intuitive and novel approach to gauging customer 
s loyalty and predicting their likelihood of defection. Immediate action taken against these early- warnings 
is often the key to the eventual retention or loss of the customers involved. 1.1 Keywords Decision-tree 
induction, deviation analysis, multiple concept-level association rules, customer retention 2. INTRODUCTlON 
Customer Retention is an increasingly pressing issue in today s ever-competitive commercial arena. This 
is especially relevant and important for all sales (e.g. departmental stores, banking, insurance) and 
services (e.g. Internet / telecommunication service providers) related industries. From an economic point 
of view, customer retention directly translates to a huge saving in marketing cost, as highlighted by 
Coopers &#38; Lybrand s Vince Bowey:  A lot of companies haven t figured out what it costs them to acquire 
a new customer, it s usually pretty shocking. We estimate that it costs three to five times more money 
to acquire a new customer than to keep the ones you have. Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advsn-tage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish. to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fss. SIGMOD 98 Seattle, WA, USA 8 1998 ACM 0-89791~995.6/98/006...$5.00 
The problem is especially relevant in the context of PSA -the managing authority of the world s busiest 
port. With a customer base of only a few hundreds shipping-lines, contributing to an annual turnover 
of a few hundreds of millions, PSA has a strong interest in retaining each and every one of them. Moreover, 
the Singapore port is facing keen competition from many upcoming ports in the neighboring regions. This 
means that the Marketing division faces higher risk of customer defection and potentially escalating 
marketing costs. Furthermore, the majority of the port activities in Singapore are entrepot in nature, 
i.e. an intermediary center for goods exchange and transshipment. This means that the defection of a 
customer to another port is likely to influence its associated business partners to also defect, in order 
to maintain their current transshipment business. Thus, there is a pressing need for an effective method 
to identify customers associations and partnerships for the benefit of marketing and customer retention. 
Finally, contrary to common belief, focusing on customer retention is not a passive policy because existing 
customers bring in new customers through their business associations and through word of mouth. The conventional 
approaches to dealing with this type of problem have a number of shortcomings. Domain experts are required 
to subjectively determine a set of performance indicators , from which each of the customer s current 
performance is compared with the previous month s and year s performance. Since each expert has his or 
her own different list of performance indicators which are tacit, there is no way to tell which is more 
accurate. This is aggravated by the fact that indicators tend to change over time in the real world due 
to concept drift. Therefore, there is a risk of monitoring the irrelevant and outdated performance indicators 
. Managers and executives rarely realize that the very knowledge that can help them alleviate these problems 
lies within the wealth of data already at their disposal. In the context of our application, PSA logs 
in approximately 2,000 vessel-calls and 45,000 TEUs (Twenty Thousand Equivalent Units) of container-transactions 
into various databases daily. This wealth of information can potentially be mined for the knowledge to 
gauge the loyalty of her customers and predict the possible chain-effects of a defection, Such knowledge 
would enable PSA to take steps to retain her valuable customers before it is too late. This work illustrates 
how the integration of the various techniques of data nrining can give rise to an intuitive and novel 
approach that provides such knowledge. The application is implemented using C and Gentia on PCs in a 
client-server network environment. It should be highlighted that due to the confidentiality of the details 
involved, all the data attributes are substituted with notations, e.g. S,, Sz, . ..&#38; to represent 
the different shipping-lines. If possible, we try to cite examples from the context of the port business 
itself. Otherwise, an analogy from the domain of database marketing is used to illustrate the concept. 
3. DECISION TREE INDUCTION FOR CLASSIFICATION Our first step uses Cd.5 [ 131 to apply decision tree induction 
[ 121 to find objective indicators that describe the target concept of customer s loyalty . The training 
dataset is prepared from the vessel s transactional database residing in Oracle database, which consists 
of over 60,000 monthly records of more than 30 attributes. Using an analogy from database marketing, 
a typical clussijkation rule obtained from apply decision-tree induction to the training dataset in Table 
1 is: if (income > $40K) n (3@age>29) n (education >= diploma(6) ) + buyer = yes (85% Confidence) Table 
I : Training data set for classification in database marketing From the classification rule, we can 
deduce that the attributes, income , age and education are influential to the target class of potential 
buyer ; while gender , loan amount , number of children and other attributes are not. Features appearing 
in classification rules with high confidence form a good model for representing the characteristics and 
influencing factors associated to the target class. These are called objective indicators . Such,pture 
selection method [5], [lo] plays an important role m the application of data mining in a real-world context. 
This is because data are normally collected as a by-product of other business processes, resulting in 
the presence of many attributes that are irrelevant or redundant to the target-concept. Hence, raw datasets 
are usually too a multl-dimensional database software with data warehousing and OLAP capabilities large 
for the user to monitor or for many similarity-based learning algorithms to work effectively or efficiently. 
Moreover, without the help of an objective evaluating method like decision-tree induction, the set of 
subjective indicators specified by the domain experts are often incomplete and susceptible to concept 
drift. This is expected because humans cannot perceive indicators if they are not very significant or 
if they have complicated correlation with the target concept. Humans are also slow to detect change in 
trends in a dynamic environment. As an illustration, the domain experts in our analogy may only perceive 
income and education , but not age , as influential to the target concept of potential buyer . They missed 
out the potential age group between 29 to 38. To make matter worse, over a period of time, education 
ceases to be one of the influential factors that determine a potential buyer , whereas age gradually 
becomes one. Domain experts could not perceive the concept drift and the business continues to use the 
outdated and irrelevant indicators to plan its strategies. Hence, the key to solve this dynamic problem 
is to apply decision-tree induction regularly to the most recent training dataset, so as to derive the 
updated classification rules [ 121 for the segment of potential buyer . In our context, the objective 
indicators obtained are further cross-validate with the existing domain knowledge. Thus, the eventual 
set of indicators obtained will be more valid and complete, when used to measure the loyalty of customers 
and their likelihood of defecting. 4. DEVIATION ANALYSIS AND FORECASTING The next step involves a statistics-based 
deviation analysis that monitors the objective indicators identified for the signs of defection among 
the customers. This OLAP-based implementation over the data warehouse, which contains historical transactional 
data of vessel s performance, container s volume, financial records, etc., seeks to detect and trigger 
off an exception report of defection should any of the customer shows significant deviations from her 
expected norms. Deviation analysis [l I] is employed in data mining to discover the sets of data, which 
deviate significantly from its expected norm. For a time t, deviation o(t) is given by: o(t) = ( A(t) 
- E(t) ) / E(t) where A(t) is the Actual value for the indicator, and E(t) is the Expected value for 
the indicator, obtained over a time period from the temporal time-series. In our context, the expected 
norm or normative value E(t) for each of the 5 to 7 indicators of a customer is first obtained through 
a trend-seasonal forecasting model [8] built from the historical time-series, consisting of more than 
50,000 records annually per indicator. This forecasting technique significantly improves the accuracy 
of the predicted normative values because 1) the use of seasonaf indexes (the ratio of the actual value 
of the time-series to the average for a year) in the model will adjust the forecast according to the 
annual seasonal pattern in the time-series, and 2) the use of exponential smoothing method will allow 
more weights to be assigned to the recent data, thus taking into account the current economic performance. 
With the normative values of every indicator forecasted for every customer, their respective percentage-deviations 
are next computed. Those with deviations greater than a certain user-specified threshold are considered 
to be significant enough for further interestingness validation [ 1 I]. This is done by comparing the 
customer s deviation to the average deviation of the aggregated customers operating in the same service-route, 
as illustrated below. distinct Ship-line, Cons ShiwlineiCst c.f. ServiceRoute ~~~ Table 2: Deviation 
analysis result In the above analysis, shipping-lines S,, Sq and consortium C2 showed significant deviations 
of over 10%. These are further compared with the average deviation of the aggregated customers in their 
respective service-routes. In S, s case, the general population in SRI performs reasonably well (a positive 
deviation +I%), suggesting that Sr s deviation is unexpected and thus interesting. In S4 s case, the 
general population in SR5 performs equally badly (a deviation of -lo%), suggesting that S4 s deviation 
is expected and thus not interesting. S4 s type of deviation was probably caused by some regional events 
like the recent economy turmoil in Asia, which affects all the shipping-lines operating in the Asia s 
service-route. If consistent deviations are also observed across the set of indicators for deviating 
customers like S, and CZ, then a monthly exception report will alert the domain experts on these possible 
defectors . Domain knowledge and insights are then applied to verify the findings for each of these cases 
and the suspected potential defectors will be monitored closely for the subsequent months. Persistent 
deviations would reinforce their likelihood to defect. Deviation analysis is useful in identifying trimming 
patterns , even at the initial stage when the phenomenon is still barely observable. This is more so 
in the port business, where the sheer size of business commitments, and the establishment of contractual 
agreements between shipping- lines and the port authority mean that potential defectors will usually 
take a couple of months to trim-out their imports and exports gradually before their eventual withdrawal. 
Defection predictions help the authority gauge which customer segments are likely to stay put and which 
are likely to defect. These early-warnings would give PSA ample lead-time to investigate the causes and 
take rectification actions before defections actually take place. As described in [ 111, the interestingness 
of a deviation can be related to the estimated benefit achievable through available actions. Besides 
performing deviation analysis on the Customer concept, similar analysis can also be applied to investigate 
and identify upcoming or weakening Market (continents and countries) and Service-route for the purpose 
of marketing. 5. MULTIPLE CONCEPT-LEVEL ASSOCIATION RULES With the predictions from deviation analysis, 
we proceed to use a statistical method to mine for multiple concept-level association rules [2], [4], 
[9] among the shipping- lines and the consortiums. Knowledge such as, if Shipping-line S, defects, who 
would follow suit is important to PSA s entrepot-based business. This is because the choice of Singapore 
as the transshipment point for shipping-lines or consortiums, linking to different service-routes and 
markets is usually dictated by those major shipping-lines having great influences and massive transshipment 
dealings. Their defection is likely to cause an avalanche of defections from their associated business 
partners, as well as the breaking up of their respective consortiums. Hence, if PSA can predict the possible 
chain-effects of a defection, she would have a good chance to take relevant actions before a major customer 
leaves PSA for a new port, thereby influencing its associated business partners to leave too. Despite 
the importance of this issue, conventional approaches can only give highly subjective predictions obtained 
through business contacts and information exchanges with other ports and shipping-lines. In our application, 
we investigate the transactional associations between the Inbound Vessels and the Outbound Vessels from 
the container transactional database , which contains approximately 120,000 records monthly. The former 
are vessels that are responsible for bringing in the containers to PSA s port, while the latter are those 
that ultimately reload and ship out the containers from the Singapore s port. An association rule obtained 
from using the Apriori algorithm [2] is of the form: VI --+ V2 [support, confidence] Support and confidence 
are terminologies used to measure the strength and interestingness of an association rule, such that 
support s = P(Vr u V,) and confidence c = P(V2 ] V,). With these measures, we are able to select the 
strong rules of high confidence for accurate prediction of associations. However, these types of vessel-to-vessel 
associations are overly specific to be of any significance to PSA business, Therefore, we need to mine 
association rules at multiple concept-level [9]. Generalizing association rules into higher concept-levels 
is useful in our context because our problem domain involves background knowledge with some form of natural 
conceptual hierarchies. For example, we have the concepts Customer , with the hierarchy: (consortiums 
3 shipping-lines 3 vessels) and Market , with the hierarchy: (continents 3 countries 2 ports). For our 
illustration here, we will only use the concept Customer . A consortium is an association of shipping- 
lines, formed to gain significance, in order to enjoy a better volume rebate / discount or to qualify 
for a better charging scheme. Most shipping-lines will therefore form consortiums with their associated 
business partners. In our context, typical association rules at multiple concept-levels, i.e. shipping-line 
level and consortium level are: Consortium : C2 -+ Cq [OS support, 0.7 confidence] Shipping-line: SI 
-+ S2 [0.3 support, 0.5 confidence] The former rule is interpreted as if consortium Cz defects, C4 is 
also likely (0.7 confidence level) to defect . Likewise, the latter rule is interpreted as if shipping-line 
S, defects, S2 may (0.5 confidence level) also defect . Hence, PSA can work out a solution with those 
valuable customers, like S, and Cz when they show signs of possible defection. This will not only prevent 
the loss of these valuable customers, the shipping-lines in their respective consortiums, but also safeguard 
the business with the associated business alliances of S, and Cz, i.e. Sz and C+ Therefore, the constant 
monitoring of associations between the customers can effectively prevent an avalanche of unexpected defection 
caused by the departure of a single customer. Furthermore, the knowledge of associations also allows 
the marketing department to customize attractive schemes to attract more volume from the customers alliances 
identified. 6. CONCLUSION Currently, a prototype OLAP-based system is helping PSA to identify the fast 
changing influencing factors for customers loyalty, monitor for customer segments that show signs of 
possible defection (deviation) and predict the associated business partners that may follow suit. The 
success of this application can further demonstrate that the maturity of data mining has reached a point 
where wider applications to other practical problems are now desirable and feasible. This will hopefully 
create a chain-effect to motivate the strategic use of data mining in business areas, where conventional 
approaches fall short. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to express our sincere appreciation to PSA for 
providing the support and assistance in the course of the project. We would also like to thank Roger 
King and Chris Marshall for their valuable advice.  8. REFERENCES [II Agrawal, R., Ghosh, S., Imielinski, 
T., Iyer, B., Swami, A. 1992, An Interval Classifier for Database Mining Applications, Proceedings of 
the 18th VLDB Conference, British Columbia, Canada. PI Agrawal, R., Srikant, R. 1994. Fast Algorithms 
for Mining Association Rules. In the Proceedings of the 20th VLDB Conference Santago, Chile. [31 Agrawal, 
R., Srikant, R. 1995. Mining Sequential Patterns. In the Proceedings of the International Conferenceon 
Database Engineering, IEEE, pp.3- 14. [41 Agrawal, R., Srikant, R. 1996. Mining Quantitative Association 
Rules in Large Relational Tables. In the Proceedings of 1996 ACM-SIGMOD Int. Conference On Managementof 
Data, Montreal, Canada. [51 Dash, M., Liu, H., 1997. Feature Selection for Classification. Journal of 
Intelligent Data Analysis, Vol. 1, No. 3. (http:llwww.elsevier.comilocate/ida). [61 Fayyad, U.M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, 
G., Smyth, P. 1996. From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery: An Overview. In Fayyad, U.M., G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, 
Smyth, P., Uthurusamy, R. (Eds.). Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, pp. l- 34. [71 Langley, P. 1994. Selection of Relevant Features in Machine Learning. In Proceedings 
of the AAAI Fall Symposiumon relevance. AAAI Press. PI Levin, R.I., Rubin, D.S., Stinson, J.P., Gardener, 
ES. 1992. Quantitative Approach to Management (8th Edition). Forecasting. McGraw-Hill, pp. 103- 138 
r91 Han, J., Fu Y. 1995. Discovery of Multiple-Level Association Rules from Large Databases. In the Proceedings 
of the 21st VLDB Conference, Zurich Switzerland. [IO] Kira, K., Rendell, L.A. 1992. The Feature Selection 
Problem: Traditional Methods and a New Algorithm. In Proceedings of Ninth National Conference on AI, 
pp. 129-134 [l I] Matheus, C.J., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., McNeill, D,. 1996. Selecting and Reporting What 
Is Interesting. In Fayyad, U.M., G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, Smyth, P., Uthurusamy, R. (Eds.). Advances in 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 465- 5 15. [12] Quinlan, J.R. 1986. 
Induction of decision trees. Machine Learning, Vol. 1, pp.81-106 [13] Quinlan, J.R. 1993. C4.5: Programs 
for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Mateo, California. [14] Shavlik, J.W., Dietterich, 
T.G. 1990. Readings in Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann. [ 151 Thornton, C.J. 199 1. Techniques in Computational 
Learning -- An Introduction. Chapman &#38; Hall, pp.70-85. 
			