
 A MARKETING FRAMEWORK FOR USER SERVICES MANAGEMENT Elliott J. Haugen Computer Center North Dakota State 
University Fargo, ND 58105 (701) 237-8685 Introduction Dramatic, new developments in technology plus 
continually changing needs of users present great challenges for those of us involved with computing 
in higher education. While it is quite evident that a tremendous amount of change is occurring around 
us, it is often less noticeable that the rate of change is accelerating. One of the major factors contributing 
to this acceleration is the rapid growth and development of technology. Alvin Toffler, in Future Shock, 
called the "technological engine" the driving force of change and he predicted that as man's search for 
new knowledge expands, the rate of technological development will increase spectacularly. Probably the 
most significant recent technological development is the growth in the use of computers. The way computers 
are used has also changed during this technological explosion. The computer, previously only a calculating 
machine, has become a major information processing instrument. The role of computing on colleges campus 
has changed accordingly. It is not uncommon for graduate students to spend as much time at a terminal 
preparing thesis text as they do executing data analysis programs. Educational institutions have always 
played an important role in identifying change, in preparing people to respond to change, and in helping 
explain the impact and use of computers. In the last 15 years the percentage of colleges and universities 
which have their own computers, or at least have access to one, has increased from 10% to over 90% (1). 
The availability of low cost microcomputers has probably increased this figure even closer to 100%. In 
North Dakota all public and private colleges and universities have at least one computer. This high percentage 
masks the fact, however, that there are still a great number of students (and faculty) who are not using 
computing in their Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that 
the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and 
the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of 
the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific 
permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM0-89791-088-5/82/011/0079 $00.75 79 classes. By 1985, it is expected 
that 75% of all high school graduates will have used computing (1). The impact of these students entering 
college plus the growing emphasis on "computer literacy" for college graduates (3) will compound the 
changes occurring in curriculum and computer use. It is, therefore, important that those persons charged 
with supporting educational computing be aware of change, and be prepared to deal with the resulting 
demands placed upon them. Computing Center Challenges The rate of change, the increase in computer use, 
and advances in computing technology, when combined, present a great challenge for a computing center's 
management and staff. We must not only function within a technology-intensive discipline, but also understand 
and attempt to meet the needs of a rapidly changing user community. Computing centers have been generally 
successful in adapting to technology changes. Data processing journals and conference proceedings reveal 
many innovative and cognitive approaches to applying computing methodologies. Even though the computing 
profession is relatively young, there are many knowledgeable and capable practitioners. The technical 
experience and training of computing center staff have helped them deal successfully with the changes 
in technology. It is more difficult to judge the degree of success achieved by computing centers in attempting 
to meet changing user needs. In fact, it is nearly impossible to define criteria for determining when 
an effort has been successful. In some cases, the lack of success can be used as a measurement of progress. 
Computing and Higher Education: an Accidental Revolution indicated development of educational computing 
has not been exemplary. (1) It states that the successful application of computing technologies has been 
most evident in business, industry, the professions, and government. The use of computing in education 
has not been as fruitful as in other fields, because its application has been largely unplanned. Educators 
usually recognize the need to use computers, but have had difficulty identifying specific roles for this 
new technology. Individual higher education computing centers may view this as undue criticism, but demonstrate 
resourcefulness higher education. as a and group must efficacy in consider this dealing with an opportunity 
to the challenges in Problems of Management While the title of this paper addresses user services management, 
the information should be useful for all user services staff, as well as other groups within the computing 
center. Computing center staff must deal with a variety of responsibilities, opportunities, and problems. 
They are expected to handle each situation efficiently and effectively. Those in user services, however, 
often wonder if there is a "method to our madness". Are we promoting a particular strategy or management 
plan when we help users or are we merely reacting to user problems? While it is quite easy to define 
daily problems, it is not easy to objectively determine an overall approach for solving them. This paper 
does not present specific tools for day-to-day activities, rather it provides a context within which 
the user services function can be discharged. Selecting a management approach is difficult, since there 
is no single, best solution. The search for an appropriate strategy quickly leads one to realize there 
is a rich assortment of management philosophies, theories, and practices. Evaluation of the alternatives 
is a formidable task. Computing professionals are accustomed to functioning in a very descriptive field 
where it is often possible to identify specific results of decisions in areas of hardware and software. 
However, management is a normative endeavor where guidelines and models indicate only what should result, 
not what will result. It is a management truism that if there is a good foundation for making decisions, 
then it is likely good decisions will result. This paper suggests a foundation which may not be "the" 
answer to all management problems, but it is one approach which can help solve some of the problems of 
managing resources within a higher education computing center. The Framework Approach While it is easy 
to define the desired outcome of a successful management effort, it is often very difficult to describe 
the exact actions which will produce that outcome. One method of approaching a degree of specificity 
is by using a framework, guideline, or model. A framework can provide a structure for thinking, but framework 
described not usually associate it is in this d with not a paper computing substitution is based on centers. 
for prin thought ciples of and mark action. eting, a The field Marketing Principles Many people do not 
clearly understand the meaning of marketing. As a result marketing is often viewed as high-pressure selling, 
extravagent advertising, and customer manipulation. It is difficult to imagine building a positive management 
framework on such a negative base. Actually marketing encompasses a variety of activities and is a function 
found in almost all organizations. Marketing is defined as a process through which a business enterprise, 
institution, or organization: 1. Selects target customers or constituents, 2. Assesses the needs of 
these target customers, and 3. Manages its resources to satisfy those customer needs.  Marketing has 
not always held these activities as objectives. Evolution of the marketing concept can be characterized 
by four distinct stages. Sta~e 1_ --Product Orientation: A superior product is the most important 81 
 element of satisfying consumer needs. If a good product is produced, consumers will want to buy it. 
This stage is typified by the expression "build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path to 
your door." Stage 2 --Selling Orientation: Selling the product is the major concern. Increased market 
competition requires that products be "sold" to potential consumers. It is assumed that the seller can 
influence the consumer; the product is sold by the firm, not bought by the consumer. Much emphasis is 
placed on salesmanship and the art of creating consumer demand. Stage 3 --Marketing Concept Orientation: 
The organization first identifies a need, then produces a product to meet that need. Marketing, not production, 
staff determine what will be produced. There is a concentrated effort to analyze the market, identify 
specific consumer demands, and provide products to satisfy those needs. Stage 4_ --Societal Marketing 
Orientation: An organization has a societal responsibility beyond just providing products to meet consumer 
needs. Individual consumers may demand a particular product, but the producer has an obligation to provide 
a product which does not pollute, create a hazard, or harm society in general. All organizations do not 
evolve through each stage, some enter at higher stages while others do not change at all. Individual 
organizations have been successful at all stages, although most modern organizations have found the Marketing 
Concept orientation best addresses today's changing consumer needs. Business firms do not survive if 
they do not adjust to change; the same is true for computing centers. The most important contribution 
of marketing is the philosophy which emphasizes identifying specific needs before providing a product 
or service. A Marketing Strategy for Management/Planning The marketing concept as a management framework 
for computing centers is actually a strategic planning process consisting of the following steps: 1. 
Identify the corporate/university/college mission. 2. Determine a general opportunity within this mission. 
 3. Select a specific marketing objective. 4. Perform a market analysis. 5. Develop a marketing mix: 
the 4 P's. 6. Prepare an operational plan. 7. Implement the plan. 8. Utilize control and feedback. 
 Only the Market Analysis and Market Mix steps will be addressed here since steps 1-3 and 6-8 are common 
to most management strategies. For example, the educational, research, and service missions of a higher 
education institution provide an opportunity for the computing center to provide services but the computing 
center's marketing objective may be to concentrate only on academic or administrative computing. Market 
Analysis is the systematic study of the market to determine the characteristics and needs of potential 
customers. The purpose is to identify specific target markets so available resources can be focused on 
meeting the needs of these targets. Another name for this process is market segmentation. It is generally 
best to select a middle ground approach to market segmentation. This is located between market aggregation, 
where all consumers are treated the same, and total market disaggregation, where each consumer is considered 
unique. Most computing centers know their targets in general terms, but spend little time categorizing 
them as to specific needs. Segmentation should result in the identification of groups of computing users 
with similar resource, information, or service needs. Segments can be categorized by geographic characteristics, 
such as users at local or remote campuses; by type of service used, such as word processing, statistical 
analysis, or graphics; by quantity of resources used, such as the "number crunchers", students in introductory 
programming labs, or instructors who use the computer only to score a few exams. Some segments may have 
subcategories, for example, text-processing users may consist of subgroups such as professional secretaries 
and graduate students. Each group requires different capabilities, training, and documentation. The ultimate 
goal of market segmentation is to efficiently allocate limited resources to best satisfying the needs 
of identified targets. Defining user needs in terms of desired outcomes makes it easier for the computing 
center to provide specific products to meet those needs. Too often, user services staff think of their 
clients only as good or bad users. The NDSU Computer Center uses the following market analysis vehicles: 
, The campus Computational Resources Committee and its planning subcommittee. This group of faculty, 
staff, and student representatives advises the Center as to emerging or changing computing needs. They 
have prepared a 6-year plan which is updated every two years. 2. The North Dakota Higher Education Computing 
Network Users' Council. 83 Representatives from each network campus meet bimonthly and makes recommendations 
to the Center. They recently completed a long-range plan for computing in higher education in North Dakota. 
3. The ACM Peer Review Team. They evaluated services provided by the Computer Center and suggested methods 
to better meet user needs. 4. The campus ACM Student Chapter. They have been quite helpful in providing 
advice about student needs. 5. Campus surveys. Surveys are taken regarding timesharing, telecommunications, 
microcomputers, and support services.  6. Computer Usage Statistics. Detailed information is available 
on departmental and library program use.  . Equipment Approval. All requests for computing equipment 
are coordinated through the Center. This means users contact the Center early in the planning process. 
 . Staff Feedback. Since all User Services staff consult, they have become one of the best sources of 
gathering market information. Identified needs are then discussed within the group. The Marketin 9 Mix 
component of marketing strategy was developed at the Harvard Business School in the 1940's and has been 
amplified considerably over the years. Marketing mix suggests that a consumer does not buy a physical 
product, but instead buys a bundle of satisfactions of which the physical product is only a part. The 
entire package consists of the product and its features, information, convenience and attendent services, 
and price. These elements of a consumer's purchase are called the four P's: Product, Promotion, Place, 
and Price. The 4 P's can help the computing center focus on the complete product sought by consumers. 
Product: People seek products which will provide satisfaction or utility to them. These products can 
be ideas, services, or physical items consisting of both tangible and intangible qualities. The consumer 
is usually not concerned with the details of the product, but rather the benefits the product can provide. 
Promotion: Communications is very important since the consumer must understand what utility the product 
will provide and how to use the product. Promotion may consist of persuasive efforts, but it is primarily 
a means of providing information about the product. This is especially true for technologically complex 
products. Communications media include seminars, short courses, newsletters, documentation, annual reports, 
and consulting. Place: The consumer needs to have a method of acquiring a product. There must be some 
place to find out about a product, to purchase it, and to return 84 to for support help. One of the 
most important tasks a computing center can perform is to serve as a broker between the consumer and 
the actual hardware or software supplier. The NDSU Computer Center bids general use terminals so network 
users know what is available where at what price. Price: All computing services are paid for pay either 
directly through charge-back systems, or indirectly by sharing the organization's overhead budget. Although 
some colleges do not have formal charging policies, all user services' products have a price: staff time. 
Conclusion The quickening pace of change, increasing demands on personnel, and tightening financial 
constraints mean that computing centers can no longer merely react to current circumstances, but must 
anticipate changing user needs. Therefore, it is important that a management framework be available to 
provide direction and guidance for all planning and decision making. Marketing provides a good framework 
because it contains an overall philosophy which stesses both a consumer orientation and the identification 
of specific consumer needs. The emphasis on customer satisfaction implies that all computing center activities 
should be focused upon this fundamental objective. While this sounds straightforward, some computing 
centers may not have a single objective, instead have subunits each striving for what it thinks is important. 
A consumer orientation also keeps the computing center alert to changing needs in the campus marketplace. 
It is important that we develop a "user-friendly" atmosphere or service, but it is more important to 
be "user-conscious" so we provide what is needed (2). Marketing also provides specific steps for carrying 
out a strategy. Market segmentation helps the computing center define specific computing needs and whether 
there is sufficient demand to warrant providing services to that segment. The 4 P's force consideration 
of the total product desired by the computing consumer. Although computing centers are often tempted 
to try being everything to everyone, we realize that resource limitations mean we may end up meeting 
no one's needs very well. Conversely, if resources are concentrated on only a few consumer targets, then 
the center is not discharging its responsibility to develop computing as a campus-wide tool for dealing 
with change. It is a difficult challenge, but one which must be attempted. Computing centers can improve 
the probability of successfully meeting this challange by using an organized management strategy built 
upon the concepts and principles of marketing. REFERENCES 1. Gillespie, Robert G. Computin 9 and Higher 
Education: an Accidental Revolution. Washington: GPO, 1981. 85 2. Landon, Michele. "The Importance of 
Being 'User-Friendly'." Computerworld, 31 August 1981, p. 29. 3. Magarrell, Jack. "Computer Literacy 
Gaining Place in Undergraduate Curriculum." The Chronicle of Higher Education, 21 April 1982, p. 1,8. 
4. Toffler, Alvin. Future Shock. New York: Signet Press, 1970. 86  
			