
 A Mobile Commerce Application for Rural Economy Development: A case study for Dwesa Edim Azom Emmanuel 
Telkom Centre of Excellence in Development E-commerce, Department of Computer Science, University of 
Fort Hare, Alice, Eastern Cape, South Africa. eedim@ufh.ac.za Muyingi Hippolyte N. MTC Endowed Chair 
of ICT, School of Information Technology, Polytechnic of Namibia. Hmuyingi@polytechnic.edu.na. ABSTRACT 
Economic activities in rural areas of developing countries are usually not strong enough to impact significantly 
in poverty alleviation and improve rural life. These communities are often marginalized in terms of basic 
infrastructures; low economic activities and limited markets. However, they possess market potentials 
in agriculture and micro-enterprises. Information and communication technologies can be use to develop 
these potentials by opening these markets beyond the local borders. Our objective is to explore the potentials 
of information technologies for rural economy development by bringing mobile added value to potential 
users. Our aim is to design a mobile user interface that will be easy to use by rural micro-entrepreneurs 
who have little or no previous experience of the mobile commerce technology. In order to design the application 
and user interface, we conducted a case study in Dwesa community and applied user-centered design methods 
in the design process. Qualitative and quantitative methods were used to gather user data. This paper 
presents the design process, and user evaluation of the prototype mobile user interface. The user evaluation 
of the prototype was conducted and the descriptive statistics of users performance is presented. The 
result shows that the evaluators who had no prior experience with this technology recorded minimum tasks 
completion time and with few errors, and an increasing level of precision in task performance as they 
continue to use the interface; which is a positive indication on the usability of the user-interface. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Design tools and Techniques User interfaces, 
Modules and interfaces General Terms Design, Human factors Keywords Usability, Mobile commerce, ICT4D, 
User interface, Rural micro-entrepreneur 1. INTRODUCTION  Rural communities in developing countries 
are faced with numerous life challenges such as poverty, marginalization and low level of literacy. 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 
10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, South Africa. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 $10.00. 
 Social services and development infrastructures are absent or inadequate. Dwesa is a rural community 
in the Eastern Cape coast Province of South Africa. Its working inhabitants are predominantly subsistence 
farmers, and a minority of the people equally engaged in arts and craft as a source of income; the population 
is mostly made up of older adults and children of school age [3], [16], [24]. Most of the youths have 
migrated to urban areas in search of greener pastures. Lack of good access roads and the impoverished 
condition of the area have prevented the local entrepreneurs from extending their markets beyond their 
shores [16]. The objective of this study is to harness the potentials of information technology through 
a mobile commerce application to bring mobile added value to the users in the rural community. The aim 
is to design a user interface that will meet users preferences, easy to understand and use by rural users. 
 Efforts in incubating development to this community have lead to the deployment of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) infrastructure, the Siyakhula Living Lab (SLL) within this community. This has promoted 
extensive research [3], [5], [16], [24], on how best to harness the potentials of ICT for rural development. 
As a community based ICT installation, SLL provides facilities for accessing the Internet, design, test 
and deployment of e-commerce services and related applications aimed at promoting the adoption of ICTs 
by the community and improving the condition of living in the area [3]. Dwesa community has witnessed 
an increase in mobile phone use in recent years a situation that created an environment for mobile applications 
design [16]. Adopting m-commerce into farming and small businesses in rural areas may help to extend 
their markets beyond their immediate environment, leverage their income and enhance quality of life. 
Technology users in rural areas have different needs, expectations and capabilities that match their 
behavior and socio-cultural environment [12]. These groups of users may sometimes face usability challenges 
if the user interface for new technology is not designed to match their expectations and context of use 
[13]. In developing software for rural users, it is important that during the design process, the users 
are actively involved [12]. This is possible through the use of user-centred design processes and techniques 
[2], [29]. Designers will be able to understand the users and their environment, elicit requirements, 
design prototype and evaluate the design with the users actively involved. In section 2, we present 
a summary of related work and the user-centred approach we adopted for this study. Section 3 describes 
the design phases and the research method that was used, section 4 presents the results and analysis 
of the data collected during the design process. In section 5 we discuss and conclude and also share 
the lessons learned during the study. 2. RELATED WORK  ICT is rapidly becoming the driving force for 
development in the 21st century and penetrating every aspect of human life [6]; the rural community people 
are not left out. Studies have shown that ICT has impacted significantly to economic growth in developed 
countries where it has been deployed and used successfully in businesses [4]. The majority of ICT development 
efforts are concentrated in the urban centers [1]. The rural areas are perceived as risky markets and 
are still unexplored to a large extend [6]. With the growing demand for mobile telecommunication, mobile 
networks have penetrated several rural areas in developing countries providing connectivity to rural 
dwellers [8]. Africa has the highest growth rate in terms of mobile phone subscription [27], narrowing 
down gradually the digital gap that was created due to the absence of digital media such as computer 
for accessing information. Mobile phones have the capability to access information from the internet, 
rural and marginalized communities can be provided with ICT services that will help to reduce poverty, 
enhance access to education, government services and health information. Several efforts have been made 
to use ICTs in supporting the low literate and poor people in developing countries by different research 
studies mainly in Asia. These efforts include computer literacy training programmes and skills acquisition. 
Also, efforts in software applications and user interfaces designs that meet users capabilities and needs 
are also yielding good results. For instance, the texts free interface on desktop PC for semi and illiterate 
domestic labourers in rural Indian [14], is designed with simplicity so that the users could freely search 
for jobs within their locality from the Internet without being assisted during the interactions [14]. 
A voice user interface on mobile devices enables rural Indian farmers to share farming information among 
themselves [17]. An online desktop computer application prototype [21] assist rural and low literate 
community health workers in Parkistan to access health information from the Internet in order to improve 
health care service delivery to the people. A desktop-based e-commerce application was designed and 
deployed for micro-entrepreneurs in Dwesa community [24]. The application offers a Web platform for marketing 
art and craft products and to encourage trade activities in the community. Customers can access the web 
site to buy products in the different online shops. The shop-owners user interface at the back-end of 
the application has also been culturally and linguistically localized to increase system usability [5]. 
SLL e-commerce site is hosted in a school environment in the community and the shop-owners have restricted 
access to the facility and their online shops. Time and distance away from the school are other limiting 
factors. Rural life pattern proves to be less stationary than office activity in urban life. It also 
requires the shop-owners to be computer literate in order to use the system. With a mobile user interface 
that meets users capabilities, the shop-owners will be able to have access to their online shops at the 
SLL in the comfort of their homes or any other place at any time. It will also alleviate computer literacy 
problems since the handy nature of cell phone makes literacy easily reached by many users [20]. 2.1 
User-Centred Design Approach User-centred design methods have been used extensively in developing usable 
systems [9], [18], [21], [29]. The methods advocate for users involvement in the design process from 
the beginning of the design to the eventual implementation of the system. The design process focuses 
on the users, their tasks/goals, their capabilities, expectations and needs. The design process is user-driven 
and seeks to identify the users, the work environment, the tasks and the users experience in performing 
the tasks [2]. The design of user interfaces in yet unexplored rural communities is costly and time consuming 
[7]. The application of user-centred design methods in this environment will produce usable systems, 
meet users needs, and build users confidence and trust. The user-centred design approach [2], [9], [23], 
[29] that we applied in the design of the mobile user interface emphasize on processes that include: 
 Analysis of the intended users behavior to identify user characteristics and the environment where the 
system will be implemented.  Users tasks analysis to identify the tasks involved and design of scenarios 
to describe the procedures for performing the tasks  Design of prototype: iteratively develop tangible 
prototype to enhance users understanding of the proposed system.  Evaluate the prototype with the users 
to determine if the prototype meets design requirements and if the users are satisfied with the system. 
  The above design processes also include data collection methods in each of the design phases. Both 
qualitative and quantitative data are collected and analyzed to aid the design process and decision making 
[29]. In rural communities their life pattern is not confined to an office environment, having access 
to participants in such environment is difficult [7]. Huenerfauth [7] proposed the use of hypothetical 
scenario writing method were the target users are not easily accessible during the design process. We 
have adopted the design process presented above for this study. Due to accessibility constraints, lack 
of experience or work practice in the proposed application area by the target community members, a combination 
of the user-centred approach and scenarios design would be able to create the means for rural users participation, 
build their confidence and trust for effective user interface design. 3. METHODS  In order to design 
the user interface and the mobile commerce application we applied a user-centred design approach and 
used different methods to collect and analyze user data, design and evaluate the prototype. The approach 
is a combination of the usability design methodology for lightweight applications [29] and scenarios 
design proposed by [7], [19]. The study leading to the design of the user interface for rural micro-entrepreneurs 
consists of the four processes explained in section 2.1. Details of the methods used during the study 
are presented in subsections below. 3.1 User and Environment Data Collection There are different methods 
for collecting information about the users and the environment where the application will eventually 
be used. Both qualitative and quantitative methods could be used. Qualitative techniques include site 
visits and having interactions with the potential users, carrying out interviews and focus groups, and 
observing the users in their work practice, while qualitative techniques include surveys and other methods. 
In this study the users include primarily the crafters (shop-owners) and other members of the community 
(e.g. school learners, educators, community clerks, and others). The data collection activities include: 
 Survey was conducted in the community (120 questionnaire were distributed). The survey provided data 
on the demography of the people, day-to-day occupations, literacy levels, technologies literacy and use. 
The data describes the user profile, technology environment, and technology literacy level.  Interviews 
and focus groups sessions were held with crafters in one of the art and craft center and also with other 
members of the community. The information provided during the sessions includes business activities and 
landscape in the community, and their connections with Internet and mobile technologies. Data attributes 
of artifacts produced by crafters like the names, images (taken by camera), descriptions/use and prices 
were collected; these attributes are the database entities for the application.  Organized computer 
literacy training programmes at regular intervals with members of the community to improve their computer 
skills, build confidence and trust, and learn social and cultural interactions.   3.2 Analysis of Users 
 Tasks and Scenarios Design  Users tasks analysis could be conducted using both qualitative and quantitative 
methods. These methods provide data needed to identify users tasks, goals, and how the tasks are carried 
out on daily basis. Qualitative methods include observations, interviews, focus groups, review of documents 
and others, while quantitative methods involves the use of surveys. Community stakeholders have little 
or no knowledge of mobile or e-commerce technologies. Engaging them in analyzing the tasks for the application 
would yield very little results. The following methods were then adopted: To identify users tasks and 
goals, an audit of similar e-commerce and mobile sites was conducted [25]. The data also collected include 
different interface elements, navigations, menu, layout and users interactions. The tasks were analyzed 
into a hierarchy of tasks consisting of the tasks for the system, the customer s tasks, and the shop-owner 
s tasks.  Scenarios were designed using the tasks analysis outcome. A scenario script is a narrative 
or story and could be used to represent a simple prototype [19]. Scenarios were designed and used as 
first version of the system prototype. The scenarios consist of the screens, users activities, information 
and users interactions. The screen scenarios provide sketches of the different displays with the interface 
elements icons, metaphors, menus, labels, inputs, text and navigations (e.g. buttons, links) and the 
explanations for the screens and outcomes. A breakdown of the tasks into users activities, information 
feedbacks, and the interactions needed to achieve each task were transformed into scenarios.   An early 
involvement of participants from the community in the design process necessitated the presentation of 
the scenarios designs for evaluation and feedbacks. Part of the objective for the presentation was to 
get more artifact data from crafters (shop-owners) for the online shops. Evaluation of the scenarios 
was conducted through focus groups with crafters and feedbacks on user interface requirements were collected. 
The artifacts data also include information of their producers.    3.3 Prototype Design The prototype 
was designed following the output from task analysis and scenarios design. The user interface should 
be able to display properly on different mobile browsers. Mobile web and server-side technologies were 
used in the design process. PHP was used to design the server-side program functions, MYSQL database 
language was used to create the relational database for the application, while XHTML-MP and WCSS scripting 
languages were used to design the client-side interface. The openwave phone simulator was used for designing 
and testing the application. The application is designed for XHTML-MP compliant mobile devices. We also 
used Wireless Abstraction Library (WALL) open source tool to adapt the interface to suit low brand cell 
phones that are Wireless Markup Language (WML) and Compact HTML (cHTML) compliant devices. The prototype 
provides two types of user interfaces: one for the customers (users who will buy from the online shops) 
who would visit the site, browse through the online shops and place order using mobile devices, and the 
other interface at the back-end for the shop-owners. The shop-owner interface will enable a shop-owner 
to manage his/her online shop. Figure 1 presents the system architecture. The application prototype is 
designed for micro-entrepreneurs in the community (e.g. crafters, farmers) who may have products to sell. 
Currently, we have used art and craft products as a starting point to design and demonstrate the value 
of mobile commerce for rural development.          Figure 1. The system architecture 3.4 Prototype 
Evaluation We relied on user testing technique during prototyping. The testing processes were conducted 
through focus groups and recorded the outcome through writing of notes. User testing usually provides 
good information that would help to reshape the application to the specific needs and capabilities of 
the intended users [11]. MySQL DB  1. Login 2. Register 3. E-malls 4. Search products 5. Place an 
order 6. Help 7. Logout  Formative evaluation was conducted to get users feedbacks concerning their 
needs, level of understanding and elicit cultural preferences for the purpose of redesigning the shop-owner 
interface [19]. The evaluation was a user inspection process [15] and then interviews were used to get 
users feedbacks. Participants (n = 12) were members of the community and the sessions consisted of two 
focus groups and single individual evaluations. Each session started with an introduction of the system, 
followed by a demonstration of selected tasks. The participants examine the user interface look and feel, 
menu layout, text and button size, positioning of labels and input format, colors, navigations and output 
presentations for each of the interfaces displayed during the demonstrations. Structured interviews were 
used to take users feedbacks. Data on cultural markers were part of the feedbacks collected from the 
participants. The data collected is for adapting the shop-owner user interface elements to meet the cultural 
preferences e.g. cultural metaphors, numbers, icons, colors, text, date format, and images [10], [22], 
[26] and to improve interface usability. Summative evaluation is used to verify the design, determine 
users perception and the usability of the system [29]. Different methods are used for this type of evaluation, 
such as heuristics method, think-aloud, single individual testing, and focus groups [15], [29]. Evaluation 
using the intended users of the system is the predominant method for determining whether a developed 
system meet users requirements and expectations [22]. The engagement of real users for evaluation is 
often very effective because it usually expose the problems novice users are likely to face when the 
system is finally implemented [11]. This evaluation was intended to provide users feedbacks on the effectiveness 
of the shop-owner user interface and the evaluation technique used. User evaluation of the prototype 
was conducted through focus groups with participants drawn from the community. Participants carried out 
two separate tasks to test the system s ability to store, retrieve and display information effectively. 
The test was also to evaluate participants understanding of the interface elements such as the buttons, 
icons, and the feedbacks from the system. We observed the participants as they perform the tasks on the 
shop-owner user interface and took note for each participant s performance. Interviews and survey were 
used to collect post-test data and the quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive statistics. 
 4. RESULTS AND DATA ANALYSIS  4.1. Analysis of User Data The survey conducted provides information 
on demography, business activities in the community and the profile of potential users of the application 
and the shop-owner user interface. Other information includes the level of proliferation of mobile phones 
among members of the community, Internet and mobile phones technologies awareness and usage. We believed 
that the level of awareness and use of these technologies will have a direct impact on the perception 
people will have on mobile commerce. For instance, people who browse the Internet or send multimedia 
messages would have phones that would be able to access the mobile commerce application on the Internet 
and would not worry much on the cost implication. The survey data (83 responses) was collected and the 
analysis is presented below. The demographic data shows that people in the community are engaged in 
different business activities for life sustainability. Both observations and the survey identified occupations 
such as subsistence farming, teaching, crafting, schooling, and others (e.g. clerks, none teaching staff 
in schools, community road laborers). Among the respondents, 26 were farmers representing 31.3% , 11 
were those who are engaged in art and craft and represent 13.3%, 17 were teachers (educators) and made 
up 20.5%, 24 were school learners representing 30.1%, those who indicated other occupations such as clerks 
or non-teaching school staff were 4 representing 4.8% of the 83 respondents. Figure 2 shows the percentage 
distribution of the respondents based on their occupation. Apart from the craft products, farm produce 
could also be advertised for sale on the mobile commerce application.   Mobile phones form part of 
the user resources in this research, and we have previously mentioned other infrastructures supporting 
this application in the introduction section. Figure 3 shows the level of ownership and use of mobile 
phones amongst the different age brackets or groups in the community. The graph shows that older adults 
from 51 years and upper and young people of school age between 14-19 years form the highest population 
of respondents, an indication of the dominant population groups in the community. The graph also points 
out the fact that people between the ages of 26-40 are less in number and this may be due to migration 
to urban areas in search of better life. A small percentage of the respondents in the age bracket of 
14-19 owned mobile phones (10.9%) and also made up the largest percentage among people without mobile 
phones, and 8.7% are those who owned mobile phone in the age bracket of 20-25 years. These are mostly 
those who are dependant populations. They could benefit if the economy of their parents in the community 
is improved through the mobile commerce application. 8.7% of 31-35 age bracket owned mobile phones and 
13% for those between 26-30 and 46-50 age brackets also owned mobile phones. 19.6% for 41-45 age bracket 
and 26.1% for 51 years and above owned and used mobile phones. Subsistence farming and crafting in the 
community are mostly performed by adults from 40 years and above and they form the greater number of 
mobile phone users. Application of mobile commerce in this community will help to generate income and 
improve livelihood for the adult population as well as their dependants.        We also considered 
the level of familiarity and use of common phone technologies such as SMS, MMS, and mobile internet browsing. 
As previously stated, awareness and use of these mobile technologies will have a positive impact and 
influence on the adoption of mobile commerce in the community. Figure 4 shows the use of these mobile 
technologies according to the data collected. Certain factors influence the use of any technology, for 
example availability on the mobile phone, affordability in terms of cost and capability to use the technology. 
In figure 4, those who could send and receive SMS form the highest percentage (46.9 %). 18.8 % represent 
those who could browse the Internet with their mobile phones. There are those respondents who indicated 
that they could only receive SMS (6.25%) and do not send, again it could be due to cost of sending or 
capability of the individual or literacy level. Also, there are those who could send and receive MMS 
(21.9%), while others could only send MMS (6.25%), same factors could be responsible for this. Majority 
of the respondents, who use SMS, said they do so in their own local language (Isixhosa) and are equally 
comfortable when they received it written in their local language.   Figure 4 indicates the use of 
common mobile technologies according to the data collected. For the community, translates to the level 
of experience and capabilities with these technologies among the respondents. The information will have 
direct influence on the user interface design for this group of users. Factors that may be responsible 
for limiting the use of these technologies such as cost and literacy need to be considered when designing 
the mobile interface. A simple interface without complex or hidden information, less and necessary graphics 
on the interface will reduce cost and time. Users who use SMS do so using text in local language which 
is an indication of how to present information and content on the user interface. Few individuals (18.8%) 
have little experience browsing with their phone; this could also be due to cost and literacy. This is 
an indication that very few people will actually know the value of mobile commerce. A user interface 
that is designed to conform to the culture of the people, present easy to use and easy to understand 
information, interactions, and easy navigations, will be able to motivate the users. Other information 
obtained in the community through unstructured interviews with individuals borders on the social and 
economic life in the community. People are highly influenced by their culture and values. They practice 
both traditional and Christian religion. There is no visible market place where people go to buy and 
sell items within the community. The community members depend on markets in nearby towns for most of 
the household needs as well as market some of their products or produce. 12.2% of interviewees say they 
could not use mobile phones due to the cost which they cannot afford, and also a few others who had phones 
got them as gift from relatives living within or outside the community. 4.2. User Interface Cultural 
Markers Eliciting data on cultural markers with respect to the culture of the Isixhosa people was a difficult 
task. This was due to the low level of technology literacy and inability to translate the cultural knowledge 
into user interface artifacts (culture components) with the right meanings. Table 1 shows some cultural 
markers and their meaning and use. Some cultural items were sourced from the local environment and then 
used to represent interface metaphors. For instance, a road side sign could represent the forward and 
backward metaphor on the user interface and it is very easy to identify. The artifacts are items that 
are common within the culture and environment. Figure 5 presents some artifacts displaying a combination 
of common cultural colors for aesthetics. These artifacts and others are produced by crafters in the 
community and they constitute the items in the online shops advertised for sale. Table 1. Cultural markers 
 Cultural markers meaning/use Colors White - signifies peace, use for attires Yellow a national color 
Black signifies evil Red Signifies blood, danger Text Local user prefer text presented in local language 
 Numbers Local users prefer the conventional numbering system  a road sign navigation metaphor  
a local hot A home metaphor    Figure 5. Artifacts with cultural colors 4.3. Prototype Design The 
prototype has gone through an iterative process of design evaluate redesign. Participants from the 
community have been involved in each evaluation process. Figure 6 presents screen shots of the prototype 
showing a customer interface (a- displays available online shops for the customer to browse through the 
products; b- displays product in an online shop), and a shop-owner interface (c- is the main menu for 
the shop-owners; d- is a log in form for the shop-owner). The prototype application is designed with 
the following features: Functionalities and characteristics of the application include: A customer registration 
and log in for user authentication. This process enables the application to keep track of the user and 
be able to connect the user to his/her data in the database during shopping.  A brief description of 
the on-line shops and the products (e.g. product name, price, description, mass).  Implementation of 
a shopping basket for customers to keep track of their purchase interest, products and total price and 
be able to remove unwanted product from the basket.  A search module for quick search of a product. 
  A user account function for a customer to monitor his/her order, check order status, and modify delivery 
address if necessary.  A help module to assist customers with information.  At the shop-owner end, 
the following functionalities are provided for interactions using mobile devices: Create new online 
shop to accommodate new shop owners.  Add new product to an online shop.  Update an existing product 
in a shop.  Check for customers orders and delivery address.  A customer visiting the site for the 
first time may not need to perform log in or registration, but can go ahead and browse through the online 
shops to see available products. The system will require the user to register if he/she has not already 
done so and he/she is attempting to place an order.      Figure 6. (a) A menu showing the available 
online shops; (b) A product in a shop; (c) The shop-owner menu; (d) A log form for the shop-owner. 4.4. 
Pilot Test The objective of the pilot test was to get feedbacks from the community members concerning 
interface preferences and also evaluate the look and feel of the interface. The test involved participants 
carrying out an inspection of the shop-owners user interface for various displayed elements. Table 2 
gives a summary of the test outcome and the expectations. Table 2. Pilot test outcome During the test, 
different groups of participants were organized in the community. Participants (n= 37) include those 
who own and used mobile phones and those who did not. 42% of the participants had some level of computer 
literacy skills. We asked participants about the level of fluency they have during interactions with 
their mobile phones. 90% of the participants said they hardly used all the functions or facilities that 
are available in their phones due to the language barrier and lack of understanding of the commands. 
They gave different comments (e.g. I do not understand some of them because they are too difficult ), 
( I would have understood them better if they are written in Isixhosa language ).  After the test session, 
participants indicated that they were satisfied with the layout of the menu (hierarchical and list), 
the labels and buttons sizes and positioning, participants like the content/text presented in the local 
language, they want plenty of help information on the interface, as well as easy to understand graphics 
to simplify interactions instead of text information. All the participants have the views that localizing 
the interface will provide better interactions.   4.5. Design Evaluation User evaluation of the shop-owner 
user interface was performed through focus groups sessions in the community. These were different sessions 
from the previous pilot test conducted much earlier. Participants (n = 15) performed two different tasks 
using the shop-owner s user interface. The tasks were repeated 3 times by each participant at intervals. 
The completion times and errors for each task were recorded for each of the participant. Table 3 and 
4 presents the descriptive statistics of users tasks performance for the two separate tasks. The participants 
were novice users of the interface and were very slow in the use of the keypad leading some of them to 
spend considerable time in completing a task. In few cases, participants were reluctant to perform the 
tasks under observation which also contributed to longer time taken to complete a task. Among the participants, 
4 were school learners, 5 were crafters, 2 were none teaching staff of schools, and 4 were educators. 
86.3% owned mobile phones and 24.09% of the participants indicated they have been using their mobile 
phones to browse the Internet. The result in table 3 consists of three trials performed by each participant 
on each of the tasks. The results show a decrease in time variation for each subsequent trial. The participants 
were first time users of the interface. As participants made their second and third attempts, they got 
familiar with the interface and the tasks, their level of precision increased. They found the interface 
easy to understand and use in the second and third trials for each of the tasks. In table 3, to create 
an online shop, a mean time of 96.04 seconds (SD = 26.64) was recorded for the first attempt, 72.04 seconds 
(SD = 19.76), and 63.74 seconds (SD = 15.60) were recorded for the second and third trials respectively, 
a significant improvement from one trial to the other. On the task to add a product to an online shop, 
there was also a significant improvement from one trial to the other among the participants. The decrease 
in time variation also indicates a better level of accuracy and tasks performance in the second and third 
trial by all the participants. Participants were able to complete the tasks in good time considering 
their capabilities and experience with technologies. During the test process, participants showed interest 
in performing the test, entering data was a problem for some of them, but they were able to complete 
the tasks. Table 3: Tasks completion time.  Task Trial Mean time (in seconds) SD  Create an online 
shop 1st 96.04 26.61 2nd 72.17 19.76 3rd 63.74 15.60 Add a product to the online shop 1st 101.78 
27.01 2nd 90.83 24.21 3rd 81.52 20.52   Figure 7 and 8 shows the learning curve for the participants 
in each of the task that was performed. It shows a downward slope or decrease in time as the users got 
familiar with the user interface. It is an indication that participants were able to learn the interface 
quickly. And in subsequent trials, they performed better and task completion time reduced significantly. 
  Figure 7. The graph of 3 trials for the first task   Figure 8. The graph of 3 trials for the second 
task Participants recorded low error rate considering the environment and the average literacy level 
of all the participants (table 4). The use of a localized user interface may have contributed to the 
low level of errors committed during interactions. The mean errors recorded for the first task was 2.36 
and a SD = 1.15, while for the second task, mean = 2.60 and SD= 1.11. The result shows that there was 
a considerable level of precision among the participants during the tasks performance test among the 
participants. Table 4. Tasks performance error rate. Task Mean error rate SD Create your online shop 
2.36 1.15 Add a product to your online shop 2.60 1.11   Based on post-test interviews with the participants, 
they perceived the application as being useful and intend to use the system when it is deployed. They 
also believe it will help to promote small businesses in the community. For instance, they made verbal 
responses such as: the interface can help us to advertise our product to the people outside , it will 
assist us in our business , using our language on the interface made it very easy . 5. DISCUSSION AND 
CONCLUSION  The outcome of the user evaluation shows that localization of a user interface can enhance 
users abilities to quickly learn and use the system, and also give confidence to the users for easy technology 
acceptance [22]. We have applied different research methods in the design process to get the most insight 
and enable participants in the rural community to be involved in the design process. The prominent use 
of focus groups was as a result of our attempt to have positive contributions from participants while 
interacting as a group. Direct interactions with the community members had been poor due to the language 
difference between researchers and the participants, a situation that lead to frequent use of focus groups 
in the study. The use of think aloud method of evaluation was unsuccessful due to poor communication 
during the few trials with participants. Media accessibility and technology illiteracy are challenges 
that face rural ICT development. Due to limited number of desktop computers in rural areas and computer 
literacy problems, desktop applications remain under utilized, for example [24] and the telecenters [6]. 
Mobile phones are accessible to rural users. Mobile phones and applications will provide easy access 
to information and will be widely accepted and used in rural communities. In the paper, we have presented 
a prototype user interface for a mobile commerce application developed for local micro-entrepreneurs 
in Dwesa. The interface is designed with the nature of the mobile device in mind (low brand of phones) 
and it is rendered on mobile browsers [28], [30]. The customer interface had been made very simple and 
easy to use. The customers will not need to perform much text entry before completing a task such as 
placing an order except in registration and log in processes. The shop-owner will easily manage the data 
in the online shop using a culture sensitive user interface. We considered seriously the context of use 
for designing the shop-owner user interface. For our future work, we hope to balance interactions with 
a voice user interface for voice interactions with the application and investigate further on their usefulness 
to the target users. 6. REFERENCES  [1] Batchelor, S., Scott, N. 2005. Good Practice Paper on ICTs 
for economic growth and poverty reduction. The DAC journal Vol.6, No.3, 37-64. [2] Costabile, M. F. 
2001. Usability in the Software Life Cycle, In: Handbook of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering. 
S.K. Chang Ed., World Scientific Publishing Company, Vol.1,179-192.  [3] Dalvit, L., Thinyane M., Muyingi 
H. and Terzoli A., 2007. The Deployment of an e-Commerce Platform and Related Projects in a Rural Area 
in South Africa, International journal of Computing and ICT Research, Vol. 1, No. 1, 9-18. [4] Dedrick, 
J., Gurbaxini, V., Kraemer, K. 2003. Information technology and economic performance: A critical review 
of the empirical evidence. ACM computing surveys, Vol.35, No.1, 1-28. [5] Dyakalashe, S.: 2009. Cultural 
and Linguistic Localization of the Virtual Sop-owners End of E-commerce Platforms for Rural development.. 
MSC thesis, Computer Science department, University of Fort Hare, South Africa. [6] Heeks, R. 2008. 
ICT4D 2.0: The Next Phase of Applying ICT for International Development. Computer, Vol. 41, No. 6, 26-33. 
 [7]Huenerfauth M. P. 2002. Design Approaches for Developing User-Interfaces Accessible to Illiterate 
Users. In: Proceedings of the 18th National conference on Artificial intelligence, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada. [8]International Telecommunication Union, Measuring Village ICT in Sub-Saharan Africa. Available: 
www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/material/Africa_Village_ICT_2007.pdf. (Access July, 2008) [9]Johnson, 
C. M., Johnson, T. R. and Zhang, J. 2005. A user-centered framework for redesigning health care interfaces. 
Journal of Biomed. Informatics, 38, 75-87. [10]Kang, K. and Corbitt, B. 2001. Effectiveness of Graphical 
Components in Web Site E-commerce Application A Cultural Perspective. EJISD, Vol.7, No 2, 1-6. [11] 
Kinzie, M. B., Cohn, W. F. and Julian, M. F. 2002. A User-centered Model for Web Site Design. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, 320-330. [12] Lalji, Z. and Good, J. 2008. Designing 
new technologies for illiterate populations: A study in mobile phone interface design. Interacting with 
Computers Vol. 20, 574 586. [13] Marcus, A. 2001. Cross-cultural user-interface design for work, home, 
play, and on the way , In: Proceedings of the 19th annual international conference on computer documentation, 
Sante Fe, New Mexico, USA, 221-222. [14] Medhi, I., Sagar, A., Toyama, K. 2006. Text-Free User Interfaces 
for Illiterate and Semi-Literate Users. In Proc. International Conference on Information and Communications 
Technologies and Development, 72-82. [15]Nielson, J. 1995. Usability Inspection Methods. CHI 95 Mosaic 
of Creativity, (May 7-11, 1995), 377-378. [16] Pade, C., Palmer, R., Kavhai, M. and Gumbo, S. 2009. 
Siyakhula Living Lab Baseline study Report. (April, 2009). [17] Patel, N., Agarwal, S., Rajput, N., 
Kumar, A., Nanavati, A., Dave, P. and Parikh, T. S. 2008. Experiences Designing a Voice Interface for 
Rural India. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Spoken Language Technology for Development (SLT), 
21-25. [18]Peleg, M., Shachak, A., Wang, D. and Kernieli, E. 2009. Using Multi-perspective Methodologies 
to Study Users Interactions with the Prototype front end of a Guideline-based Decision Support system 
for Diabetic Foot Care. Int l journal of Medical Informatics, Vol.78, 482-493. [19] Rosson, M. B. and 
Carroll, J. M. 2002. Usability Engineering: Scenario-Based Development of Human-Computer Interaction. 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. [20]Scott, I. 2009. Cell phones in Africa: Improving literacy and agricultural 
market information systems in Niger. Available: http://www.isbrandt.com/ (Accessed on 18 November, 2009) 
 [21] Sherwani, J., Ali, N., Mirza, S., Fatma, A., Memon, Y., Karim, M., Tongia, R., Rosenfeld, R. 2007. 
HealthLine: Speechbased Access to Health Information by Low-literate Users. In Proc. Int l conf. of Information 
&#38; Communication Technologies and Development, Bangalore, India. [22]Shen, S., Woolley, M. and Prior 
S. 2006. Towards culture-centered design. Interacting with Computers, Vol. 18, 820-852. [23]Shneiderman, 
B. 1998. Designing the User Interface: strategies for effective Human-Computer Interaction (3r ed). Addison 
Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass. [24] Sicelo, G. N. 2007. Implementation of a Virtual shopping mall for 
Dwesa, a rural area in the Eastern Cape, South Africa. MSC thesis, Department of Computer Science, University 
of Fort Hare, South Africa. [25]Smith, A., Dunckley, L., French, T., Minocha, S., and Chang, Y. 2004. 
A Process Model for Developing Usable Cross-cultural Web Sites. Interacting with Computers, Vol.16, 63-91. 
 [26]Tong, M. C. A., and Robertson, K. 2008. Political and Cultural Representation in Malaysian Websites. 
Int l J. of Design, Vol.2, No. 2, 67-79. [27]World Bank report, 2009. Connecting Africa: How ICT is 
Transforming a Continent. Availabe: http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:21526131~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitPK:4607,00.html. 
(Accessed 20 August, 2008). [28]W3C, 2009. The role of Mobile Technologies in Fostering Social and Economic 
Development, W3C Workshop Report. Maputo, (1-2 April 2009), Mozambique. Available: http://www.w3.org/2008/10/MW4D_WS/ 
(Accessed 15 November, 2009). [29] Xavier, F., Juristo, N., Windl, H. and Constantine, L. 2001. Usability 
Basics for Software Developers. IEEE. Software, Vol.18, No.1, 22-29. [30] Zafeiri, K., Gavalas, D., 
Balla, A. 2006. Selling culture: implementation of e-commerce and WAP-based prototypes , International 
Review on Computers and Software, Vol. 1, 68-76. 
			