
 A MODERATE APPROACH TO COMPUTER LITERACY Diane M. Spresser Department of Mathematics and Computer Science 
James Madison University Rarrisonburg, Virginia 22807 A new computer literacy program has been implemented 
at James Madison University (Vs.). Our approach has been to integrate the computer into appropriate existing 
courses, rather than introduce into the curriculum any new course(s) called "Computer Literacy." Three 
existing courses in mathematics were revised to include a computing component. These three courses, together 
with an introductory course in BASIC programming and a course in business computer applications, form 
the entry level of our computer literacy program. Beyond these courses, each discipline throughout the 
University is being strongly encouraged in order to integrate computer use with The philosophical base 
for our approach detail. Definition of the Problem In recent years, "computer litera- cy" has been 
the topic writing and discussion. computer literacy abound [4]-[6], and [8]-[11], the spring of 1983, 
received enough exposure of considerable Definitions of (see Ill, [2], for example). By the subject 
had on a national level and in sufficiently wide circles that the College Board issued a statement [4] 
on "Computer Competency: An Emerging Need," in which four basic areas of preparation in computing for 
 college were delineated: I. A basic knowledge of how computers work and of common computer terminology. 
 2. Some ability to use the computer and appropriate software for: self-instruc-tion; collection and 
retrieval of information; word processing (including the development of keyboard, composition, and editing 
skills); modeling, simula- tions, and decision making; Permission to copy without fee all or part of 
this material is granted provided that the copies arc not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, 
the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
reqmres a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1985 ACM 0-89791-152-0/85/003/0327 $00.75 to develop 
materials and to revise curricula appropriate applications in the discipline. and our curricular design 
are reported in problem solving--both through the use of existing programs and through experience with 
developing one's own programs. 3. An awareness of when and how computers may be used in the academic 
disciplines and various fields of work, as well as in daily life. 4. Some understanding of the  problems 
and issues confronting ind ividuals--and society generally--in the use of computers, including the social 
and economic effects of computers and the ethics involved in their use. Discussions programs were not 
tation in the college curricula Committee on the in Mathematics of computer literacy confined to implemen-secondary 
school and of the nation. The Undergraduate Program of The Mathematical Association of America, in its 
1983 report [13], recommended a unit, of approximately one month in duration, on computer appreciation 
for all teachers of grades 1 through . 6. This unit on computer appreciation, which is a part of a two-semester 
course on fundamental mathematical concepts, includes such topics as the nature of an algorithm, elementary 
programming, historical references, the role of comRuting in mathematics, and the impact of computers 
on contemporary school mathematics curricula [13, p. 15]. The Committee 327 further recommended a more 
extensive computing background for teachers of middle school mathematics and for those preparing for 
specialization in elemen- tary school mathematics. Clearly, there are many perspec-tives of computer 
literacy. Those who advocate a computer literacy requirement of some kind have traditionally based their 
rationale on one or more of the following precepts: I. Virtually every career and occupation in today's 
world is touched by computers . The employer/employee who has some knowledge of, and experience with, 
computers has a competitive edge over his/her counterpart without comparable knowledge and experience. 
 Indeed, some advocates of universal computer literacy argue that it is no longer a matter of "competitive 
edge" but a "necessity" in today's work force. 2. Computers have so permeated our lives and our world 
that one should have some knowledge  of computers in order to function as an enlightened member of society, 
comfortable with--and unafraid of--computerized systems. 3. Many of the most important issues in the 
realm of public policy today are issues which involve computers. Matters of privacy, for example, touch 
the lives of all citizens. Advocates of universal computer literacy argue that informed policy makers 
and an  informed electorate are the most important components of sound public policy. It seems reasonable 
to assume that many elements of computer literacy will be transmitted to the general population through 
cultural assimilation, especial-ly with the recent increased popularity of personal computers in the 
home and in the classroom. But, advocates of universal computer literacy argue that it is not enough 
to rely on cultural assimilation, that it is not enough to offer elective courses in computer science 
in our secondary schools and colleges for those who are interested, that there needs to be a systematic 
 approach--including formal classroom study as a requirement in every college and secondary school curriculum. 
The widely-publicized 1983 report [14] "A Nation at Risk," for example, called for a one-semester course 
in computer science to be required of every high school graduate. Most of us would probably agree that 
if it were possible to design one or two high school or college-level courses which would indeed address 
the three basic arguments for computer literacy in a thorough and responsible manner, and i__~ it were 
possible for these courses to be taught by competent faculty with adequate resources, then the concept 
of universal computer literacy would be much more appealing. The problem, of course, is that this broad 
approach to computer literacy cannot really be examined well in one or two required courses, often taught 
by marginally prepared instructors with or without acceptable equipment; and so the rational base for 
universal computer literacy has undergone a metamorphosis. Now, instead of the occupational/voca-tional 
argument, the "pervasiveness-in-modern-life" argument, and the public-policy argument, which are consonant 
with a broad perspective of computer literacy, the arguments for computer literacy have often become 
arguments of the genre "if you can't do well what you think should be done, still better to do something 
than nothing." What we see, therefore, is a metamorphosis from a broadly based perspective of computer 
literacy to a narrowly based one. There is ample evidence of this phenomenom in curricula where the major 
component of computer literacy is programming in BASIC. The whole issue of computer literacy has become 
clouded ([3], [5], [7], and [12], for example, give varying perspectives of the issue). One Institutional 
Approach At James Madison University, a state-supported, comprehensive univer-sity of over 9,000 students, 
located in Harrisonburg, Virginia, we too have attempted to confront the issue of computer literacy. 
In the Department of Mathmatics and Computer Science, we do not believe that one contributes to computer 
literacy by initiating and teaching an N-credit course called "computer literacy." We are skeptical of 
any course which purports to address well the traditional occupational/voca-tional, "pervasiveness-in-modern 
life," and public-policy arguments. We think that an acceptable, intuitive descript-ion of computer literacy 
may be summarized in this way: that one has enough acquaintance with computers that he/she is not intimidated 
by them, and more importantly, that the computer has become sufficiently integrated into one's thinking 
that it is viewed as a natural resource in one's environment. Our perspective of computer literacy is 
328 an extremely broad one. What we hope to do is to enhance our undergraduates" experience with and 
awareness of the computer, so that whenever some set of circumstances arise in which the computer could 
be a helpful resource, the student will think of it as a resource and will call upon its capabilities 
in an appropriate way. We have chosen to integrate com- puters into appropriate existing courses as 
a first step towards computer literacy, rather than introduce new courses into the curriculum. There 
are several reasons for this approach: I. The computer is a tool to most people. Unlike those in disciplines 
such as computer science where the computer is itself the object of study, most of our students at James 
Madison will use the computer as a tool in various disciplines. There is therefore no one common set 
of topics or common context which, in this sense, makes one "computer literate." 2. The subject matter 
content of any introductory college course whose raison d'etre is computer literacy is highly volatile. 
While students will have an ongoing need for "base line" experiences in computing, many of these base 
line responsibilities will be increasingly borne in future years by our secondary schools and eventually--at 
least in part--by our elementary and middle schools . Incoming undergraduates will come to college in 
future years with increasing sophistication in computers . We believe that the best, long-term approach 
to computer literacy is to integrate computing within existing courses . In elementary statistics, for 
example, the use of statistical computing packages to analyze large data sets will be ongoing, regardless 
of the level of computer sophistication possessed by the average student. This is therefore a long-term 
use of computing, not merely a short-term remedy just for the sake of saying that we have something called 
"computer literacy. " 3. The computer, like the slide rule and the calculator before it, has natural 
uses which should azise in n natural habitat, not in an artifically constructed and isolated course. 
After all, computer literacy means that computers have become a part of the thinking and the "mind set" 
of individuals. This is--we be lieve--accomp lished better by using computers in natural environments, 
where a problem at hand suggests a computer application. To integrate computers into a discipline, into 
a topic under discussion, is more effective--we feel--in changing the mind set and thinking of students 
than to carve out an isolated environment in which we say, in effect, to our students "now we "re going 
to learn about computers." 4. There are some pragmatic reasons which suggest that a separate course 
is not to be preferred. Paramount among these are the problem of faculty resources and the problem of 
adding a course requirement to a curriculum which, for students in some majors, is already heavy. It 
should be noted further that skeptics of courses in computer literacy doubt the "staying power" of such 
courses . McCracken, for example , compares computer literacy with the New Math and predicts that "unless 
computer literacy is nipped in the bud . . , in about I0 or 20 years the two experiments will appear 
equally foolish" [12, p. 64]. Curricular Design Our approach to computer literacy at James Madison 
has been to integrate the computer into appropriate existing courses, rather than introduce into the 
curriculum any new course(s) called "Computer Literacy." More specifically, our approach has been as 
follows: 1. We have revised our existing fundamentals of mathematics course (MATH 107-108, three credits 
each semester) to include a unit on the use of computers in problem-solving. This course is one of several 
mathematics courses in our university general studies program. Every student at James Madison is required 
to complete st least one course 329 in mathematics as part of general education. The fundamentals of 
mathematics course is designed primarily for students in the fine arts and humanities and in the School 
of Education. The computing unit will be taught early in the first semester (MATH 107), and the computer 
will be integrated appropriately with other content throughout the year sequence. The unit on computers 
will include such topics as the nature of an a 1 g or ithm, elementary programming in BASIC, and especially 
the use of the computer in problem-solving through the development of individually written programs and 
through the use of existing programs. 2. We have revised the three-credit elementary statistics course 
(MATH 220) currently required of most students in the social sciences, the biological sciences and allied 
health fields, nursing, and health/physical education. The revised course contains a computing component 
designed to enhance literacy through hands-on experience with computer terminals, through use of prepared 
statistical packages (primarily MINITAB), and through computer applications geared toward those disciplines 
being served. 3. We have increased the number of offerings of our one-credit , introductory course in 
BASIC programming (CS I00) . While this is a service course elected by students in a variety of different 
majors, most areas of the natura 1 sciences strongly encourage--indeed, in some cases, require--their 
majors to take it. Science students, in particular, then broaden their computer competency through additional 
experience iu their own disciplines, using microcomputers in the laboratory and in their own student 
research projects. 4. Our School of Business continues to require an introductory course in business 
computing and applications (IDS 201, three credits) of all students majoring in programs in that school. 
This course provides an introduction to computer equipment, applications, systems design and programming; 
it provides an overview of business data processing, including the analysis of computer processing in 
various media. 5. Beyond the courses enumerated above, each discipline throughout the University has 
been strongly encouraged to develop materials and to revise curricula in order to integrate computer 
use with appropriate applications in the discipline. The last item above deserves particular mention. 
Computer literacy is the re-sponsibility of the entire university community, not just those few depart-ments 
which house computer-related pro- grams. Each department at the University has therefore been asked to 
give special attention to those courses, at both the upper and lower division levels, where natural and 
appropriate applications of computers exist in that discipline. While word processing is not included 
in the computing components of courses in mathematics, it might be a highly appropriate component of 
courses in writing and composition. No formal graduation requirement in computer literacy exists at James 
Madison; however, the program outlined above--together with other requirements and anticipated changes 
within the various disciplines--will provide a "base line" of computer experience and a high degree 
of computer awareness for about 95g of the undergraduates at the University. We have taken many steps 
in the past twelve months to ensure a heightened awareness of computers among our undergraduates; in 
the final analysis, however, we believe that computer literacy will have become a reality only when 
all disciplines across the University integrate the computer into their course offerings, in whatever 
ways are most appropriate to the environment of the discipline. References [ I] Anderson, R.E., Klassen, 
D.L., and Johnson, D.C. "In Defense of a Comprehensive View of Computer Literacy--A Reply to Luehrmann." 
Mathematics Teacher 7.4, 9 (December 1981), 687-690. 330 [ 21 [ 3] [ 4] [ 5]  [ 6] [ 7] [ 8] [ 9] 
[10] [ltl [12] Earger, R.N. "Computer Lit-[131 The Mathematical Association eracy: Toward a Clearer 
Def-of America, Committee on the inition." Technological .Hori- Undergraduate Program in zons in Education 
Journal 11 Mathematics, CUPM Panel on (October 1983), 108-112. Teacher Training. Rceommenda- tlons Qn 
the .Mathematical Baron, N.S. "Should Everyone preparati@n of Teachers. The Learn Anything?: The Question 
Mathematical Association of of Computer Literacy." SIGSCSE America, Washington, D.C., Bulletin, The Papers 
of. ~he 1983. Fifteenth SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science [141 The National Commission on 
Education 16, I (February Excellence in Education. A 1984), 108-114. Nation at Risk: The .Imper- ative 
for Educational Reform. College Board. "Text of State-A report to the nation and the ment on "Computer 
Competen-Secretary of Education, United cy'". The Chronicle of Higher States Department of Educa-Education, 
May 18, 1983, 15. tion, April 1983. Eisele, J.g. "A Case for Uni-versal Computer Literacy", Appendix 
Journal of Research and Devel- opment in Education 14, 1 Course descriptions (1980), 84-8ยง. CS 100 Introduction 
to BASIC. Fischer, H. "Computer Literacy Introduction to the pro-Scope and Sequence Models, A gramming 
language BASIC. Critical Review of Two Ap-proaches." SIGCUE Bulletin 18, IDS 201 Computer Applications. 
An 1 (Winter 1984), 22-26. introduction to com- puter-based information Friedman, F.L. "Computer systems. 
Emphasis is Literacy Considered Harmful (A placed on the components, View From the Trenches)." applications, 
development, !nt er~ace 5, 3 (Fall 1983), programming, operation and 78-79. impact of business com- puter 
systems. Cawronski, J.D. "Computer Literacy and School Mathe-MATH 107-108 Fundamentals of Mathe- matics." 
Mathematics Teacher matics. Sets, logic, nu- 74, 8 (November 1981), meration systems, number 613-614. 
theory, probability and statistics, measurement, Johnson, D.C., Anderson, R.E., geometry, and an introduc- 
Hanson, T.P., and Klassen, tion to computers. This D.L. "Computer Literacy--What course will fulfill 
the Is It?" Mathematics Teacher requirements for certifi-73, 2 (February 1980), 91-96. cation of prospective 
elementary school Luehrmann, A. "Computer Liter-teachers, as well as acy." EDUCOM Bulletin 16, 4 provide 
a general (Winter 1981), 14-15+. introduction to mathe- matics for students in Luehrmann, A. "Computer 
o t h e r ma j o r s . Literacy--What Should It BEY" Prerequisite for MATE 108: Mathematics Teacher 74, 
9 MATH 107. (December 1981), 682-686. MATH 220 Elementary Statistics. McCracken, D.D. "A Skeptical Descriptive 
statistics, View of Computer Literacy." frequency distributions, Proceedings of the 1984 ACM sampling, 
estimation and Computer Science Confe!ence testing of hypothesis, (February 14-16, 1984), 61-65. regressionj 
correlation Also SIGCSE Bulletin, The and an introduction to Papers of the Fifteenth SIGCSE statistical 
analysis using Technical Symposium on computers. Prerequisite: Computer Science Education 16, MATH 145 
("College Algebra I (February 1984), Appendix A. with Probability") or MATH 115 ("Introduction to Probability"). 
331 ~~i > i : / A-~ ~'' 
			