
 A Performance Monitoring System for VoIP Gateways Adrian E. Conway Infolibria, Inc. 411 Waverley Oaks 
Road Waltham, MA 02452 ABSTRACT A system is developed to monitor performance at voice-over-IP (VoIP) 
gateways in an IP-telecom network. The gateways provide a bridge for VoIP calls between the IP network 
and the conventional circuit-switched telephone network. The monitoring system provides a range of traffic 
and performance statistics on an ongoing basis. This information is used for performance monitoring and 
management, capacity planning, resource optimization, load balancing, and troubleshooting, in order to 
maintain VoIP service at or above required quality of service levels. The system includes a web page 
interface for charting performance data and generating reports.  Keywords Dial peer, gateway, IP telephony, 
performance monitoring, PRI statistics, voice-over-IP. 1. INTRODUCTION The use of the Internet for the 
transport of telecommunication services such as voice calls, as well as related services such as fax 
and messaging, is seen to be increasing quite rapidly at the present time [1]. An example is the free 
voice-over-IP (VoIP) service being offered by dialpad.com. In this service, a user may make a voice call 
from a PC located anywhere on the Internet to any telephone in the United States. This involves a combined 
use of the Internet and the conventional public circuit-switched telephone network (PSTN) using H.323 
[2] for call set-up. There are many ways in which the Internet is being combined with the PSTN to realize 
novel telecommunication services. Figure 1 serves to illustrate some examples. In the dialpad scenario, 
calls are established over the Internet from a PC to a VoIP gateway on the Internet. The VoIP gateway 
bridges the call between the IP network and the PSTN. In another scenario, intra-European mobile PSTN 
calls are bridged onto a European VoIP gateway and carried over the Internet to gateways in the United 
States. The gateways in the US then dial back to Europe over the long-distance PSTN. This scenario is 
motivated by arbitrage opportunities. In a third scenario, telephone calls at Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted with­ this work or personal or classroom use is granted without 
 out fee provided that copies are not made or distributed fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this this notice and the full citation on the .rst page. To copy notice and the full citation on 
the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redis­ otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute  tribute to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. a fee. Proceedings of WOSP2000, Ottawa, Canada, 
9/2000 WOSP 2000, Ontario, Canada (c) 2000 ACM. ISBN 1-58113-195-X. &#38;#169; ACM 2000 1-58113-195-X/00/09 
...$5.00 an Enterprise PBX are bridged onto the Internet at an Enterprise VoIP gateway. The call is established 
across the Internet to a remote gateway where it is bridged back onto the PSTN network. In this scenario, 
long-distance cost savings may be realized. In providing VoIP service, it is important to be able to 
measure continuously the end-to-end quality-of-service (QoS) and the traffic. This is required for performance 
monitoring and management, capacity planning, resource optimization, load balancing, and troubleshooting 
purposes. In VoIP, the main QoS performance measures of importance are end-to-end RTP [3] packet loss, 
RTP delay, RTP delay jitter (defined in [3]), and call grade-of-service (GoS). The GoS is the probability 
that a new call attempt is blocked and lost. The GoS is a QoS factor when there is a gateway involved 
in the VoIP call since it is at the PSTN side of gateways where calls may be blocked. The main traffic 
measures of importance at a gateway are the PSTN utilization, carried/offered traffic, and lost traffic. 
In this paper, we develop a system for monitoring traffic, GoS, and other related performance measures 
at the VoIP gateways in a large IP-telecom network. The monitoring system is based on dial peer statistics 
that are obtained by polling the dial control management information base (MIB) in each gateway. This 
MIB is defined in recommendation RFC 2128 [4] and implemented in gateways such as the Cisco 5300. The 
dial peers are logical associations used in establishing the session level connection between the IP 
side and the PSTN side of each VoIP call. Figure 1. Illustration of VoIP scenarios. In the following 
section, we review the concept of dial peers and describe how the basic dial peer statistics are obtained. 
In Section 3, we show how one can then derive gateway traffic and performance estimates of interest from 
dial peer statistics. The implementation of the monitoring system and the web page interface are then 
described in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, we present some cases that illustrate how the monitoring 
system is used as an engineering tool for improving the performance of the VoIP services and/or maintaining 
performance with increasing traffic.  2. GATEWAY DIAL PEER STATISTICS Consider a VoIP gateway at the 
interface between the Internet and the PSTN, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The gateway bridges calls between 
the Internet and the PSTN. This bridging is primarily a software function. On the IP-side, the call is 
carried over RTP/UDP/IP. On the PSTN-side, the call is carried over a circuit connection such as an ISDN 
B channel [5]. There are typically two or four ISDN primary rate interfaces (PRIs) on the PSTN-side of 
a gateway. Each PRI is typically configured to support 23 ISDN B channels. Figure 2. VoIP gateway at 
the PSTN-IP network interface. In the establishment of a VoIP call across a gateway, there are two call 
legs. A call leg is a directed logical call segment defined between two points. At a gateway, there is 
one call leg on the PSTN-side and one on the IP-side. A dial peer defines the characteristics of a particular 
call leg. A dial peer on the PSTN-side defines the characteristics of a traditional telephone connection. 
A PSTN dial peer associates a telephone number with a voice port. A dial peer on the IP-side defines 
the characteristics of a packet-switched connection. An IP dial peer points to a specific device on the 
IP network. When a VoIP call is established across a gateway, a specific pair of IP-side and PSTN-side 
dial peers is seized to complete the call legs that are required to form an end-to-end call. Each gateway 
is typically configured with a multitude of dial peers. The gateway traffic and performance measures 
produced by the monitoring system are derived from dial peer traffic statistics that are obtained by 
polling the dial control MIB. This MIB maintains various counters for each configured dial peer. In particular, 
we use the DialCtlPeerStatsEntry defined to be [4]: DialCtlPeerStatsEntry::= SEQUENCE { dialCtlPeerStatsConnectTime 
AbsoluteCounter32, dialCtlPeerStatsChargedUnits AbsoluteCounter32, dialCtlPeerStatsSuccessCalls AbsoluteCounter32, 
dialCtlPeerStatsFailCalls AbsoluteCounter32, dialCtlPeerStatsAcceptCalls AbsoluteCounter32, dialCtlPeerStatsRefuseCalls 
AbsoluteCounter32, dialCtlPeerStatsLastDisconnectCause OCTET STRING, dialCtlPeerStatsLastDisconnectText 
DisplayString, dialCtlPeerStatsLastSetupTime TimeStamp } In the above entry, the specific counters of 
interest for our traffic and performance monitoring system are ConnectTime, SuccessCalls, FailCalls, 
and RefuseCalls. To derive traffic and performance statistics for a gateway, the counters must be polled 
periodically with an SNMP network management system. Polling the above counters provides basic information 
about the traffic condition of gateways. However, much more information can be derived from the counters 
knowing the actual configuration of each dial peer. This configuration information is available to us 
from an existing gateway configuration system (described in [6]). For each dial peer on every gateway, 
we have the following dial peer information: gateway role, application type, network side, direction, 
and port number. The gateway role field specifies the use of the dial peer in terms of the type of service 
that the corresponding gateway has been designed to support (i.e. PSTN, IP fax, voice mail, Internet 
call waiting, or PSTN long-distance). The application type field provides further information regarding 
the use of the dial peer (i.e. any application, unspecified application, fax inbox, fax redialer service, 
unified messaging deposit, unified messaging deposit forwarded, unified messaging retrieval, Internet 
call waiting, and two-stage dial-through). The network side field specifies if the dial peer is used 
on the PSTN-side or the IP-side of the gateway. The direction field specifies if the dial peer is used 
for inbound or outbound calls. Inbound dial peers are used for call legs that terminate on the gateway, 
while outbound dial peers are used for call legs that emanate from the gateway. The port number field 
specifies the gateway ISDN PRI with which the dial peer is associated. Based on all of these dial peer 
information fields, we derive a number of useful traffic and performance measures for the gateways. 
 3. STATISTICS AT VoIP GATEWAYS The traffic and performance statistics for a gateway PRI are obtained 
directly from the polled values of the dial peer counters. From the PRI statistics, we obtain marginal 
statistics for individual gateways and groups of gateways. Using the detailed configuration information 
for each dial peer, we also obtain more detailed traffic statistics for gateways. We first consider the 
Here B is known and the carried_traffic (in Erlangs) is derivation of the statistics for individual PRIs 
on gateways. measured as Define CT(i,t), SC(i,t), FC(i,t), and RC(i,t) to be the values of ConnectTime, 
SuccessCalls, FailCalls, and RefuseCalls, respectively, for dial peer i at polling time t on a specific 
gateway. For each gateway PRI, we compute the following statistics: call success rate, call loss rate, 
call mean duration, minutes-of-use (MOU), utilization, estimated GoS, and estimated offered traffic. 
These statistics are computed as follows. Assume a polling time interval (a,b) specified in seconds. 
The call success rate (calls/second) in the polling interval is given by call_success_rate= (SC(i,b) 
-SC(i,a)) / (b-a), . i . I( p) where I(p) is the subset of gateway dial peers that are on the PSTN side 
of the gateway and which are associated with PRI p. The call loss rate (calls/second) is defined to be 
call_loss_rate= (FC(i,b) + RC(i,b)-FC(i,a)-RC(i,a)) / (b-a). . i.I( p) The mean call duration (seconds) 
is given by call_mean_duration= (CT (i,b)-CT (i,a)) / (SC(i,b)-SC(i,a)) . .. i.I( p) i.I( p) The MOU 
(minutes) in the polling interval is given by mou= (call_mean_duration)(call_success_rate)(b-a) / 60. 
The utilization of the PRI (with 23 B channels) is given by utilization= (call_mean_duration)(call_success_rate) 
/ 23. The estimated GoS and estimated offered traffic at a PRI are obtained using a method summarized 
in [7]. A difficulty with measuring the GoS is that the exact offered traffic may not, in general, be 
determined from the dial peer counters or from other available information at a gateway. The reason for 
this is that PSTN calls arriving to the gateway from the central office (CO) switch (see Fig. 2) will 
be blocked when the PRI from the CO switch to the gateway is already fully occupied. Consequently, these 
blocked calls are not counted by either FailCalls or RefuseCalls. A practical solution to this problem 
is to estimate the GoS by measuring the carried traffic and then use the Erlang-B formula [8] in an 'inverse' 
manner by solving a fixed-point problem. Assuming that offered calls to a PRI arrive according to a Poisson 
process, the GoS is given by gos = Erlang(B, .), where B is the number of ISDN B channels in the PRI, 
. is the offered traffic (in Erlangs), and Erlang(,) is the Erlang-B formula [8]. The carried traffic 
(in Erlangs) is given by . (1-gos). Hence, gos= Erlang(B, carried_traffic /(1-gos)). (3.1) carried_traffic= 
(CT (i,b)-CT (i, a)) / (b-a). . i.I( p) Let gos= G* be the fixed-point solution to eq. 3.1 such that 
0 < gos < 1. The solution for gos is found numerically using a fixed-point iteration that follows the 
'staircase' shown in Fig. 3, where C = carried_traffic. In this iteration, the Erlang-B formula is computed 
efficiently using the recursion [8] Erlang(B, .) = . Erlang(B-1, .) / (B + . Erlang(B-1, .)) with Erlang(0, 
.) = 1. Having obtained the GoS G*, the estimated offered traffic (in Erlangs) is given by offered_traffic= 
carried_traffic/ (1-G*). Having obtained the gateway PRI statistics, a number of marginal statistics 
are also derived. The call success rate, call loss rate, call mean duration, minutes-of-use (MOU), utilization, 
estimated GoS, and estimated offered traffic are obtained for each city in which gateways are located. 
This provides geographic traffic information. Statistics for the entire set of gateways in the network 
are also obtained. This provides global traffic information. Daily averages/totals/peaks are also derived. 
All of these marginal statistics are derived in a straightforward manner from the PRI statistics. y 1 
y = Erlang(B,C/(1-x)) G* Erlang(B,C) y = x 0 G*1 Figure 3. Illustration of solution for G*. Using the 
detailed configuration information for each dial peer, we also derive a number of detailed traffic statistics. 
Using the gateway role field, we break down the traffic statistics into local PSTN and long distance 
PSTN components. Using the application type field, we break down traffic into the service type that is 
being supported. Using the direction field, we break down traffic into inbound and outbound directions. 
This allows one to measure the inbound and outbound traffic on a PRI. We also break down the traffic 
using combinations of fields.  4. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION We have developed and deployed a system for 
continuously monitoring the gateway statistics at all the gateways in a large IP-telecom network. In 
this IP network, there are presently about 300 gateways. The complete monitoring system is depicted in 
Fig. 4. The dial control MIB in each Cisco 5300 gateway is polled once every 3 hours by the Tivoli Netview 
network management system that runs on a Sun 450. In each gateway, there can be up to about 400 dial 
peers. Due to the number of gateways in the network and the potential number of dial peers on each gateway, 
it is undesirable to poll each gateway very frequently due to the volume of MIB data that is retrieved 
in each SNMP poll and the processing required of the network management system. On the other hand, a 
smaller polling interval is desirable to increase the time granularity of the measurements. A polling 
period of 3 hours was chosen as a practical compromise. Figure 4. Gateway monitoring system. On each 
gateway SNMP poll, Tivoli Netview timestamps the retrieved MIB counter data and writes the raw data to 
a Netview file. There is one Netview file for each dial peer on each gateway. The data in the Netview 
files is processed daily by a custom developed Perl script to provide the statistics for each gateway 
as a function of the time of day. This provides 8 data points each day for each statistic and each gateway. 
A daily statistics file for each gateway is stored on the Sun 450. To facilitate the generation and dissemination 
of statistics reports, a web page interface has been developed using HTML, Perl, and JavaScript. The 
web page interface allows one to immediately generate graphical reports (charts and tables) on statistics 
for any time period specified by a beginning and an end date. The web page code interfaces with the daily 
gateway statistics files that are stored on the Sun 450. An Apache web server runs on the Sun 450. Several 
different web pages have been developed to view the data in different ways. Fig. 5 shows the web page 
that is used to display detailed traffic/GoS statistics for specific gateways and PRIs. The statistics 
can be broken down by direction, application type, and gateway role. Marginal statistics are also available 
for all gateways in a city or for all the gateways in the entire IP-telecom network. This page, together 
with its associated linked pages, is useful for 'drilling-down' from a high-level performance view towards 
statistics for specific gateways and PRIs. Figure 5. Utilization of the PRIs at a gateway in Los Angeles 
for March 1-12, 2000. Figure 6. Utilization of a gateway group for March 1-5, 2000. Fig. 6 shows the 
web page that is used to display marginal statistics for arbitrarily defined subsets of gateways. The 
subsets are defined in a configuration file. This page, and its associated linked pages, is useful for 
viewing the marginal statistics of groups of gateways that have some specific common purpose or association. 
For example, the web page may be used to view the marginal statistics for all the gateways that are used 
by a specific business such as dialpad.com. The statistics may be charted using 3 hour intervals or as 
daily averages/totals/peaks. The statistics may also be broken down by direction. Fig. 7 shows the web 
page that is used for quickly viewing the utilization of all the gateways in the entire IP-telecom network 
over a specified time period. In this page, the utilization measure is defined to be the .th percentile 
of the utilization samples over the selected time period. With . = 100, the utilization measure corresponds, 
of course, to the peak utilization. The web page displays all the gateway utilizations in a table and 
bar chart. The gateways are sorted in decreasing order of utilizations. This enables one to quickly locate 
highly utilized or under utilized gateways. The web page shown in Fig. 7 also provides some trending 
capabilities. However, this feature is not fully developed at the present time. To date, only linear 
regression is implemented as a trivial forecasting algorithm. A neural network forecasting algorithm 
is under development. Figure 7. 99th percentile of the sample utilizations for all gateways in the IP-telecom 
network for March 12, 2000. The various web pages are seen to complement each other and provide different 
views of the same data. They also provide different marginal views of the data. These different views 
facilitate the day-to-day monitoring process and enable one to quickly locate performance bottlenecks. 
 5. ENGINEERING FOR PERFORMANCE The main use of the gateway monitoring system is as a performance/traffic 
monitoring tool for engineering to use for performance management, capacity planning, resource optimization, 
and troubleshooting. These functions are all aimed at improving the performance of the existing IP-telecom 
network through optimization/troubleshooting and maintaining performance in the face of traffic growth 
through capacity planning. From the performance perspective, the main item of interest is the GoS at 
PRIs. This is, of course, directly related to the PRI utilizations. The target PSTN GoS that has been 
adopted is 1%. This corresponds to the GoS target that has been commonly used in the traditional PSTN. 
In the following, we present some examples which demonstrate how the monitoring system has been used 
for performance engineering. Resource Sharing: In the existing IP-telecom network architecture, distinct 
groups of gateways are assigned to each business customer (dialpad.com being one example). This corresponds 
to a 'complete partitioning' sharing policy. The direct consequence of this policy is that some groups 
of gateways may be consistently under utilized while others may be over utilized. Using the monitoring 
system, we track the utilization and GoS of each gateway group. Gateways are then reassigned from under 
utilized groups to the higher utilized groups in order to optimize the overall system performance in 
terms of minimizing the GoS over all groups subject to the constraint of the number of already deployed 
gateways. Troubleshooting: The monitored traffic and performance statistics can sometimes expose symptoms 
of functional problems that affect performance. For example, in one case, it was observed at a gateway 
that in the busy-hour periods the measured call_loss_rate had increased while the carried_traffic was 
quite low compared to levels observed in prior days. This anomaly led to the discovery that many of the 
available B-channels were not actually being released after call completions due to a software bug in 
the gateway code. The bug effectively reduced the number of PSTN circuits on the gateway which, of course, 
led to the increase in call_loss_rate. Note that the traffic due to the 'unreleased' calls was not being 
counted since the ConnectTime of a dial­peer is actually only updated at the end of a completed call. 
Capacity Planning: The basic ongoing use of the monitoring system is as an engineering tool to aid one 
in the capacity planning process. With the web page interface and its charting capabilities, we are able 
to easily monitor the history of gateways and discern medium-term and long-term traffic trends. This 
provides the required information for making the capacity expansion decisions that are required to remain 
ahead of anticipated traffic demands. Hot Spots: The gateways in the IP-telecom network are spread out 
over multiple cities in the United States. Some gateways serve a specific PSTN area code. Consequently, 
depending on traffic patterns, there is the potential for a gateway to become overloaded if the traffic 
to that specific area code happens to increase significantly. The web page interface (Fig. 7) for viewing 
simultaneously the utilizations of all gateways has helped us to quickly identify such performance hot 
spots. Once a hot spot is identified, the gateway capacity can be increased. By eliminating the system 
hot spots, we significantly improve the overall performance of the system in terms of minimizing the 
maximum GoS over all the gateways. 0 5000 10000 15000 Load Balancing: As mentioned above, distinct 
groups of gateways are assigned to each business customer. In the process of establishing a call, one 
of the gateways in the group is selected by the H.323 gatekeeper [2] assigned to that customer. The customer 
may program the algorithm by which calls are assigned to gateways. This provides the means for the customer 
to implement call-routing and/or load balancing policies. By monitoring the utilization and GoS of gateway 
groups, we have been able to provide feedback to the customer on how their policies may be modified to 
improve overall performance.  6. CONCLUDING REMARKS There are several directions in which additional 
work could be carried out to improve upon the system developed to date. One improvement could be to reduce 
the polling interval. However, as mentioned previously, a smaller interval increases the SNMP processing 
requirements at the network management workstation. A possible solution to this processing bottleneck 
would be to develop a system in which the basic gateway SNMP polling is distributed over a number of 
separate workstations. 20000 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 Figure 8. Log10 of holding time density for 1,000,000 
VoIP calls, compared with the exponential density. Another direction for further work is to validate 
the use of Eq. 3.1 as an approximation technique. To date, we have not conducted any explicit validation. 
However, it can be mentioned that we recently started to analyze the arrival process and call holding 
times for 1,000,000 consecutive VoIP calls using call detail records obtained from the IP-telecom network 
accounting system. Preliminary results suggest that the arrival process is Poisson. This lends some support 
to the use of Eq. 3.1 as an approximation. We also obtained the holding time density function for the 
1,000,000 calls. This is shown in Fig. 8. In this figure, the density is plotted with the y-axis on a 
log10 scale. The scale on the x-axis is in seconds. The straight line is the exponential density function 
with mean equal to that of the holding time data. Interestingly, we can see that the holding time density 
function is clearly heavy tailed [9]. This is probably because, in the majority of our VoIP calls, the 
users are not being charged for the time usage (revenues are generated indirectly through advertising). 
With regard to Eq. 3.1 or the Erlang-B formula itself, the implications of a heavy tailed holding time 
density function need, of course, to be studied. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was carried out while 
the Author was with GTE Internetworking (now Genuity, Inc.), Waltham, MA.  8. REFERENCES [1] Black, 
U., Voice Over IP, Prentice Hall, NJ (1999). [2] ITU-T Recommendation H.323, Visual Telephone Systems 
and Equipment for Local Area Networks Which Provide Non-Guaranteed Quality of Service (May 1996). [3] 
IETF RFC 1889, RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications (January 1996). [4] IETF RFC 2128, 
Dial Control Management Information Base using SMIv2 (March 1997). [5] Helgert, H.J., Integrated Services 
Digital Networks, Addison-Wesley (1991). [6] Israel, R., P. Cohen, Y. Fang, and E. Eichen, "Configuration 
Management of Large IP Telephony Networks," in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium, 
Honolulu, HI (April 2000). [7] Conway, A.E., "Monitoring Application-Level VoIP Grade of Service at a 
PSTN-IP Network Gateway (tool summary)," in Computer Performance Evaluation Modelling Techniques and 
Tools, Lecture Notes in Computer Science No. 1786, Haverkort, B.R., H.C. Bohnenkamp, and C.U. Smith (Eds.), 
pp. 374-377, Springer (2000). [8] Cooper, R.B., Introduction to Queueing Theory, Elsevier North Holland, 
NY (1981). [9] Crovella, M.E., "Performance Evaluation with Heavy Tailed Distributions," in Computer 
Performance Evaluation Modelling Techniques and Tools, Lecture Notes in Computer Science No. 1786, Haverkort, 
B.R., H.C. Bohnenkamp, and C.U. Smith (Eds.), pp. 1-9, Springer (2000).  
			