
 A preliminary structure of software outsourcing vendors readiness model Siffat Ullah Khan (author), 
Mahmood Niazi (supervisor) School of Computing and Mathematics, Keele University, ST5 5BG, UK s.khan@epsam.keele.ac.uk 
{siffat7@yahoo.com}, mkniazi@cs.keele.ac.uk ABSTRACT CONTEXT Offshore software development outsourcing 
is a contractual business of high quality software production at offshore destinations with significant 
cost-saving. Vendor s readiness plays an important role in the successful outcomes of outsourcing projects. 
OBJECTIVE The objective of this paper is to describe the preliminary structure of software outsourcing 
vendors readiness model (SOVRM). METHOD In order to develop SOVRM, we have performed systematic literature 
review (SLR) to identify critical success factors (CSFs) and critical barriers (CBs). To validate SLR 
findings and to find practices for the identified CSFs and CBs a questionnaire survey was conducted in 
the outsourcing industry. Case study approach was used for the evaluation of SOVRM. RESULTS The SOVRM 
has been developed to assist software development outsourcing organisations in measuring and improving 
their outsourcing readiness prior to start outsourcing activities. CONCLUSIONS SOVRM is a useful tool 
for offshore software development outsourcing vendors in assessing their readiness for offshore outsourcing 
activities. Vendors should address each CSFs and CBs in order to achieve a certain SOVRM level. Categories 
and Subject Descriptors D.2.9 [Software Engineering]: Offshore Software Outsourcing  General Terms Outsourcing, 
Readiness  Keywords Offshore Software Outsourcing, Vendors Readiness 1. MOTIVATION Software development 
outsourcing is simply defined as the transfer of software development work outside the client organisation. 
Software development outsourcing is a contractual business between client and vendor organisations in 
which a client(s) contracts out all or part of its software development activities to a vendor(s), who 
provides agreed services for remuneration [1]. Offshore software outsourcing is dramatically changing 
the business economics in the overall outsourcing industry due to the availability of skilled human resource 
and provision of high quality software at low cost [2]. Due to the growth in free markets of globalization 
and advancements in information and communication technologies, organisations have to consider taking 
advantage of outsourcing strategies, not only to utilize the cost advantages but also to benefit from 
the improved quality that offshore vendors provide [3]. Client organisations are outsourcing more software 
development activities than ever before [4]. Many firms in the US have outsourced their software development 
projects to offshore countries for gaining better quality IT services at comparatively cheaper rate and 
in a shorter time period [5]. India was the first outsourcing destination and is still leading the outsoaring 
industry [2]. Many Indian vendor organisations are creating global reach (overseas offices) in Northern 
Ireland in order to offer services to those European clients who desire onshore or nearshore presence 
[2]. However, new outsourcing destinations are emerging which may offer a better deal to clients [2]. 
India, Philippines, China, Ireland and Brazil are ranked as the top 5 mature outsourcing destinations 
where as the report predicts Canada, Russia, Mexico, Vietnam and Poland as the next 5 emerging offshore 
destinations [6]. In addition, more than half of all CMM level 5 companies in the world are located in 
India [7]. These trends show that a software quality standards and models certification is used as one 
of the criteria in the selection of software development outsourcing vendors. This trend has led to a 
realisation that the organisations (vendor) readiness for software development outsourcing plays a vital 
role in the selection of software development outsourcing vendors. This research focuses on the need 
to gain an in-depth understanding of the range of criteria used by the software development outsourcing 
clients for the selection of software development outsourcing vendors. Understanding the selection criteria 
will help software development outsourcing vendors in addressing those criteria in order to be fully 
ready for software development outsourcing initiatives. This may also help to ensure the desired outcomes 
of offshore outsourcing projects and durable relationships between client and vendor organisations. This 
paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 aims and objectives are described. Section 3 describes the 
research methodology. In Section 4 the preliminary structure of SOVRM is described with some discussion. 
 2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES The objective of this research project is to empirically explore the viewpoints 
and experiences of outsourcing experts regarding software development outsourcing and to develop a model 
in order to assist outsourcing vendor organisations in measuring their readiness for software development 
outsourcing. This model will be based on an empirical analysis of outsourcing experts experiences and 
perceptions of factors that can have a positive or negative impact on software development outsourcing 
initiatives. The SOVRM will assist outsourcing organisations (vendors) in evaluating their strengths 
and weaknesses in terms of designing, implementing, and measuring suitable strategies to support their 
software development outsourcing activities. We aim to narrow the gap between software development outsourcing 
research and practice in such a way that is accessible to both software outsourcing experts and researchers. 
In order to achieve this we have addressed the following research questions using SLR: RQ1. What factors 
do offshore software outsourcing vendors need to address in order to have a positive impact on software 
outsourcing clients? RQ2. Do the identified factors vary from continent to continent? RQ3. How are these 
factors related to the size of organisations? RQ4. How are these factors related to the methodology used? 
RQ5. Do the identified factors vary from decade to decade? RQ6. What barriers within a software outsourcing 
vendor organisations have a negative impact on software outsourcing clients? RQ7. Do the identified barriers 
vary from continent to continent? RQ8. How are these barriers related to the size of organisations? RQ9. 
How are these barriers related to the methodology used? RQ10. Do the identified barriers vary from decade 
to decade? In order to validate the findings of SLR we have addressed the following research questions 
in our empirical study with outsourcing experts: RQ11.What factors, as identified in the SLR, do offshore 
software outsourcing vendors need to address in order to have a positive impact on software outsourcing 
clients? RQ12. Do the identified success factors vary across the different levels of experts? RQ13. What 
barriers, as identified in the SLR, within a software outsourcing vendor organisations have a negative 
impact on software outsourcing clients? RQ14. Do the identified barriers vary across the different levels 
of experts? 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 3.1 Systematic Literature Review Two types of data were collected 
in this research project: firstly, factors that can have a positive (critical success factors CSFs) 
or negative (critical barriers CBs) impact on software outsourcing clients in the selection of software 
development outsourcing vendors; and secondly, how one can implement these factors. For the identification 
of CSFs and CBs [8, 9] , a systematic literature reviews process was used [10]. We have used a Systematic 
Literature Review (SLR) process [11] as the main approach for data collection because a SLR is a defined 
and methodical way of identifying, assessing, and analysing published primary studies in order to investigate 
a specific research question. A systematic review protocol was written to describe the plan for the review, 
and this protocol is described in detail in a technical report [12]. The major steps in our methodology 
are: x Determine the search strategy then perform the search for relevant studies. x Perform the study 
selection process. x Apply study quality assessment. x Extract data and analyse the extracted data. 
3.2 Empirical Study In order to validate the findings of the SLR and to find practices for the identified 
CSFs and CBs, a questionnaire survey was conducted across 53 outsourcing experts from a total of 20 different 
countries. A questionnaire was developed at Keele University, UK based on existing literature [13-15]. 
We used a closed format questionnaire as an instrument to collect self­reported data. The questionnaire 
was based on the success factors and barriers reported by Khan et al. [16, 17]. In order to gain the 
tacit knowledge on success factors some open ended questions were also included in the questionnaire 
to find any other factors apart from the identified factors. The questionnaire was also designed to elicit 
the importance that each respondent placed on each factor identified. In order to describe the importance 
of success factors, the respondents were asked to note each factor s relative value (i.e., Strongly Agree, 
Agree, Strongly Disagree, Disagree, or Not sure). The piloting of the questionnaire was conducted through 
four software engineering researchers at Keele and necessary changes were made to the questionnaire. 
Since the goal of this research was to gain an understanding of software development outsourcing practitioners 
perceptions of factors that influence software outsourcing clients in the selection of offshore software 
outsourcing vendors, we needed to collect data from diverse range of outsourcing practitioners involved 
in outsourcing activities across the world. In this connection, we joined 10 relevant outsourcing online 
groups to find outsourcing experts for participation in the research survey. All these online groups, 
except ICGSE, are hosted by LinkedIn website. Amongst these a total of 106 experts showed their willingness 
through email for participation in the research survey. Finally, 43 responses were received, giving the 
response rate of 41%. These 10 online outsourcing professional groups have 13268 members at our request 
posting time. Due to space limitations details of these online groups can be found at our research paper 
[18]. Apart from online outsourcing groups, 10 experts participated at IEEE conference ICGSE09 Limerick, 
Ireland. Thus raising the total no of experts participated in the survey to 53 and the overall response 
rate reached to almost 44%. These participants are from a total of 20 different countries with a majority 
from US, UK and Canada. 3.3 Case Study for SOVRM Evaluation A case study approach was used for the evaluation 
of the SOVRM. We conducted 4 case studies at software development outsourcing vendor organisations for 
the evaluation of SOVRM. The case study method was used to evaluate the SOVRM as it is considered a powerful 
evaluation tool and can provide useful real world information [19]. At the end of these case studies, 
focus group sessions [20] were conducted with the participants in order to obtain feedback about the 
SOVRM. In order to structure the focus group sessions the following criteria was used: x Ease of use 
x User satisfaction We have chosen focus group sessions for feedback because the data from focus groups 
is mainly from the interaction between the members in the group without any suggestion or help from the 
researchers. The other reason is that the existence of subjects in a group of peers allows them to be 
more open about issues discussed than they will be in individual interviews [20].  4. A Preliminary 
Structure of Software Outsourcing Vendors Readiness Model An examination of the outsourcing literature, 
together with an empirical study, highlights the need to develop a model in order to assist outsourcing 
practitioners in measuring the organisation (vendor) readiness for software development outsourcing. 
In order to address this need, 14 research questions were developed (see Section 1). An empirical investigation 
to answer these questions has led us to the development of the SOVRM which is the major contribution 
of this research project. SOVRM development was initiated by creating and agreeing its success criteria. 
Objectives were set to clarify the purpose of the model and outline what the model is expected to describe. 
These criteria guided development and are later used to help evaluate the SOVRM. The development of SOVRM 
involved abstracting characteristics from the following sources: x Outsourcing literature data x Questionnaire 
data x CMMI architecture The structure of the SOVRM has been built upon the following three dimensions: 
x Readiness levels x Critical success factors (CSFs) and critical barriers (CBs) x Implementation There 
are four levels in SOVRM regarding vendor s readiness for software development outsourcing as shown in 
Appendix. These levels are Initial, Trust, Quality and Success. The initial level does not contain any 
CSFs or CBs. This means that the company is in the infancy stage and has not yet achieved any readiness 
level. The 2nd level of SOVRM is Trust and it is the level where vendors should work to establish and 
maintain clients trust in order to win an outsourcing project. There are 5 CSFs and 3 CBs in this level. 
These CSFs are skilled human resource , efficient outsourcing relationships management , organisation 
s track record of successful projects , efficient project management and efficient contract management 
. The CBs in this level are hidden costs , lack of control over project and lack of protection for intellectual 
property rights . A vendor will be considered in the 2nd level only if it has fully implemented all the 
5 CSFs and have fully addressed all the 3 CBs. To achieve 3rd level of SOVRM, i.e. Quality, it is mandatory 
that a vendor have already achieved and maintained the 2nd SOVRM level. This is the level where vendor 
should address the issues relating to software development and service quality. The 3rd SOVRM level comprises 
of 3 CSFs - appropriate infrastructure , quality of products and services , and SPI certification (CMMI, 
ISO, etc.) . A vendor will be considered in the 3rd level only if it has fully implemented all the 3 
CSFs. In order to achieve 4th level of SOVRM, i.e. Success, it is mandatory that a vendor have already 
achieved and maintained the 2nd and 3rd levels of SOVRM. The 4th level of SOVRM comprises of 2 CSFs and 
2 CBs. These CSFs are cost-saving and knowledge of the client s language and culture whereas the CBs 
are communication gap and country instability . A vendor will be considered in the 4th level only if 
it has fully implemented all the 2 CSFs and have fully addressed all the 2 CBs. For how to implement 
these CSFs and CBs, different practices under each CSFs and CBs have been designed that will guide vendor 
organisations for addressing each factor. However, due to space limitations these practices have not 
been described in this paper. The SOVRM proposed will bring together and advance the work that has been 
undertaken on frameworks and models for outsourcing. Our contribution to improving software development 
outsourcing processes will provide other researchers with a firm basis on which to develop different 
outsourcing processes that are based on an understanding of how and where they fit into the software 
development outsourcing activities. New outsourcing practices could then be developed targeting software 
development outsourcing projects.  5. References [1] M. Ali-Babar, J. Verner, and P. Nguyen, "Establishing 
and maintaining trust in software outsourcing relationships: An empirical investigation," The Journal 
of Systems and Software, vol. 80, pp. 1438 1449, 2007. [2] O2pi.com, "Outsourcing Survey Report, 2008 
(www.o2pi.com)," 2008. [3] J. Hagel, Brown, J.S., "The Only Sustainable Edge.," Harvard Business School 
Press, Boston, 2005. 2005. [4] J. Dries, "Is Your Outsourcing Initiative Designed to Succeed?," http://www.outsourcing-papers.com/, 
2010. [5] S. C. J. Palvia, "Global Outsourcing of IT and IT Enabled Services: Impact on US and Global 
Economy.," Journal of Information Technology Case and Applications, vol. 5, pp. 1-8, 2003. [6] http://microsites.globalservicesmedia.com/research, 
outsourcing success," Information &#38; Management, vol. "Global Services," 2009. 38, pp. 323-335, 2001. 
[7] D. Moitra, "India's Software Industry," IEEE Software, [14] M. Niazi, "A Framework for Assisting 
the Design of vol. 18, pp. 77-80, 2001. Effective Software Process Improvement [8] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, 
and A. Rashid, "Critical Success Implementation Strategies," University of Technology Factors for Offshore 
Software Development Sydney., 2004. Outsourcing Vendors: A Systematic Literature [15] B. Kitchenham and 
S. L. Pfleeger, "Principles of Review," presented at Fourth IEEE International Survey Research, Parts 
1 to 6, Software Engineering conference on Global Software Engineering, ICGSE09, Notes," 2001-2002. pp: 
207-216,, Lero, Limerick, Ireland., 2009. [16] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and A. Rashid, "Factors [9] S. U. 
Khan, M. Niazi, and A. Rashid, "Critical Barriers influencing clients in the selection of offshore software 
for Offshore Software Development Outsourcing outsourcing vendors: an exploratory study using a Vendors: 
A Systematic Literature Review," presented systematic literature review," submitted to Journal of at 
16th IEEE Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Information and Software Technology, 2010. Conference, APSEC09, 
Penang, Malaysia, 2009. [17] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and R. Ahmad, "Barriers in the [10] B. Kitchenham, 
"Procedures for Performing Systematic Selection of Offshore Software Development Reviews," Keele University 
Technical Outsourcing Vendors: An Exploratory Study using a ReportTR/SE0401, 2004. Systematic Literature 
Review," submitted to [11] EBSE-Technical-Report, "Guidelines for performing Information and Software 
Technology, 2010. Systematic Literature Reviews in Software [18] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and R. Ahmad, 
"Critical Success Engineering, EBSE Technical Report: EBSE-2007-01," Factors for Offshore Software Development 
2007. Outsourcing Vendors: An Empirical Study," presented [12] S. U. Khan and M. Niazi, "Systematic Literature 
at Submitted to Profes 2010, 2010. Review Protocol for Software Outsourcing Vendors [19] R. K. Yin, Case 
Study Research, 3rd edition: Thousand Readiness Model (SOVRM), Technical Report: TR/08- Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2003. 01, ISSN: 1353-7776, School of Computing and Maths, [20] D. Morgan, Focus Groups 
as qualitative research: Keele University, UK," 2008. Sage Publications, 1997. [13] J.-N. Lee, "The impact 
of knowledge sharing, organizational capability and partnership quality on IS Appendix: SOVRM Levels 
 SOVRM Level Focus CSFs CBs 4 Success The focus of this level lies on establishing success for outsourcing 
projects Cost-saving Communication gap Knowledge of the Client s Language and Culture Country instability 
3 Quality This level focuses on the quality of vendors products and services Appropriate Infrastructure 
Nil Quality of Products and Services SPI Certification (CMMI, ISO, etc.) 2 Trust Trust of clients has 
been gained. Skilled Human Resource Hidden costs Efficient Outsourcing Relationships Management Lack 
of control over project Organisation s track record of successful projects Efficient Project Management 
Lack of protection for intellectual property rights Efficient Contract Management 1 Initial This readiness 
level can be best described as one of chaotic processes Nil Nil 79  
			