
 A Rectangular Area Filling Display System Architecture Daniel S. Whelan Computer Science Department 
California Institute of Technology Pasadena, California 91125 Abstract A display system architecture 
which has rectangular area filling as its primitive operation is presented. It is shown that lines can 
be drawn significantly faster with this architecture than with a pixel display system. The rendition 
of filled boxes is also faster showing an O(n 2) speed improvement. Furthermore filled polygons can be 
rendered with an O(n) speed improvement. The design and implementation of this rectangular area filling 
architecture are discussed and refined. A cus- tom VLSI integrated circuit is currently being designed 
to implement this rectangular area filling architecure and at the same time reduce the display memory 
system video refresh bandwidth requirements. CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: 1.3.1 [Com- puter 
Graphics]: Hardware Architecture --raster display devices; 1.3.3 ]Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Gener- 
ation --display algorithms; B.3.m [Memory Structures]: Design Styles -- miscellaneous; B.6.1 [Logic Design]: 
Design Styles -- memory control and access; B.6.1 [Logic Design]: Design Styles --memory used as logic; 
B.7.1 ]Integrated Circuits]: Types and Design Styles -- Memory technologies; B.7.1 [Integrated Circuits]: 
Types and Design Styles --VLSI Introduction Presently, most computer graphics systems are of two architectures. 
Calligraphic displays render lines as their primitive operation whereas raster scan displays render pix- 
els as their primitives. This paper discusses a new type of Permission to copy without fee all or part 
of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM 0-89791-076-1/82/007/0147 
$00.75 display that rehders filled rectangular areas as its primitive operation. This type of display 
can be considered a sub- class of raster scan displays and as such it retains all of the attributes of 
such display systems. This paper examines algorithms for rendering lines, filled boxes and filled polygons 
and compares time com- plexities for these algorithms on conventional raster scan displays with those 
on rectangular area filling displays. This analysis will show that the design and implementation of a 
rectangular area filling display system is desirable. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) is beginning 
to show itself in graphics hardware. VLSI has made com-puter graphics possible by providing large inexpensive 
ran- dom access memories (RAMs) and several researchers have demonstrated its use for realizing high-performance 
hard- ware in a low-cost medium ]Clark 1980, Gupta 1981]. Fur- thermore major manufacturers will be providing 
such in- tegrated circuits in the near future (NEC and Intel). These uses of VLSI technology will make 
high performance graph- ics systems low cost propositions in the near future. Other researchers have 
chosen to use the flexibility of VLSI to design display systems that have to be considered radically 
different architectures [Fuchs 1981, Locanthi 1979]. This paper uses VLSI technology to implement a "processor 
per pixel" display system. This device is different from pre- vious attempts in that it attempts to ride 
the coat tails of the RAM manufacturers to provide a large number (4096) of processors per device. Applications 
exist for which a rectangular area filling display system would provide substantial system improve- ments. 
One such application area is Computer Aided Design (CAD), which may gain the most from such a display 
since most CAD applications involve the display of non-shaded filled polygons most of which are rectangles. 
Another ap- plication area is real time animation systems since the dis- play system can provide the 
nice property of robustness. That is, as the system becomes overloaded, its performance degrades smoothly. 
 Algorithms This section will analyze algorithms for the rendition of lines, filled boxes and filled 
polygons on traditional pixel oriented displays and on rectangular area filling display systems. The 
primitive operation that pixel oriented display systems perform is the setting of a 1 X 1 rectangular 
area to some intensity i in some constant time rp. The primi- tive operation that a rectangular area 
filling display system performs is the setting of an axis-aligned n X m rectan-gular area to some intensity 
i in some constant time ra. Thus, rectangular area filling display systems have all the generality of 
pixel oriented display systems since we can set n = m = 1. The relative performance of the two systems 
is determined by rp/ra. In some cases, ra may be smaller than rp since some inexpensive pixel based systems 
require software to select the pixel from within a word of pixels. The following discussions of algorithms 
will use ra and rp but the reader should consider ra ~ rp. For the purpose of discussing line drawing 
algorithms, a line can be described independently of its endpoints by the differences in x and y between 
the endpoints. These differences will be referred to as A x and Av. Efficient line drawing algorithms 
for pixel display devices [Bresenham 1965] require max([A~[, IAy[)+ 1 pixel write operations. Such algorithms 
can be directly implemented on rectan-gular area filling display systems, thus the worst case line drawing 
performance of the two systems is similar. Of course, horizontal and vertical lines are rectangles with 
a height or width of a single pixel and can be drawn in time ra. In fact, on a rectangular area filling 
display system, any line can be composed of min(lA~[, [Avl ) + 1 boxes, so it is possible to render a 
line in time ra. (min(IA=l, IANI) + 1). Worst case behavior for this algorithm occurs when [Ax[ = ]AN[ 
and the algorithm requires lAx[ + 1 display write operations which is the same behavior as algorithms 
on pixel displays. Average behavior of these two line drawing algorithms can be calculated by considering 
an uniform angular distribution of lines of unit length. If the line length is much larger than one pixel, 
then the constant term can be dropped and the mean relative performance, P, of these two algorithms is: 
max(]A~], IlXNI) dO  = I0 f0 mi-(la= h la l) Symmetry allows us to only consider the range from 0 
to ~. In this range, max(]A~], IAN]) reduces to cos0 and mill(]A~ ], ]AN I) reduces to sin 0 yielding: 
-fi = fo~ rp.cosOdO __ rp-sinO[~ If ra = rp average line drawing time is 241% faster using a rectagular 
area filling display system than with a conventional pixel based system. Furthermore, if we con- sider 
that in many applications, the angular distribution of lines is not unitbrm but tends to emphasize horizontal 
and vertical lines, the rectangular area filling display performs even better. Consider filling a l X 
w axis-aligned rectangular area such that lw --~ n 2. This requires n 2 write operations on a pixel based 
display system thus requiring time rp. n 2. On a rectangular area filling display system, this operation 
is a primitive and as such requires one display write operation and requires time ra which can be considered 
as an O(n 2) improvement. Filling times for convex polygons are more difficult to compare since polygons 
can differ in both area and shape. In general though, convex polygons can be thought of as having a minimum 
bounding box of A~ X Av pixels. On a pixel based display system the worst case polygon fill will require 
Az AV write operations whereas on a rectan-gular area filling display system, the worst case behavior 
is min(Ax, Av) write operations. Such performance can be achieved by using ordinary scan-line algorithms. 
 Consider a distribution in shape of polygons of area n 2 such that the shorter dimension of the minimum 
bounding boxes of these polygons is uniformly distributed between 0 and n. Pixel based display system 
always require n 2 display write operations while a rectangular area filling display system requires 
at the worst only n display write operations, an order n improvement. The mean relative performance, 
P, is: : r v n 2 __ rp n 2 r~ ± fo min(/, n2/l) dl ran! fo l dl r if2" r-" --2n rp an 2 0 a2 Non-convex 
polygons can be decomposed into convex polygons. In practice convex and non-convex polygons are often 
fractured into axis-aligned trapezoids. The time re- quired to fill polygons that have be fractured into 
trapezoids still shows an order n performance improvement over pixel based systems since an order n performance 
improvement is made for each trapezoid. In summary, algorithms can be found that make rec-tangular area 
filling display systems perform better than pixel based display systems at line drawing, box filling 
and general polygon filling operations. Display Memory System Architecture Pixel based raster scan display 
systems are common place because of the availability of high density random access memories. Unfortunately, 
RAM manufacturers are striving to build larger and larger n X 1 RAMs without considering that other RAM 
organizations might yield vi- able products. It is because of this n X 1 memory or-ganization that we 
have pixel based display systems. In this paper, another RAM organization is presented that en- ables 
rectangular area filling display systems to be built. Furthermore since this RAM design is very similar 
to cur-rent RAMs being produced today, it should be able to be produced as a high density part at low 
cost. Conventional pixel based display systems are built up of n X 1 memory circuits that are organized 
into a m X z linear array where m is usually some integral multiple of n and z is the the number of bits 
per pixel. Figure 1 il- lustrates how such a system is built up from n X 1 RAMs. A typical display system 
might have m ~ 1,000,000 and z --24. The important thing to realize is that this or-ganization imposes 
a restriction that only one pixel may be modified in any memory cycle. That is, out of 24,000, 000 bits 
of RAM only 24 may be altered at any one time. This is the bottleneck that conventional RAM devices impose 
upon the graphics system designer. There are ways to make this bottleneck appear less severe but usually 
this means that the designer has built ADDRESS 40:19 n-l> SELM- I I I RAM RAM RAM M,O M,I M,Z-I RESS 
In: w o O rm SELI I i I im_,)i ~ _- RAM RAM RAM I,O I,I I,Z-I SEL 0 I I I RAM RAM RAM 0,0 O, I 3,Z-I 
 a system that allows more than one pixel to be accessed at a time. For example, Sutherland [Gupta 1981] 
has built a display system that allows 64 neighboring pixels to be modified at once and although it is 
true that the system performance may be 64 times better, such a system is only altering 24.64 bits out 
of 24,000,000 which is still a small fraction. Figure 2 illustrates why the conventional RAM or-ganization 
causes this bottleneck. A static RAM contains a rectangular array of memory cells each similar to the 
cell shown in Figure 3. A single cell is selected by first select- ing a row of the memory array and 
then selecting a bit within that row. Both selections are made by the binary decoders labeled row select 
and column select. The RAM cell works by writing its contents on the bit lines when selected. During 
a read cycle, sense amplifiers detect the state of the RAM cell by detecting voltage changes on the bit 
lines. During a write cycle, one of the bit lines is pulled to ground and the RAM cell is set to a 1 
or a 0. Since n X 1 RAMs use binary address decoders and thus hide all but one memory element from the 
outside ROW W--.J--W-- 4~ x ,/h- ADDRESS MEMORY ARRAY O--   IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII I SENSE AMPS I I I IIII 
IIIIII I ] II I COLUMN SELECT I DATA I COLUMN ADDRESS Figure 2: Floorplau of a typical ~ by 1 static 
RAM. R0W --L DO DI DZ-I Figure 1: Composition of an m by z memory from a by 1 BIT BIT memory chips. Figure 
3: A six transistor static memory cell. world, the only practical way to make a large improvement in 
display performance is to design a RAM chip expressly for use as a graphics display memory. The previous 
section illustrated that rectangular area filling is a desirable primi- tive operation. Because we want 
to deal with rectangles, it seems that the display memory system ought to be able to address rectangles 
in a natural way. Another desirable feature would be if the memory organization could decrease the video 
refresh overhead that is usually associated with high resolution displays. It is often the case that 
the computer or graphics processor can only get every other memory cycle or may not even be able to access 
the video memory during active scan periods. This means that video refreshing often requires between 
fifty and eighty percent of the display bandwidth. Double buffering can be used to decrease the video 
refreshing overhead but it is an expen-sive solution. Addressing rectangles within a rectangular memory 
array can be easily accomplished by providing the x and y coordinates of the lower left corner and upper 
right corner points. The problem is to design a decoding scheme that is cascadable, that is, one that 
will allow an arbitrary size rectangular array to be built. As was pointed out earlier, both conventional 
RAMs and display memory systems use binary address decoders and the address decoding process can be though 
of as a hierarchy of binary decoders. Such a simple cascading scheme is desirable and for this reason, 
the decoders within our rectangular area filling RAM ought to be the same type of decoder that is used 
to but together an array of these RAM chips. In order to provide two dimensional addressability, the 
memory array within the RAM will have to be modified slightly. First, notice that the static RAM of Figure 
2 has only row select signal lines running across the array. The rectangular area filling RAM will need 
column select signal lines running across the memory array also. Of course, the basic RAM cell of Figure 
3 will have to be modified slightly to make use of these column select lines. This involves the addition 
of two pass transistors as is illustrated in Figure 4. The operation of an array of such memory cells 
is as follows. A memory cell is selected if its column and row select lines are both 1. When selected, 
the memory cell behaves as it did before, forcing its state onto the bit lines. Notice however, that 
if a band of column select lines and a band of row select lines are set to 1, a rectangle of memory cells 
are simultaneously selected. These cells may be written in the same way that one memory cell is written 
in a conventional RAM. Reading poses a problem in that cells in different selected rows may have had 
different values prior to being selected and for this reason, this architecture only allows single rows 
to be read. This memory array architecture provides us with a way of implementing a rectangular area 
filling RAM only requiring us to design a banded address decoder. In addition, the extra wiring channels 
and pass ROW SELECT ~-]  ~ V?C  BrTCOLUMN SELECT BiT Figure 4: Static memory cell with row and column 
select capability. transistors have not resulted in an extremely larger memory cell, enabling the implementation 
of large memory arrays on a single die. The design of a banded address decoder is straight- forward. 
A banded decoder requires two address, a lower address and a upper address, and selects the band of out- 
puts between and inclusive of the two addresses. Assume that one can build a n bit decoder that takes 
an address i where i < 2 n and selects all outputs in the range [i... 2n]. Call that the lower address 
decoder. Similarly construct another decoder that selects all outputs in the range [0... i] and call 
that the upper address decoder. The logical AND of these two decoders selects the band [la... ua] where 
la is the lower address and ua is the upper address. Either type of decoder can be constructed by building 
a binary decoder and adding a propagation chain to it as is illustrated in Figure 5. A propagation tree 
can be used to reduce the propagation time from O(n) to O(log n). A complete band-ed decoder is illustrated 
in Figure 6. Notice that it provides select and carry inputs that are used in the cascading of the decoders. 
Decreasing video refresh bandwidth requirements is also rather straightforward. If we construct a display 
mem- ory out of these RAM chips such that rows in the memory o SELECT 0 > SELECT I SELECT 2 SELECT 5 
 'C> D i CARRY IN Figure 5: Binary decoder with a propagation chain. Computer Graphics Volume 16, Number 
3 July 1982 o- o- 1~55 I#~g u CARRY rN --SELECT 0 --SELECTq --SELECT 2 )--SELECT L CARRY IN ; t J LOWER 
ADDRESS DECODER UPPER ADDRESS DECODER Figure 6:A Complete 2 bit banded decoder implemented with a propagation 
tree. array map onto scan lines on the display then a whole scan line of video refresh data can be read 
in one memory cycle. Since we don't have the pins to bring all of the bits out of the chip in parallel, 
read data is shifted out serially, as is appropriate for video refreshing and only requires the addition 
of a shift register to each RAM chip. Adding a latch between the RAM array and the shift register makes 
the device easier to design into a system since the one video refresh cycle per scan-line time doesn't 
have to come at any time tightly synchronized with the video refresh operation but has to occur in a 
window of one scan-line time. Figure 7 illustrates the complete architecure of a rec-tangular area filling 
RAM. The memory array is surrounded on two sides by the row and column banded decoders. The decoder strobe 
input is used to gate the outputs of the decoders. The bottom of the memory array is connected to sense 
amplifiers which detect the small voltage variations on the bit lines during read operations and convert 
these signals to a logic level representing the value of the stored bit. The outputs of the sense amplifiers 
are inputs to a 64-bit wide latch. When data is read, it is loaded into the latch and, sometime later, 
the outputs of the latch are loaded into a 64-bit shift register and shifted off the chip to provide 
video data. The final component is labeled write drive circuitry and consists of the logic necessary 
to pull the proper bit line to ground during write cycles. Figure 8 illustrates how these RAM chips may 
be com- posed to form a larger display memory system. This figure illustrates a single plane and thus 
for a full display system, the RAM chips must be arranged in a three-dimensional array instead of a two-dimensional 
array as in the case of ordinary systems. Decoding for the array, is done with banded decoders. A decoder 
output is used for the select input while neighboring decoder outputs are used for the two carry inputs. 
A multiplexer is needed to select the proper serial video data stream. It should be noted that the rectangular 
area filling RAM can be considered a "processor per pixel" display sys- tem. Each RAM cell can be considered 
as a processor that LLX SELECT I~ --URX SELECT LLX CARRY [ --URX CARRY  LLXADORESSB 1 IF-- URX ADDRESS 
IIIIlilllllllllllII LLY SELECT~ E -- w -- LLY CARRY ~ Q -- O -- LLY ADDRESS~ o -- w -- D -- a --MEMORY 
ARRAY w -- Z -- URY SELECT~ < URY CARRY ~ URY ADDRESS'----I--  IIIIllllllllll]llll SENSE AMPS I Ilrlllll{[lllllllll 
READ LATCH I"-LATCH CLOCK SHIFT REGISTER - I -DATA OUT DATA IN " III]111 IIIIII Ill lip WRITE DATA --WRITE 
DRIVE CIRCUlTR~ Figure 7: Rectangular Area Filling RAM architecture. LLY URY 0-- uJ £3 o URY-- 
o uJ a VIDEO Q DATA tu a LLY--Z ROW SELECT O OUT LLX URX 0----0 I X BANDED DECODER I I I LLX URX 
Figure 8: Composition of a display memory system out of Rectangulax Area Filling RAMs. sets its state 
bit if both column and row selects are present. In this sense, on the "processor per pixel" spectrum, 
the rec- tangular area filling RAM belongs at the minimal processor end. In general, schemes that utilize 
minimal processors will be able to place larger numbers of these processors on a chip, making it more 
feasible to construct systems out of such devices. Implementation Refinements A 4096 device rectangular 
area filling RAM is cur- rently being implemented in n-MOS. Several refinements have been made to the 
architecture to reduce the circuitry, power dissipation and the package pin count. One of the most notable 
changes is that the RAM is being implemented as a pseudo-static RAM instead of  Computer Graphics Volume 
16, Number 3 July 1982 as a static RAM. This change changes the memory cell CAS / from an eight transistor 
circuit to the six transistor circuit 64 illustrated in Figure 9. Because of the reduction in the STROBE 
,I BOOTSTRAPPED    BUFFERS/ number of transistors and the elimination of a power line, the pseudo-static 
RAM cell is much smaller than the static cell. Furthermore since ordinary static RAMs use six tran- sistor 
cells, comparable size devices should be achievable. Currently 16K static RAMs are available and many 
64K devices have been reported in the literature [Ohzone 1980, Wada 1981]. Pseudo-static implies that 
the device is static in one mode of operation and dynamic in another mode. This means that the device 
must be periodically refreshed but in a display memory, refreshing occurs naturally through the video 
refresh accesses and thus imposes no additional overhead. In certain applications such as pixel-replicating 
zoom, the display memory may need to be refreshed and can be refreshed through explicit refresh cycles. 
Pseudo-static devices also draw less current than static devices so the device power dissipation is expected 
to be much less. In addition, current surges that result from large numbers of bits changing in one memory 
cycle can be easily controlled. In pseudo-static RAMs, the bit cells behave as capacitors during write 
cycles and not as flip-flops, allowing the rate at which the bits change states to be determined by the 
series resistance of the pullup transistors used in the write circuitry. By adjusting the series resistance 
of these transistors, the amplitude of current surges can be limited to an acceptable value. In an effort 
to reduce the number of pins required by the RAM, 12 address pins are used and are time multiplexed to 
read in all 24 bits. This time multiplexing has the side affect of allowing one of the two banded address 
decoders in Figure 7 to be discarded since a single banded decoder can be time multiplexed and the outputs 
latched at the appropriate times by the select driver circuitry. These changes are illustrated in Figure 
10. Conclusions The performance improvements that rectangular area filling display systems are able to 
provide justifies their im- plementation. Architectures such as this one, which can be COLUMN SELECT 
ROW __ SELECT L L BIT BIT Figure 9: A psuedo-static RAM cell with row and column selects. LOWER ~ i ADDRESS~ 
N ! UPPER ADDRESS ~-64 x 64 SELECT ~. PSEUDO-STATIC CARRY ~ I up ~'~ ~ I--- I MEMORY ARRAY CARRY 
  DOWN~ 0 I gl -V  ~ 64 RAS PCH --~ PRECHARGE I ~ 64 WRtTE~ t WRITE CIRCUITRY 1 WRITE DATA -~ 64 READ 
~ SENSE AMPLIFIERS I¢64 STORE-~ LATCH I VIDEO 64 I = VtDEOSHIFT REGISTERDATA IN DATA OUT T T CLOCK LOAD 
Figure 10: Floorplan of the 4090 bit Rectangular Area Filling RAM currently being implemented. described 
as "processor per pixel" architectures, necessitate implementations in silicon and since these architectures 
can provide notable improvements in system performance, this is an area where manufacturers should concentrate 
their efforts. The system described here does have some drawbacks. While it can fill polygons fairly 
fast, it is not significantly faster at filling shaded polygons since shading usually im- plies that 
neighboring pixels have slightly different values. For the same reason, the architecture does not aid 
in the rendition of anti-aliased lines. However, both shading and anti-aliasing can be performed by this 
system since the rec- tangle size can be set to 1 X 1 causing the system to behave like an ordinary pixel 
system. Further work might concentrate on a scan-line filling RAM. The previous analysis indicates that 
scan-line fi!ling can offer significant performance improvements but will not be as good as rectangular 
area filling since scan-lines are always horizontal. Shading algorithms might be easyily implemented 
on a scan-line fillingRAM. Both scan-line and rectangular area filling RAMs allow scan-lines to be filled 
and therefore can be used in implementing real-time visible surface systems using a Watkins [Watkins 
1970] algorithm. Acknowledgments The author would like thank Jim Kajiya and Carver Mead for their many 
helpful discussions. In addition, he would also like to acknowledge conversations with Henry Computer 
Graphics Fuchs. This research was sponsored by the Defense Ad- vanced Research Project Agency, ARPA Order 
number 3771, and monitored by the Office of Naval Research under contract number N00014-79-C-0597.  
References 1. Bresenham, J.E. "Algorithm for computer control of a digital plotter" IBM Systems Journal, 
Vol. 4, No. 1, 1965, pp. 25-30. 2. Clark, J.H. "Structuring a VLSI System Architecture" LAMBDA, Vol. 
1, No. 2, 1980, pp. 25-30. 3. Henry Fuchs and John Poulton "PIXEL-PLANES: A VLSI-Oriented Design for 
a Raster Graphics Engine" VLSI Design, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1981, pp. 20-28. 4. Satish Gupta, Robert F. Sproull 
and Ivan E. Sutherland "A VLSI Architecture for Updating Raster-Scan Dis- plays" Computer Graphics, Vol. 
15, No. 3, 1981, pp. 71-78. 5. Bart Locanthi "Object Oriented Raster Displays" Pro- ceedings of Caltech 
Conference on Very Large Scale Integration, 1979, pp. 215-225. 6. Takashi Ohzone, Juro Yasui, Takeshi 
Ishihara and Shiro Horiuchi "An 8KX8 Bit Static MOS RAM Fabricated by n-MOS/n-Well CMOS Technology" IEEE 
Journal of Solld-State Circuits, Vol. SC-15, No. 5, October 1980, pp. 854-861. 7. Toshio Wada, Hiroshi 
Yamanaka, Mitsuru Sakamoto, Hirohiko Yamamoto and Shigeki Matsue "A 16 DIP, 64 kbit, Static MOS-RAM" 
IEEE Journal of Solid- State Circuits, Vol. SC-10, No. 5, October 1981, pp. 488-491. 8. Gary S. Watkins 
"A real-time visible surface algorithm" University of Utah Computer Science Department UTECH-CSc-70-101, 
June 1970.  Volume 16, Number 3 July 1982  
			