
 Proceedings of the 1983 Winter Simulation Conference S. Roberts, J. Banks, B. Schmeiser (eds.) A SIMULATION 
STUDY OF A MULTI-NODAL COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITH CONTENTION S. KUMAR DEPT. OF MATHEMATICS AND COMPUTER 
SCIENCE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA at CHARLOTTE CHARLOTTE NC 28223. We consider a communication network 
in which one set of nodes receive messages which are transmitted to another set of nodes. The simulation 
attempts to examine the growth of congestion due to conflicts, the impact of contention on several system 
performance measures and the effects of the contention resolution procedures on these measures. I. MODEL 
We consider a network which consists of a set designs can be found in Burnett and Coffman(1975) of origins 
each of which has a path to one of and Chang, Kuck and Lawrie(I977) and the several destinations. The 
origins are called references thereof. sending nodes and the destinations are called receiving nodes. 
These nodes are further 2. THE SIMULATION PROCEDURE d~vided into small groups. We assume that the For 
the simulation procedure ,the model arrival to each sending node form a Bernoulli parameters which describe 
the design of the process whose parameter depends on the group network are initialized outside the main 
to which the node belongs. When a message simulation routine. The simulation parameters arrives at the 
head of a sending node, its which control the manner in which the simulation destination is determined 
by a Routing is carried out are supplied during the execution Probability Matrix, which governs the selection 
of the main program. of the receiving group and a receiving node in that group is chosen at random. The 
simulation is carried out by introducing registers or arrays that record the state of The service time 
of a message depends on the the network at each time point. These registers sending and receiving groups 
and is chosen from must be few in number and at the same time the given set of distributions. When the 
should be capable of capturing the dynamics of destinations of several sending nodes are chosen, the 
network. Moreover, these registers must it is likely that they are the same for many also facilitate 
data collection for the purposes of them. Since only one message can be of analyses. processed by any 
receiving node at any given time, this gives rise to the phenomenon of contention. The study is an attempt, 
using the There are three main registers that provide a simulation methodology, to identify and interpret 
complete description of the state of the nodes the presence of contention, to analyze the of the network. 
These are the activity register, influence of the model parameters on the the queue length register and 
the register of performance of the network and compare the residual service time. At each time point, 
the strategies for the resolution of contention. updating routine is called to update the counters. This 
model is related to the interleaved memory To generate the variates from the given discrete design of 
multiprocessors and discussions on these distributions, the alias method is utilized and CH1953-9/83/O000-0227 
$01.00 m 1983 IEEE 228 S. Kumar while generating the variates from the service time distribution, the 
special structure of such distribution is used to evolve efficient algorithms. The crux of the simulation 
procedure is the updating routine. It is called at each time point. The updating procedure is quite involved 
and details of it are given in Kumar(1983). It is reasonable to require that the expected quanta of work 
that comes into each receiving node from all the sending nodes be less than the amount of work that can 
be performed by that node at a given time point, which is one unit. We call this expected quanta of work 
load the utilization factor and we require this factor to be less than one. The utilization factor is 
the same for all the nodes in a given group and can easily be calculated using the model parameters. 
3 THE ANALYSIS The basic parameters that we are interested in are the average number of busy channels, 
average number of idle channels, average queue length, the number of messages completed by each sending 
node and the proportion of time spent by each sending node contending for service and transmitting messages. 
REFERENCES Burnett GJ, Coffman EG Jr (1975), Analysis of interleaved memory systems using blockage buffers, 
Communications of the Association for Computin~ Machinery, Vol.18,pp. 91-95. Chang DY,Kuck DJ, Lawrie 
DH (1977), On the effective bandwidth of parallel memories, IEEE Transactions on Computers, Vol. 26, 
pp. 480-490. Kumar S (1983), A simulation study of a multi- nodal communications network with contention, 
Technical Report No. 91 B, Applied Mathematics Institute, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, August, 
163 pp. Law AM (1982), Statistical analyses of simulation output data: the state of the art, Technical 
Report No. 82-I, Management Information Systems, College of Business and Public Administration, The University 
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. We use the batch means method to estimate these parameters (Law 1982) and 
more significantly use the graphical output to identify and interpret the nature of contention, the influence 
of various model parameters on contention and the effectiveness of the contention resolution procedures. 
Several procedures can be adopted to resolve conflicts. The sending nodes may be chosen at random from 
the group of contending nodes or the decision may be based on other characteristics such as the contention 
time, the number of messages completed, queue length, average message length, and the likelihood of being 
followed by another message which has the smallest chance of requesting the same receiving node. In the 
examples, we compare the first three procedures. The analysis indicate that these methods affect the 
system performance in different ways and hence the actual design of a resolution strategy depends on 
its effectiveness as well as the network objective and the relative ease with which the corresponding 
hardware can be included in the system. It is shown that even for the networks in which the receiving 
nodes are not saturated with requests, contention forces a substantial number of sending nodes to become 
blocked. The dependence of the distribution of workload among the sending nodes and the total amount 
of work completed during the simulation run on the contention resolution procedure is brought out in 
the analysis. 
			