
 A SPECIAL GROUP OF USERS: INSTRUCTIONAL FACULTY Geraldine MacDonald SUNY-Binghamton Computer Center 
Binghamton, NY 13901 (607) 798-6107 Abstract A university user services staff serves a wide variety 
of users: students, staff, administrators, research faculty and instructional faculty. This paper reports 
on methods used to provide support to instructional faculty. Short-term, concentrated support offered 
to instructional faculty includes introductory short courses directed to special groups of stu-dents, 
advanced seminars tailored to individual courses, machine room tours, equipment usage demonstra-tions, 
specialized consulting servi-ces and documentation. Assisting in setting up common files for class-room 
use as well as reviewing course assignments, job control lan-guage, and Iogon instructions are frequently 
sought services. With proper planning and coordina-tion, the jobs of both user services and faculty are 
simplified to the great benefit of the student and the educational process. Examples of services will 
be reviewed. Introduction Support for instructional faculty in computer centers has long been available 
under the name of user services or academic support. In the early days (late 60's), efforts in this area 
emphasized development of computer usage rather than sup-port. Computer center staff, at that time, encouraged 
faculty to use the computer as a teaching tool. Com-puter science courses then were few in number. Subsequent 
explosive growth of computer utilization in the curriculum has resulted in increased pressure for support 
ser-vices which relate directly to the instructional process. Faculty are, of course, involved in computer 
use for both instruction and research. When doing research, their computer efforts are sup-ported as 
well; however, research work is frequently dependent on a contract or fee basis for Computer Center services. 
The instructional faculty of concern here are made up of two groups: 1. Faculty teaching computer Permission 
to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or 
distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 
1983 ACM 0-89791-116-4/83/010/0165 $00.75 165 science courses. 2. Faculty in non-computer subject areas 
who rely on the computer as a tool or" instructional aid. User" services or academic support staff consider" 
these groups as a special class of users for" several reasons. For example, faculty work on a semester 
deadline, often with large classes and related time con-straints imposed by grading dead-lines. This 
can result in tight and relatively inflexible schedules. Where Computer Center" services, such as documentation 
or short courses, are inadequate, valuable lecture time may be lost on review-ing material which is perhaps 
irrel-evant to the course objectives. Changes in Computer Center hard-ware and software have significant 
impact on curricula. Careful atten-tion must be given to fully docu-menting such changes and to circu-lating 
the notices to faculty so that timely modifications in procedures and materials for classroom projects 
can be effected. Traditional seg- ments of user" services support such as consulting, documentation, 
and short courses can be utilized to advantage to advertise the changes and their probable impact. The 
effort to support instructional faculty is divided into two catego- ries" 1. Identifying the faculty 
members and establishing lines of commu-nication. 2. Modifying user services func-tions to accommodate 
instruc-tional needs and schedules.  Identification and Communication The instructional faculty at SUNY-Binghamton 
have berths in a wide variety of departments. Computer science courses, particularly pro-gramming, can 
be found in Engi-neering, Physical Sciences, Advanced Technology, Mathematics, Computer Science, and 
Management. Non-traditional subject areas such as Journalism, Rhetoric, History, English, Social Science 
and Music have been absorbing instructional support at an increasing pace. The faculty involved in these 
areas are from diverse backgrounds. The faculty range from full-time profes-sionals to graduate student 
instruc-tors to part-time lecturers from local industry. Identifying the changing audience of instructional 
faculty can be accomplished in many ways, some examples of which are given next. 1. Many academic departments 
have orientation programs at the beginning of the semester for" faculty. These provide excellent opportunities 
to describe com-puter facilities, distribute docu-mentation, answer questions, and most important, make 
the acquaintance of new faculty users. 2. Mailing lists of new faculty are often available from department 
or personnel offices. 3. Established as well as new fac-ulty visit the Computer Center. Staff would 
be ready and willing to discuss changes and updates. Mailing lists can be expanded through these contacts. 
 4. Interactions with various campus planning committees for comput-ing to disseminate information and 
answer questions also allows the opportunity to expand fac-ulty contacts.  Through the above methods 
for identifying instructional faculty, 166 continuing communication and update relevant to computer 
usage can be initiated. Instructional Support: Policies and Practices In providing enhanced instructional 
support, the question of staff resources and funding must be addressed. With growth in instruc-tional 
accounts (now at 3000 to 4000 per semester), more must be done with less. Modification of existing services 
is a cost-effective solution. The following section describes some practices and policies implemented 
at SUNY-Binghamton in the area of instructional support. Most signifi-cant is an open-door policy for 
instructional users. For example, most faculty teaching courses which rely on the computer are too busy 
to wait in line at the consulting desk, especially early in the semes-ter. Immediate attention is often 
required to facilitate teaching needs and to avoid classroom disasters. For" instructional users, therefore, 
the computer center" staff attempts to make itself available without appointment and on a "no fee" basis. 
Tours of the Computer" Center, equipment demonstrations, and spe-cial short courses or seminars are scheduled 
on request according to staff availability. Standing requests have evolved to include many beginning 
programming classes which require tours of the facility, student work areas and brief intro- ductions 
to terminal or keypunch operations. consultation with the faculty member in charge. This type of request 
is common from non -computer" science courses. A faculty member may choose to rely on a computer center 
staff member to lecture on the use of an editor', statistics package, graphics package, etc., as appro-priate 
for the course. User services offers assistance in planning homework assignments, setting up data or 
subroutine files, and insuring reliable file security. Advance planning of homework assignments can be 
mutually benefi-cial. Faculty know if the assign-ment works and if adequate com-puter resources are available. 
User services itself benefits, particu-larly, in reduced workload at the consulting desk. A whole class 
occasionally has problems with an assignment because of inadequate testing of data or incorrect direc-tions 
from the instructor or-teach- ing assistant. Good communication with the faculty is essential to avoid 
these situations. Planning assignraents with faculty can also help save students time and maximize access 
to equipment such as keypunches and terminals. One successful effort at SUNY-Binghamton concerns the 
mainte-nance of common subroutine librar-ies for" various courses. This avoids needless keypunching or 
data entry by students, reduces demand on machine resources, and avoids need-less pre-punching of card 
decks for distribution during class. Thus, students emphasize the academic objectives of an exercise 
rather than the irrelevant procedural details. Special short courses or seminars taught by qualified 
user services staff are given on request during the regularly scheduled lecture for the course. Such 
presentations are tailored to fit the audience after Data collected on consulting activity can also be 
of assistance to faculty. We make information available by course, type of problem, and other categories. 
Feedback from consult-ing pinpoints student problem areas 167 such as language syntax, job con-trol, 
etc. Faculty may use tile information to review material or modify future assignments. A test scoring 
facility for grading of exams in large classes is also provided. Exams are scored using an optical scanner, 
and several class grade reports are prepared. One output is designed for distribu-tion to students with 
a summary of test results. Standard scanning and grade reporting is free to fac-ulty. Calculations of 
final grades or specialized grading formulas are not available, although many faculty use their own computer-procedures. 
User services installs and maintains specific software for courses when requested. This is a difficult 
area of support. Software is often imported from other machines possi-bly requiring significant debugging 
and recoding. The Computer Center also maintains various student work areas for computing such as terminal 
rooms and micro laboratories. These are available to faculty for lab sessions on a regularly scheduled 
basis or for short-term use on a reservation system. Members of the user-ser-vices staff are available 
early in the semester to assist novice users dur-ing such sessions. If a faculty member needs access 
to special equipment or has an urgent need for computer output for class use, the user services staff 
accommo-dates these requests. Future plans include a terminal/microcomputer room in the Computer Center 
with faculty priority. One of the most time-consuming and complicated issues is that of com-puter accounts 
and student alloca-tions. In general, departments and faculty deal with the accounts office which organizationally 
is outside of user services. User services, nevertheless, has to be available to explain i'ates, to explain 
how to make the most out of limited com-puter allocations, to provide ration-ale {or extensions to accounts, 
to provide backups on disk, and to accommodate requests for increases to allocations and refunds. To 
help faculty keep track of student usage, accounting reports have been developed for" individual cour-ses. 
On a monthly report, faculty can track student usage for a course, knowing when to request extensions, 
and advising students to use their" allocations wisely and on time to complete assignments. Summary An 
important objective of Academic Support (within the user services framework) is to aid faculty in their 
didactic undertakings. With proper communications, the work of both user services and faculty is simpli-fied. 
Good communications result in mutual respect. Planning for growth in computer facilities with additions 
of new hardware and software will be based on information from the faculty as a direct result of work-ing 
with the support staff. User services is better able to represent the instructional viewpoint when decisions 
are made within the Com-puter Center. The students benefit from a well-organized and coordi-nated instructional 
environment with increased academic content and min-imal computer frustration levels. 168 
			