
 A STRATEGY FOR THE AUTOMATED DESIGN OF MECHANICAL PARTS Department N. of W. Doan, M. I. G. M. J. Wilson 
-Applied Mathematics, Leeds LS2 9JT. Bloor, University of Leeds, Abstract A method is presented for 
the design of mechanical parts which incorporates the functionality of a com­ponent into the design process. 
This paper is aimed at demonstrating how, given an initial design, we can automatically modify this design 
in order to improve the eventual functional performance of the component. The technique is illustrated 
through the consideration of solid mechanical parts -the surfaces of which are regarded as eziended blends; 
here between simple pri­maries. In this work we load the component with a pre­determined force, the object 
of the design process being to reduce the amount of material used whilst still keep­ing the maximum shear 
stress within the component below some safety limit. The surfaces of the object are generated by the 
P. D. E. method of surface design, which haa the property of being able to describe the required geometry 
in terms of a limited number of parameters An important aspect of this research is the extension of the 
P. D. E. method to include three dimensional solid design problems. INTRODUCTION In this work we describe 
a method of three dimensional design optimisation. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this 
material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, 
rfre ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery, To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fee andlor specific permission. 2nd ACM Solid Modeling 93-5/93illontreal, Canada @ 1993 ACM 
O-89791 -5 S4-4/93/0f)05/001 5...$1.50 15 In particular we concern ourselves with the opti­mal design 
of components for the motor industry. We have chosen a relatively simple example to illustrate the methodology. 
For the history of design optimisation up to and in­cluding 1968 the reader is referred to the works 
of Wa­siutynski &#38; Brandt [15] and Sheu &#38; Prager [13] which together cover the subject comprehensively. 
Since that time a number of studies have been undertaken in this field. Some of this work is referenced 
below. The design of two dimensional and axisymmetric probIems has frequently been addressed. For instance 
Francavilla, Ramakrishnan and Zienk iewicz look at the examples of a plane bar and a connecting rod in 
refer­ ence [6] while Oda [9] is concerned with a dam under uniformly varying water pressure. The authors 
of [16] and [17] also tackle two dimensional and axisymmetric problems. Yoo, Haug and Choi [16] use a 
piston arm to demonstrate their technique while Zhang and Sidall [17] have three such examples. In contrast 
the optimal design of three dimensional problems has been consid­ered far less often. Imam [7], however 
attempted a three dimensional formulation of cantilever beam problems. In most of the work in this field, 
a variant of the Davidon-Fletcher-Powell optimisation technique has been utilised. Here, we use a Powell 
met hod [10], which depends on the functional value alone of the objective function and pays no heed 
to it s derivatives. Reference [6] is interesting as it rcpresents the first attempt to optimise the 
volume of an object subject to maximum stress constraints. In this work the objective function to be 
minimised was taken to be a combina­tion of the weight or volume and the stresses measured in the design. 
In reference [171several methods of con­serving both computer time and memory are outlined. The function 
to be minimised is just the volume of the design and this is allied to a stress failure criterion, so 
forcing the eventual design to meet a stress target. Oda [9] hints at a previously untried efficiency 
tech­nique. He points out that in the early stages of an opti­misation routine only a coarse mesh need 
be used. Bele­gundu and Arora [1] [2] compare several different meth­ods of design optimisation by using 
each of them to solve 12 different problems. The overriding conclusion drawn from this study was that 
the Lagrange multiplier and penalty methods (as used in the present work) are both reliable and accurate, 
but could in certain circumstances be expensive in terms of computer time. It haa been observed that 
many mechanical compo­nents take the form of extended blends . By this, we mean that their shape is mostly 
composed of a bridging transition between those, relatively small, regions which are in contact with 
adjacent parts. In general, the ge­ometry of these contact regions is well defined, whilst that of the 
remainder of the object must satisfy more general constraints, for instance, we may only require it to 
be of sufficient strength. In this paper we model our component as an extended blend between two primary 
surfaces. In doing this we make use of the P. D. E. method of surface generation first proposed by Bloor 
and Wilson [4]. This method is described more fully in the following section. Having prescribed the surface 
of the component we can fit a finite element mesh inside it and hence per­form a finite element analysis 
to find both the volume of the component and the maximum shear streaa occur­ring inside it. The latter 
is an important quantity as it is this which will fatigue and eventually break the component. Thus in 
a good design this value would be low. This whole procedure is then linked to a penalty func­tion optimisation 
algorithm which is aimed at reducing the weight of the design whilst still keeping the shear under some 
predecided value.  DESIGN METHOD In designing a mechanical part, we often need to take into account 
the surfaces with which it must join. Of­ten, we would want such junctions to be smooth. Hence it seems 
natural to view the design procedure, math­ematically, aa a boundary value problem. That is, we use the 
boundary conditions (which quantify the fact that the design must join two primary surfaces and join 
smoothly) to generate the surface. This forms the basis for the P. D. E. Method of surface design first 
introduced by Bloor and Wilson [4]. This method was chosen for the following ressons, the first one being 
the most crucial:­ . This method makes use of relatively few design pa­rameters. This enables us to tackle 
more complex geometries without incurring a large computational coat . . The above mentioned boundary 
value formulation of the design problem lends itself very well to the present problem. . The parameters 
influence the shape in an intuitive fashion. i. e. We have an idea how the shape of the design will change 
as we alter each design parame­ter.  We address the following model example. We consider the design 
of a part which must join smoothly with a hemisphere and a cylinder of elliptic cross section. This part 
will be loaded, uniformly across the top surface, vertically from above and we seek a solution which 
uses the least possible material without allowing the maxi­mum shear stress within the component above 
a certain safety limit. It is important to note that, although this is only a simple problem, using this 
technique we could attack far more complex problems with exactly the same procedure. Following the method 
described by Bloor and Wilson [4] [3] the blend surfaces are defined to be solutions of: (I) u,?) E [0,1] 
(11) Where X is given parametrically as x= (x(u, W),y(u, v), 2(U. v)) (111) with appropriate boundary 
conditions on X and ei­ ax ther~ or~. The vector X can be viewed aa a mapping between the (u, v) parameter 
plane and the surface in the physical 3-space. The boundary conditions on X give the shape of the curves 
bounding the surface while the boundary conditions on ~ or ~8X determine the speed and di­ rection of 
the tangent vectors around the edge of the surface. The parameter a is known as the smoothing parame­ter 
and essentially controls the relative rate of smooth­ing between u and v c~ordinate directions; in the 
present example it hasthe effect of producing a waist on the blend, In this instance, a value a N 1 produces 
relatively thin blends whereas a < 1 produces more substantial ones. This parameter plays a key rble 
in reducing the volume of the blend in the optimisation process. As the surface blends smoothly between 
the two pri­mary surfaces the boundary conditions used in the so­lution of (I) are obviously determined 
by this require­ment and the precise form they take is crucially im­portant to the shape of the surface. 
Here the condi­tions at u = O describe the function and it s derivatives around the trimline on the hemisphere 
whereas those at u= 1 describe the function and it s derivatives around the trimline on the elliptic 
cylinder. For this problem the boundary conditions are written as : X(O, v) = (Rsin (cr) cos (2Tv) , 
Rsin (a)sin (27rv) , O) (Iv) X(l, v) = (h= + el cos (27rv) , hy + ez sin (27rw), hz) (v) &#38;(o, v) 
= (-The, cm aces (27rv) , (VI) Tb~~ cos @ sin (2iru) , Tbotsin a) ~(1, v) = (O,o,z-iop) (VII) Here (Tt, 
Tb) are positive and represent the magni­tudes of the tangent vectors on the upper and lower primary 
surfaces respectively. a is the polar angle of spherical geometry, :. e. it controls the height of the 
blend trimline on the hemisphere. R is the radius of the hemisphere while el and ez represent the two 
axes 17 of the ellipse forming the cross section of the cylinder. The vector (hz, hy, hz) describes the 
displacement be­tween the centre points of the two surface primaries. From the point of view of extra 
control it seemed worthwhile to allow the magnitude of the end gradients to vary with v around the top 
and bottom trimlines. To achieve this we allow: Ttop = ~ (2Tt1 + T*2) ~Tjzcos (21w) (VIII) TbOt= ~ (2Th1+ 
TM) -~TbzcO*(27w) (IX) into (VII) and (VII). This is illustrated in figure 1  PHYSICAL ANALYSIS AND 
OPTIMISATION Once an initial geometry is defined, it is subjected to a given load. The aim of the exercise 
is to reduce the vol­ume of the component, without allowing the maximum shear stress to get too large. 
Th= quantities are calcu­lated using a finite element analysis. This means a finite element mesh has 
to be generated inside the object. The shape is then optimised using a Powell optimisa­tion routine, 
where the design variables allowed to vary are Tb, Tb~,Tt, Ttl and a. This givea rise to an automatic 
procedure where, starting from an initial design, we proceed through a series of designs in which the 
objective function is de­creasing until a (local) minimum is reached. Now, at each stage of the optimisation 
routine one or more of the design parameters are changed and the finite element mesh must be recalculated 
to cope with the resulting change in the shape of the component. To generate a finite element mesh, a 
three dimensional P. D. E. is solved in a unit cube subject to boundary con­ditions, which are derived 
from the shape of the surfaces bounding the component in physical 3-space. (figure 2) Special mention 
is made of the line w = O; a cubic curve whose beginning and ending points are located at the centre 
of the surfaces u = O and u = 1 respectively. This curve represents a degenerate surface described by 
that part of the solution to equation (1), which is inde­pendent of the periodic parameter v. This done 
we solve a further P. D. E. (X) inside the cube (parameter space) to obtain a parametrisation X (u, W,w) 
of the object s volume. Here, we take al and az to be small compared with unity (typically around 0.2. 
Equation ( X) was solved using the method of finite differences and the discrete values of X (ui, Vj, 
Wk) obtained yields a hexahedral mesh inside the component, the inner-most layer of ele­ments of the 
mesh becoming degenerate. In order to attain a mesh suitable for the finite ele­ment analysis, one further 
modification is made to the mesh as it stands. The hexahedral mesh was divided into tetrahedral giving 
5 tetrahedral elements for each hexahedral one everywhere in the mesh except the de­generate elments 
which split into 3 tetrahedral. The method described was implemented to be com­pletely self-contained 
and requiring no prompting from the user. This means it is suitable for an automated optimisation procedure. 
OPTIMISATION As mentioned above, in this work we employ a Pow­ell optimisation technique. [10] We chose 
this method because it is simple to apply and has been shown to perform well in this type of constrained 
optimisation problem [1] [2]. It works in the following manner. At each stage in the process we measure 
both the volume of the component (which we would like to minimise) and the maximum shearing stress (which 
we need to keep a bound on.) We define our objective function as follows: v ifr ~r~o= penaity(v, ~) = 
v + G sinh(r Tin.=) otherwise . { (XI) Where T is the observed mrmimum shear stress, r~az the bound 
and v the measured volume. G is a weighting constant which we specify. The idea is that the method will 
punish solutions which yield a value of the shear stress higher than rmaz and so the routine will drift 
towards a solution which keeps the shear stress within the tolerable range. Natu­rally, this leads to 
a pay-off between volume and shear stress considerations and it is the parameter G which controls how 
this is biased. A large value of G combined with the exponential growth of the sinh function punishes 
the unacceptable designs more heavily and so should help the convergence of the method. In the work presented 
here G was taken to be 104.  RESULTS Three examples of blends between hemispheres and el­liptic cylinders 
were considered. In all cases the radius of the hemisphere was taken as 5 cm and the cross sec­tion of 
the elliptic cylinder had semi-major and semi­minor axes of 4 cm and 3 cm respectively. Also the vertical 
height between the two primaries hz was kept fixed at 25 cm and all models were loaded vertically downwards 
with a weight of 3 kilograms distributed uni­formly across the top face of the ellipse. As can be seen 
from table ( 1), for each design we have chosen a dif­ferent value of Tmac. As some designs are inherently 
stronger than others, it is unrealistic to impose the same bound on the shear stress for all three examples. 
With this in mind, two criteria were considered in deciding this value for each design. Firstly, we wanted 
a value of r~.= higher than the original value of the shear stress in order to give the method a chance 
c,f making a saving in volume. However, we did not want to make r~a= too large, because, it was thought, 
this would result in large c. p, u. times as the optimum design would then be far away from the starting 
position. The examples considered all differed in the way the two primary surfaces were aligned. i. e. 
each design had different values of (hz and by). We specify hx and hy in the following manner: We ensure 
the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the elliptical cross section of the cylinder are parallel to the 
z and y axes respectively. Keeping these directions fixed we displace the centre of the ellipse relative 
to the centre of the, circular, bottom primary surface. The value of the displacement in the z direction 
is referred to as hz and, similarly, the value of the displacement in the ~ direction is referred to 
as hy. In example 1 the two primary surfaces were verti­cally aligned ( hz = O,hy = O ). In example 2 
we set hz = 2,hy = Oand in example 3 hz = 2,hy = 2. The initial and final values of the shear stress 
and volume mented here, seems to be an appropriate and effective are shown in table (1), along with the 
maximum shear met hod of imposing inequality constraints such as ours. stress permissible and the percentage 
saving in volume The real benefit, however, is that a reasonably simple for each design. and automatic 
framework now exists for generating op- All calculations were carried out on SPARC IPC timal (or at least 
improved) solutions to fully 3 dimen­workstations and the maximum computation time in-sional design problems 
of this kind. We see this work as volved for any one run was 1219.2 cpu seconds. being particularly beneficial 
to the automobile and re­ lated industries, where consideration of such problems is critical. Table 1: 
Table of results II Maximum shear stress I Volume I Initial Final r~a= Initial Final % saving 1 3.90 
4.99 5.0 1420.42 1164.63 18.01 2 8.67 11.90 12.0 1409.12 1229.04 12.78 3 11.51 14.40 15.0 1409.08 1147.94 
18.53  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Looking at the first example component figure ( 3 ), we see the surface 
has drawn in towards the middle of the blend. In doing this volume is conserved, but also, because both 
primary surfaces are aligned and perpen­dicular to the direction of the applied load, no shearing force 
is applied to the component and, as a result, shear stresses within are not greatly magnified. This, 
then, coincides with what we, intuitively, would expect. We see from table ( 1) that the final component 
weighs 1870 less than the starting design and the shear stress within it is still below the maximum permissible 
of 5. In the second and third examples figures ( 4,5), where the elliptical cylinder was offset from 
the hemisphere first of all in one dimension and then in 2, have also drawn in, but to a lesser extent. 
By the above argu­ment, this is a predictable outcome and, as such, adds credance to the method. In both 
these examples well over 107o of the original weight of the component was saved, again without transgressing 
the maximum per­missible shear stress. The results in table (1) show that, by this method, quite substantial 
weight reductions can be achieved, without compromising the strength of the component. Also, that the 
penalty method of optimisation, as imple­ ...... ...... +--h+ .=1 :, Ttl+712 TtI I hz Tbl Tbl+i% ...... 
...... I ~[: Figure 1: The Geometry m Figure 4: Example 2 1 =0 =\v=OY Figure 2: Mapping between physical 
and parameter Figure 5: Example 3 Figure 3: Example 1  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to thank 
S. E. R. C. and N. A. T. O. for funding this research. References [1] A. D. Belegundu and J. S. Arora. 
A study of math­ematical programming methods for structural op­timisation. part 1: Theory. Int. J. Numer. 
methods Eng, 21(3):1583 -1599, 1985. [2] A. D. Belegundu and J. S. Arora. A study of math­ematical programming 
methods for structural opti­misation. part 2: Numerical results. Jnt. J. Nwner. methods Eng, 21(3):1601 
 1623, 1985. [3] M. I. G. Bloor and M. J. Wilson. Blend design as a boundary value problem. Geometric 
modelling :Theory and practice, 21, 1989. [4] M. I. G. Bloor and M. J. Wilson. Generating blend surfaces 
using partial differential equations. CAD, 21(3):165 -171, April 1989. [5] R. Fletcher and N.J .P. Powell. 
A rapidly conver­gent discrete method for minisation. Comput. J., 10(6):163 -168, 1963. [6] A. Francavilla, 
C. V. Ramakrishnan, and O. C. Zienkiewicz. Optimisation of shape to minimise stress concentration. .J. 
Strain AnaL, 20(2):63 ­70, 1975. [7] M. Hasan Irnam. Three dimensional shape optimi­sation. Int. J. Numer. 
methods Eng, 18:661 673, 1982. [8] T. W. Lowe, M. 1. G. Bloor, and M. J. Wilson. Functionality in blend 
design. CAD, 22(10):655 ­665, April 1990. [9] J. Oda. On a technique to obtain an opti­mum strength shape 
by the finite element method. JSME, 20(140):160 -167, 1977. [10] W. H. Press, P. Flannery, B., S. A. 
Teukolsky, and W. T. Vetterling. Numerical Recipes in Fortran. Cambridge, 1989. [11] C. V. Ramakrishnan 
and J .S. Campbell. Auto­mated design of structural shapea. lnt. Conf. com­puter orinted design, 1973. 
[12] E. Sevin. Automated design parameter identifi­cation: A new approach. ASME J. Eng. lndust., 1972. 
[13] C. Y. Sheu and W. Prager. Recent developments in optimal structural design. Appl. Mech. Rev., 21(10):985-992, 
1968. [14] E. Vitiello. Shape optimisation using mathemat­ical programming and modelling techniques. 
2nd AGARD Conf. Optimisation of structures, 1973. [15] Z. Wasiutynski and A. Brandt. The present state 
of knowledge in the field of optimum design of sr­tucturea. AppL Mech. Rev., 16(5):341-350, 1963. [16] 
Y. M. Yoo, E. J. Haug, and K. K. Choi. Shape optimal design of an engine rod. J. Mechanisms , Transmission, 
@ Autom. Des., 106:415-419, 1984. [17] W. Zhang and J. N. Sidall. A software system for structural optimisation 
using the finite element method. J. Mechanisms , Transmission, &#38; Autom. Des., 108:345-350, 1986. 
[18] 0. C. Zienkiewicz and R. L. Taylor. The Finite Element Method. LfCGraw-Hill, 1989.  
			