
 A SYSTEMS ANALYSIS &#38; DESIGN COURSE SEQUENCE Iza Goroff* University of Wisconsin-Whitewater The 
University of Wisconsin-Whitevater's Manage- ment Computer Systems (MCS) Major ~ includes a two course 
sequence, Systems Analysis and Design I and Systems Analysis and Desisn 2. In the ACM Infor- mation Systems 
Curriculum ~ there is also a two course sequence in systems analysis and design. The managers of information 
systems departments who hire our graduates frequently express the opinion that this sequence is especially 
important. It is the operational philosophy of the MCS Major that a student does not fully understand 
a theory she/he is taught until the student uses that theory to do an assignment or a project. This is 
espe- cially true of the systems analysis and design se- quence where students are grouped into project 
teams. These teams work on real projects, proj- ects which develop and implement systems used in the 
university community. There is an approach to teaching systems analysis and design which is analogous 
to teaching a per- son to swim by throwing him into the pool. Peo- ple who have been taught systems 
design in this fashion usually have high morale and feel very good about their project. However, it 
is our opinion that the students have learned consider- ably less than they should and that the resulting 
 system is less valuable than the students think. The progression of the courses begins with three 
weeks of 100% "theory" with artificial homework assignments before the students are assigned their 
projects. From the fourth week of the first course to almost the end of the second course the projects 
are carried through the successive phases of the systems development life cycle. The over- all balance 
between theory and project is even - with the theory coming earlier so as to illumi- nate t~e practice 
which follows. S~tems Analysis &#38; Design 1 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM 0-89791-067-2/82/002/0123 $00.75 This course 
contains the topics of logical sys- tems design and systems analysis. Neither topic is given more than 
a three week consecutive block of time. This is so that there is sufficient in- formation for the students 
working on a project to continue onto the next step. Documentation is stressed throughout the course. 
The forms were largely based on those in Biggs, Birks, Atkins,3 although these have been superseded 
by forms de- veloped by one of the student projects, which was entitled The MCS Project Control System. 
 The sequence of topics has been modified over the several semesters in which the course was taught. 
Following a single class devoted to general ab- stract system theory there are three weeks of classes 
devoted to the theory of logical systems design. These classes cover the elements of in- formation systems, 
procedure charts, the concept of an information base and the principles of file design. The students 
have previously taken a course covering data structures, and structural variables, pointers and links, 
are incorporated into the file design. File designs are restricted to fixed length records to allow for 
updates. Two examples of systems used for class illustration are a personnel data system, including payroll, 
and an inventory control system for a hardlines retail chain store with a focus on the inventory replenishment 
cycle, including the sales, reorder, receiving, and payments procedures. Near the end of the three weeks 
period the students are given a logical systems design to do as a homework assign- ment. A typical example 
is "The Beautiful Bessie System." Dairy Products Delivery System The Beautiful Bessie Dairy, Inc. distributes 
dairy products from five dairy plants to several hundred retail outlets (ranging from grocery stores 
to filling stations). The retail store phones in its order between 3:00 pm and 6:00 pm. At 5:30 am 
the company trucks roll out with merchandise and deliv- ery slips. Drivers collect average products 
which are credited to the retailer's account at 50% of the retailer's cost. You are to: i. specity 
files 2. draw systems charts  3. specify programs  4. define data elements (where necessary).   
123 The students ~re supposed to recognize the system requires a Route File where there are pointers 
to the Customer File. On the Customer File the cus- tomers on a route are linked together by a field 
 called "next customer # on same route." At this point the students are assigned to their project teams. 
Most recently we have assigned the students to a team using a selection sheet where the student orders 
in sequence his/her selection. The sheets are drawn at random to select the teams. The team then has 
its first limited contact with the user who is giwen a form containing a list of the team members with 
their addresses and phone numbers. Typically, the team consists of from three to seven students. Three 
classes are spent on the next topic, an in- troduction to the relationship of the systems ana- lyst 
to the user. The students read articles by Tomeski, 4 Dicksons and Simmons, 5 and Freeman, 6 all contained 
in MIS~ a managerial prespective by Dock, Luchsinger, and Cornette, 7 an anthology which is used as one 
of the basic texts of the course. One class is devoted to an interview of the instructor playing a role. 
A typical role is the district manager for Happy Hamburger, a growing regional fast-food chain. Each 
pair of students is given five minutes to question the "district supervisor" who is incompletely cooperative. 
The students are instructed in interview techniques, what mistakes were made, what kinds of questions 
to ask, and which kinds of statements to avoid. They are also required to document the interview which 
is to be used in the next topic. The system life cycle concept is introduced. The first phase discussed 
is the problem definition phase, and the students are required to write a problem definition statement 
based on their "in- terview." After this practice run and at least one interview with their project's 
user(s) the team presents a ten minute problem definition statement to the class. Analysis of the 
existing system, systems require- ments, the feasibility study are discussed as other topics in that 
portion of the life cycle in- troduction which takes three class periods~ The assigned readings are 
from Biggs, Birks, Atkins 8 a 9 nd the Barnett article from the Dock, Luchsinger and Cornette anthology, 
I0 and sections on the tools of analysis from Semprevivo. II At this time the student teams are conducting 
in- terviews with the user and examining the user's existing system for the purpose of producing a tentative 
file structure and list of activities. However, the path between the start of the pro- ject and the tentative 
system design is not al- ways a straight one. Despite the relatively pro- tected environment of the University, 
political problems frequently arise. One occasion was where a system requested by a user required cooperation 
(and considerable data inputS) from another office on campus. Although these occurences would be considered 
a detriment to most academic activities, they are almost a happy event in this context since the behavioral 
and social contexts of the systems development process is an important part of the course content. Until 
these problems arise  the student may think she/he is working on an- other homework assignment in a 
school setting. Afterwards the student realizes that the "theory" is not as far from reality as she or 
he may have thought. Three weeks are devoted to the topic of Manage- ment Information Systems. The 
positive and nega- tive goals of MIS are covered in the articles by Nichols, 12 Dickson, 13 Head, 14 
Fredericks, 15 Nicholson.16Tolliver, 17 Ackoff, 18 Rappaport, 19 and Dearden. 20 The behavioral effects 
of an MIS are covered in articles by Beishon 21 and Argyris. 22 The class discussion of these two articles 
usu- ally relates very well to many of the political problems experienced by the student project teams. 
The Artcraft case study 23 is the discussion topic of one class which illustrates the concept of data 
integrity. An extension of the topic is the cen- tralization of information. Articles by Kanter, 24 Withington, 
25 and Nolan 26 present these issues for class discussion. During this topic and the next the student 
teams are preparing their first large scale presenta- tion. By this time the boundaries of their sys- 
 tems have become better defined, and the student teams present a systems requirements report to the 
class with a preliminary logical design. The presentation is an occasion for each student team to become 
familiar with the work of the others. One of the goals of the course is for the student to develop the 
oral skills required in systems analysis and design, and the presentation is both the practice and measure 
of success of that goal. Each team presentation takes about an hour, so that several days are needed. 
The feedback which the students receive is used to modify their sys- tems so that they can prepare 
for the final sys- tems proposal.  The final topic of this semester is decision sup- port systems 
which is given two weeks. Discus- sion of business models, including implied models  as well as simulation 
models are covered. Pro- grammed decision making, the appropriate collec-  tion of history is discussed 
together with the man-machine interaction. The last class periods are devoted to team pre- sentations 
of the final systems proposal. Users and computer center personnel are in the audience as well. The 
final systems proposal includes the completed logical design of the system: a narrative of the business 
situation files procedures charts explanations report formats  screen formats Any further modification 
to the system occurs here. Systems Analysis &#38; Desisn 2  This course contains the topics of physical 
sys- tems design, computer security, and systems imple- mentation. The student projects, which were car- 
ried through the analysis and logical design stages of the previous semester, are now to be developed 
and implemented. 124 The first class is devoted to a review of physical file design: specification 
of data types, field widths, calculation of record widths, estimates of records/file, additional structural 
considerations, e.g., back links and availability lists. The stu- dent teams immediately apply these 
concepts to pro- duce a physical file design. The second class is devoted to the concept of the List 
Driven Program, 27 a strategy in which program logic may reside in files, rather than the pro- gram 
itself. Four weeks are then devoted to the Yourdon and Constantine approach to modularization. Struc- 
tured Design by Yourdon and Constantine 28" is a text for the class. The student takes the procedure 
chart from the Final Systems Proposal of the pre- vious semester and analyzes it into a structure of 
modules. Each student makes a class presentation of the chart, the first presentation of the sem- ester. 
 Topics covered during the next three weeks include: use of the operating system command languages 
 file handling minimizing system failure recoverability m~n~m~zlng exposure costs vs. benefits Much 
of the time during those three weeks and the four weeks that follow consists of team meetings in class 
where the instructor acts as consultant and facilitator. During this period the students are completing 
the structure charts for the remainder of their systems' procedures, pseudocoding the re- sultant modules, 
and beginning the coding of those modules. Testing is the next topic° Covered are the use of test drivers 
and stubs, the various testing strat- egies -top down, bottom up, or incremental, the methods for developing 
test data, both for the in- dividual module as well as the complete logical procedure. At this stage 
the students are to be- gin testing the program modules. Computer security is discussed: how the operating 
 system may be used to implement security in terms of the physical design. The larger issues in com- 
 puter security are also covered, in this case as a lecture topic. The last major topic covered is 
implementation which takes the remainder of the semester. User documentation and training is taught 
and practised. Operations documentation, including recovery pro- cedures, is completed. There is discussion 
and practice in system conversion. The student pro- ject systems are implemented, refined, and tuned. 
 The final class presentation is the post implemen- tation review. Grading Although there are the 
usual homework assignments, exams, class participation, project reports, and class presentations to be 
graded, the project orientation and team organization requires an addi- tional component: the evaluation 
of each student  by her/his teammates. In the first class in which this was tried, the second systems 
analysis and design course, the students were told that they could vote for what percentage of their 
grades would come from teammate evaluation and that an ap- propr~te precentage might be 25%. The mean 
of the vote was 25.75% which was rounded to 25%. The form used is shown as Figure i. It is distributed 
in class as in a test setting and retrieved within ten minutes. The evaluations seem to have been very 
accurate and honest. Problems Teaching these courses is difficult. The se- quencing problems, making 
sure the students have the theory to cover their next steps in their pro- jects, requires both time management 
and flexi- bility. The students have problems getting users to coop- erate, gaining resources from the 
Computer Center, scheduling team meetings, and dealing with many uncertainties. The result is an experience 
which is most educational. The course sequence comes very close to reality. NOTES Management Department 
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater Whitewater, Wisconsin 53190 Gerlach, J. and Goroff, I., The UW-Whitewater 
Management Computer Systems Program ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, Vol. 13, No. I, pp. 171-176. Couger, J.D., 
Curriculum Recommendations for Undergraduate Programs in Information Systems, Communication of the ACM, 
Vol. 15, No. 12. Biggs, C.L., Birks, E.G., Atkins, W., Managing the Systems Development Process, Prentice-Hall 
(1980). Tomeski, E.A., Building Human Factors into Com- puter Applications: The Computer Profession 
Must Overcome a "Jackass Fallacy:" originally from Management Datamatics, Vol. 4, No. 4. Anthologized 
in reference 7, pp. 280-286. Dickson, G.W. and Sirmnons, J.K., The behavioral side of MIS: some aspects 
of the "people pro- blem" originally from Business Horizons, August, 1970, pp. 59-71. Anthologized in 
reference 7, pp. 288-299. Freeman, G.A. Jr., The role top management must play in MIS planning and implementation 
ori- ginally from Proceedings of the Founders' Con- ference of the Society for Management Informa- tion 
Systems (1969). Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 253-263. Dock, V.T., Luchsinger, V.P., Cornette~ W.R., 
MIS a managerial perspective, Science Research Associates (1977). Biggs, C.L., Birks, E.G., Atkins, 
W., ibid. Barnett, A., Preparing Management for MIS  125 Fisure i Systems Analysis &#38; Design 2 
 Evaluator Team Member Evaluation Form Team I. Listed below are several criteria by which team members 
may be evaluated. You may add as many as two additional criteria to the list, and/or cross off any you 
feel are not appropriate. 2. You are to assign a point (%) count to each criterion, the total point 
count to be 100 points.  3. Give each team member a point grade on each criterion, not to exceed the 
number assigned to that criterion in step 2.  Criterion Time Spent Leadership Ideas Grasp of Goals 
 Reliability Quality of Desisn/prosrammin$ Total Points Comments: 126 originally from Journal of 
Systems Management, vol. 23, No. 1 (1972). Anthologized in refer- ence 7, pp. 274-278. i0 Reference 
7. ii Semprevivo, P.C., Systems Analysis: definition, ~rocess, and design, Science Research Asso- ciates 
(1976). 12 Nichols, G.E., On the Nature of Management In- formation originally from Management Account- 
ing ~-April 1969), pp. 9-13, 15. Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 71-79. 13 Dickson, G.W., Management 
informatipn-deci- sion systems originally from Business Horizons (December 1968). Anthologized in reference 
7, pp. 80-88. 14 Head, R.V., The elusive MIS originally from Datamation (1970). Anthologized in reference 
7, pp. 89-97. 15 Fredericks, W.A., A manager's perspective of management information systems originally 
from MSU Business Topics (Spring 1971). Antholo- gized in reference 7, pp. 98-104.  16 Nicholson, D.H., 
MIS in perspective originally from Chemical Engineering 'Pr0gress (January 1970). Anthologized in reference 
7, pp. 105-111. 17 Tolliver, E.M., Myths of antomated management s~stems originally from the Journal 
of Systems Management, Vol. 22, No. 3. Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 113-117. 18 Ackoff, R.L., Management 
misinformation sys- tems originally from Management Science, Vol. 14, No. 4. Anthologized in reference 
7, pp. 119-126.  19 Rappaport, A., Management misinformation sys- tems -another perspectiy ~ originally 
from Management Science, Vol. 15, No. 4. Antholo- gized in reference 7, pp. 127-130.  20 Dearden, J., 
MIS is a mirage originally in Harvard Business Review, Vol. 50, No. i, pp. 90-99. Anthologized in reference 
7, pp. 131- 142.  21 Beishon, R.J., Information flow and manager's decisions originally from Management 
Account- ing (November 1970). Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 306-313.  22 Argyris, C., Management 
information systems: the challenge to rationality and emotionality originally from Management Science, 
Vol. 17, No. 6. Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 314- 329.  23 Murdick, R.G., and Ross, J.E., Information 
Sys- tffms for Modern Management, second edition, Prentice-Hall (1975), pp. 363-365.  24 Kanter, J., 
Impact of computers on the business organization originally in Journal of Data Man- agement, Vol. I0, 
No. 4, pp. 20-23. Antholo- gized in reference 7, pp. 208-212.  25 Withington, F.G., Crystal bailing: 
trends in EDP Management originally in Infosystems. An- thologized in reference 7, pp. 213-216.  26 
 Nolan, R.L., Computer Data Bases: the future is now originally in Harvard Business Review, Vol. 51", 
No. 5. Anthologized in reference 7, pp. 218-234.  27 Goroff, I., The List Driven Program, submitted 
 to the Communications of the ACM.  28 Yourdon, E. and Constantine, L.L., Structured Design, Prentice-Hall 
(1979).  127 
			