
 A System for Classification and Control of Information in the Computer Aided Cooperative Work Place 
M. Carl Drott College of Information Studies Drexell Universi~ The computer aided cooperative work place 
(CACW) is at present an evolving entity that provides unique challenges for those who produce and study 
documentation. In my work as a consultant-researcher who designs, implements and studies industrial information 
systems, I have worked extensively with developing such systems and the systems of documentation which 
they of necessity must incorporate. The basic premise of CACW is the recognition that much work is the 
product of a number of individuals contributing their individual efforts to the completion of a project 
or task and that, by providing organizational coordination and appropriate tools, the effectiveness of 
each individual s effort can be increased. In fact, it is not inappropriate that the previous definition 
is broad enough to be applicable to the factory system which emerged in the nineteenth century. Thk broad 
a definition could suggest that we are somehow re­inventing the factory system which emerged in the nineteenth 
century and in a sense this is true. The twentieth century culmination of the factory system, the assembly 
line, has be­come a significant organizing principal in tasks where the processing of information rather 
than physical objects has become the dominant task. In tlds sense, the move to CACW could be viewed as 
a reform of the information assembly line in the duection of task modularity in much the same spirit 
of experiments with autonomous work groups originating in Sweden to reform the physical production line, 
The reform of the paper assembly line embodied by the CACW is characterized by the extensive use of computers 
to permit alternate work flows, partial completion, dynamic task reassignment, simple creation of effective 
work groups, and especially the timely sharing of infcmnation and evolving knowledge as the task progresses. 
At the same time, CACW can provide progress tracking and resource control necessary for effective management. 
In the ideal computer aided cooperative work place we might imagine a integrated unified package of computer 
programs. Each program is equipped with pipelines for importing and Permission to copy without fee all 
or part of this material is granted pro­ vided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
cormnercid advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the titte of the publication and its date appear, 
and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission, exporting data, with hooks for 
sharing code and functions. Programs have the intelligence to track user actions and learn from them, 
and provide decision support that includes automatic inclusion of corporate goals and objectives. Unfortunately, 
the ideal of a single integrated software system for CACW is, in most cases, not yet technically or economically 
feasible. The present norm is the use of disjoint software, incompatible hardware and a mixture of machine 
and non machine tasks. The widespread use of such ad-hoc systems as CACW stations means that documentation 
is even more of a thorny issue than it would be if the CACW had from the begitmiig be realized in pure 
form. After a brief overview of the role of documentation in CACW this paper will discuss CACW documentation 
which is automatically generated and then follow with an examination of several forms of user supplied 
documentation, some of which were expected in the design of the system, and some of which arose spontaneously. 
The Role of Documentation in CACW There have not yet been any comprehensive attempts to provide documentation 
which is specifically designed for the CACW environment. This is not surprising since in many situations 
the systems are experimental and subject to nearly continuous modification. Another complication in the 
design of documentation is that, by their nature, CACW systems are dynamically evolving and re-evolving 
to meet the developing needs of the work group. In this environment documentation that aims at a single 
task or system is still a necessity but there is an increasing need for a meta-documentation which responds 
to the growth of information inherent in the tasks themselves. Thk complexity can be seen in an example. 
One of our experimental settings has been the product research and development division of a large manufacturer 
of electronic components. h thk context every project has its own unique set of procedures and yet in 
each case the development process has a consistent underlying series of steps, milestones, and requirements 
necessary to bring any product from laboratory research to manufacturing. The development team assembled 
for each project is unique, yet as an audience for documentation they represent a repeating mix of skills 
and interests. They consist of Clerks, secretaries, and technicians; research engineers both beginning 
and advanced, @ 1991 ACM 089791 -452-X/91 /OO10/O073 $1.50 specialists in testing, prototyping, and manufacturability; 
technical managers, administrative managers, and financial managers. In this setting, we have identified 
a number of quite different documentation needs. Structuring and Indexing Knowledge In our engineering 
research example there is a data base system which holds a library of technical information. Some of 
this information is in the form of titles and abstracts (and now some full text) that is purchased from 
an outside vendor. The necessary documentation includes the procedural steps of running conversion programs 
and loading the vendor data into the data base. This information system also includes internally generated 
research papers and technical reports. For these materials the documentation needs are more complex. 
There are procedural materials for the clerical preparation and formatting of reports and for their insertion 
into the data base. But there also needs to be documentation of the process for describing the content 
and structural requirements of the original report. Content and structural requirements include the informativeness 
of the title and abstract, consistency in the use of terms identifying measurements and test results, 
provision of fields which disclose and date stamp possibly patentable ideas, and index­ ing information 
which links this report to other reports. In our system design the responsibility for these aspects of 
the report are shared by engineers who are members of the research team, clerical support staff, and 
the research project manager. In addition, the computer participates in the description of the report 
by analyzing document content in comparison to other documents and to a concept network. Further, the 
completion of a report calls for updating project progress information, communication with other work 
groups to plan future directions, and perhaps reassignment of per­sonnel and resources. In addition to 
the documentation materials provided by the engineer-users of the CACW, part of the documentation is 
generated automatically by a series of programs. The computer performs its analysis through the development 
and updating of a concept network. It first processes the document to identify key words and phrases. 
Parsing approaches and syntactic analysis were not used both because of their high implementation cost 
and because of their de­mands on machine time. The selection of terms draws upon a knowledge structure 
to which all previous reports in the information system have contributed, The concept network establishes 
weighted links between report words and and concepts. This linkage in turn links to additional concepts 
and to reports linked to them. The material from the outside vendor is also processed, although since 
most of the information is in the form of abstracts only, the procedure is somewhat different Documenting 
Dynamic Information In our test environment many of the information linkage tasks are handled by computer 
(although at present some subsystems exist only as simulations.) One of our first goals was the automatic 
linking of items in the technical information library. Previous research had shown us that to be able 
to produce such linkage, we needed information about the topics and contents of the articles and reports 
from the engineers who were actually creating and using them. on the other hand, we found that traditional 
indexing structures were too complex for the engineers to learn and master given the time available for 
this aspect of the system. In response to this we developed a classification display system that gave 
the users choices in a tree structured display. Two of our goals here were to have a shallow tree structure 
so that the number of choices which had to be made with respect to any particular concept was small and 
to permit the user create a new entry into the tree at any point. Thus the tree display is a representation 
of the concept network in which the choices of each user can be individualized and are not required to 
be consistent with the current concept network. This approach was intended to overcome user resistance 
to being forced to learn and operate within a traditional indexing structure. It also preserves the cooperative 
nature of the system since a set of relationships among ideas may represent a single individual, a specific 
project group, or the entire work group. An important force for encouraging individual effort in the 
classification of reports proved to be the project supervisors. They viewed the technical data base as 
a communications tool. One supervisor described it as an ultimate routing system. It puts in what people 
will ask for before they ask it. Another engineer said that the selection of terms was like describing 
an elephant. I don t know all the right words to put in but but the machine makes it a whole picture 
rather than than just a blind man who knows only part of the animal. The original documentation for the 
information retrieval system was organized around the online display of the hierarchies of terms. This 
is the same display that formed the search and retrieval system which included basis for the description 
of new reports and for the selection of search terms for retrieval. The user had the choice of seeing 
the tree augmented by his own terms or in standard form. Searching consisted of browsing the tree and 
selecting one or more points to form a query. Boolean searching was also available. Contrary to some 
reports in the literature that users are confused by boolean searching, the engineers using the system 
seemed to have no problems. Anecdotal evidence suggests that users tended to browse briefly in the display 
and then formulate a boolean search. Thk may in part stem from the limited number of terms that can be 
displayed on any one screen. It may have seemed faster to type more terms rather than to page through 
a lengthy display. Overall the search documentation seemed to be little used at least in part because 
the system was easily learned and straightforward. Documenting Definitions One of the surprises to emerge 
from our information system for research engineers was the need to provide definitions of terms. As noted 
above, when reports were put into the data base they included special descriptors describing specific 
tests or measurements that they reported. Upon implementation this aspect drew criticism that other engineers 
were using the terms inappropriately. As we investigated the situation, we found that there was a lack 
of agreement as to what many terms meant. Thk problem with nomenclature is not a new phenomenon to electronics. 
Even references to published standards such as RS 232 interface are widely understood by engineers to 
mean that only part of the specific interface standard may have been followed. In many engineering situations 
the universities which train the engineers are great forces for standardization, both through widely 
used texts and through the professional contacts of the faculty who do research in the fields. For our 
present case, some of the technology was so new that this standardization had not yet had a chance to 
emerge. Within the research organization the electronic communication system provided an excellent vehicle 
for working tow ard standardized defiition and there were soon files on the computer representing proposed 
definitions and commentaries on them. Interest in these definitions spread to the sales department who 
wanted to be sure that when they gave potential customers the technical specifications of a product there 
would be no confusion about what was being reported about the product. The deftitions were added to the 
technical data base and could be accessed by a simple command. Because the definitions, like other data 
base items are linked by the concept map it has been suggested that the appropriate display for them 
would be a form of hypertext. This would allow the reader to switch to the definition of related terms 
or to reports which amplified the definition. For example the definition of a measurement might be linked 
to a description of the laboratory setup for making that measurement. We have not yet attempted to implement 
such a system. Other User Supplied Documentation Our original design envisioned thut when it came to 
describing the information in the technical data base it would be necessary to collect information from 
the project engineers. In this sense, the CACW project began with the concept that some of the documentation 
would be provided by the users. We discovered, however, that user supplied documentation began appearing 
in other situations. The most obvious examples we have of user contributed documentation come from the 
electronic mail system. (Note: the examination of electronic mail messages was done with the knowledge 
and consent of the users. At no time did the investigators reveal the contents of any specific message 
without the permission of the sender.) Almost from the first, How to do it messages started to appear 
about the operation of the system. Some of these were responses to specific questions which were themselves 
sent as e-mail. Other messages were anticipations that some computer processes might offer difficulty. 
Other messages reported in detail how a program or set of programs had been set up to perform a specific 
analysis. We requested that the authors of these messages send them to the technical data base so that 
they could be more widely retrieved. To facilitate we set up two more categories hints and instructions 
in the same way that definitions had been established earlier. One of the popular ways of retrieving 
instructions was the linkage to the report of the outcome. We characterized this type of query as How 
dld he do that? The appearance of documentation on the electronic mail gave rise to a concern for the 
orderly collection and timely dissemination of this information. Electronic mail is frequently treated 
like the paper memos which it replaces. Most messages are deleted as soon as they are received. The remainder 
are electronically filed by each individual. We had asked individuals to submit their instruction and 
tip messages to the data base but this left the capture of the information in the hands of the author. 
We have considered trying to automatically transfer this information to the data base. But the volume 
of mail large and most e-mail is ephemeral. Further, the monitoring of e-mail messages makes some users 
uncomfortable. On the other hand, depending on the authors will not capture all of the available information. 
Special Documentation A small number of documentation messages took the form of an ampl~tcation of management 
directives. A management message would appear and it would be followed by one or more messages, usually 
from more senior workers which amplified the original message. The amplification might indicate what 
resources were needed for a task, what precursor work had to be done before a specific task could be 
done. Sometimes the messages were in fact corrections to the original management message, suggesting 
a change in the persons assigned, or proposing an alternate schedule. Most of these documents were messages 
to the manager. The manager readdressed these messages as general mail. But in some instances the original 
sender simply addressed the message to everyone involved. At this stage of our research the people originating 
these messages seem to be fulfilling a role much like the technological gatekeepers identified by Thomas 
Allen. Technological gatekeepers are people within organizations who take it upon themselves to be information 
sources. They attend conferences, read technical literature, and talk to others. Within the organization 
they are recognized as the person to asks when one has an information problem. We believe that we are 
seeing what we might call managerial gatekeepers. If we are seeing managerial gatekeepers because of 
the monitoring power of electronic mail we may wish to consider whether the role of explaining and amplifying 
managerial directives is a new form of gatekeeping made possible through the electronic work place or 
a long standing role made visible through the the exchange of e-mail. We did not find any managerial 
annoyance over these messages, and tentatively conclude that the amplification of a manager s directives 
is an accepted activity only now made visible. In another case of examining e-mail we found a mail item 
entitled How to use the word processor to compose e-mail. This document gave detailed steps for preparing 
a word processing document, spell checking it, and then using the communications software to put it on 
the e-mail system. This document seemed a straightforward example of user supplied documentation. We 
interviewed the originator, a senior secretary, and found that one of her principal reasons for writing 
the instructions was her dissatisfaction with the poor formatting and misspellings which appeared in 
the e-mail. On the one hand it seems perfectly reasonable for an individual to give suggestions for the 
correction of the work of others, on the other hand we are not used to the idea of documentation existing 
as a way of propagating one individual s personal preferences throughout a group. It is difficult to 
decide whether this is an isolated incident or an expected behavior, and it is even more puzzling to 
determine whether the introduction of personal biases is benign or threatens the integrity of documentation. 
In this particular case it seems hard to argue that the writer s goal, better spelt and formatted messages, 
was in any way at odds with corporate goals. But it sensitized us to an important question of documentation 
integrity. How would we deal with a message telling how to cut comers on a complex test? If it was suggested 
that the parameters in a decision algorithm be set in a certain way, who was to decide if this was a 
policy matter or simply a technical issue of how to run the program? A Range of Information From the 
analysis above it should be clear that the CACW poses unique challenges for documentation. In particular, 
the issue of information management or documentation management and coordination may in fact call for 
a shift away from the notion of an invisible computer system to one which makes its presence felt in 
a systematic and memorable way, both to give the user a mental model of the system and the system a model 
of the needs and interests of the user. Working from an information point of view we consider documentation 
on a conceptual basis rather a procedural one, From thk conceptual standpoint the following is a partial 
list of what needed to be known: * Training information including training by procedure and by example. 
 * Tracking information which creates a growing history of the project and a linking of the information 
produced.  . Organizational and sequencing information for tracking progress and controlling resources. 
c Communications information, including the identification of changes in the overall knowledge of the 
problem which require re-examination of previous decisions, plans or findings. Structuring and indexing 
information for the growing database of tectilcal knowledge.  Definitional information for providing 
consistency of nomenclature for the project staff.  This list includes information aspects that are 
traditionally clearly associated with the documentation, while other aspects such as scheduling and indexing 
are frequently not included in documentation packages. Our finding is that in a complex system these 
aspects require documentation. A Documentation Problem In a section above we listed the types of information 
that had to be tracked by the CACW system and noted that some of them were matters of project scheduling 
and management which are not normally considered a part of documentation. The integrated nature of the 
CACW system makes it less obvious where the line between documentation and management information should 
be drawn. This is complicated in the research and development environment be­cause the way in which the 
computer system is being used is changing and shifting. One of the problems was that there was no one 
who was charged with the responsibility for sorting out and tagging which of the various messages, files, 
and data base entries were which kind of information. Some of this tagging was done by the authors. The 
artificial intelligence and decision support subsystems added to the organization of information but 
their main function was control and tracking of the processes rather than the information. When the original 
system was designed, management was very clew that they did not want to hire a staff person to run the 
system. The normal actions of the managers should be enough to keep the information organized. This seemed 
a sensible objective. After all, if the computer provides more of the coordinating function in the work 
place isn t it counterproductive to have a system that needs another human coordinator? The problem here 
is not unlike the situation in which an organization has an ongoing need for updating and correcting 
documentation but there is not sufficient work to justify a full time documentation specialist. At present 
one of the technical supervisors has adopted the system and keeps the entries in the data base weeded. 
It is clear however that as cooperative systems grow, there will have to be new formal roles defined 
to see to the orderly maintenance of documentation. Making the System Visible The freedom to proceed 
in parallel proliferates individual versions of shared fdes. In many simple computer systems it is reasonable 
to keep many kinds of system information invisible to the user. This information includes details of 
what software version created a file and dates of creation and modification. Itr addition there is ephemeral 
information that even the system does not keep including the dates on which copies were made, the names 
of the input files when the present file was created and others. However, its the multiple file environment 
of the CACW system it is mandatory that this information not only be retained but that it be displayed 
for the user. Questions arise about whether a person has seen a particular revision, how different two 
(or many) versions of a file are, whether information from a particular data set has been merged into 
a resulting table. CACW systems must have greater file tracking capabilities than previous systems. Along 
with the requirement that file history documentation be constantly available is the need for a powerful 
query and comparison package to support this documentation. Some experimental CACW systems use artificial 
intelligence methods for version control and to alert workers of mismatches. But these do not reduce 
the users need for information, quite the contrary, they increase it. In manual systems it may be possible 
to impose some sort of file discipline on the work group but this is not possible in cooperative systems. 
The user must not only have access to this information but must be prompted to use it. The question what 
files do I have is replaced by what files do I have access to and which ones should I use. The fact that 
decisions withh the system may be wholly of partially under machine control creates another documentation 
problem. Jens Rasmussen has noted that users of computerized process control systems are frequently confused 
because the system operates on a logic built by the programmers rather than on a logic dictated by the 
specifics of the task. He notes that in cases where users do not understand the basis for machine actions 
or decisions they are unable to participate in the operation of the system. It is important in CACW that 
system actions be self explaining. Some of this explanation resides in providing each user with a conceptual 
overview of what stage a system is at and what immediate goals it is programmed to achieve. It is also 
necessary to be able to communicate the specific steps that the program used in achieving the result 
at hand. Fortunately, decision support systems are frequently programmed so that they can recapitulate 
the evidence used and the steps taking in reachhrg a decision. Thus the user needs to be kept in synchronization 
with the system iU two ways: First he needs to have a mental model of what process the system is currently 
involved in and why the process is occurring. Second he must have a way of relating hk observations of 
the state of the system to the actions taken by the system. providing this information requires the selection 
of the appropriate conceptual description from the data base and augmenting it with a specially generated 
explanation of how the present status was reached. Context Sensitive Conceptual Document The idea of 
context sensitive documentation is not new. In computer systems it is fairly straightforward to provide 
a help command that directly retrieves and displays information on the last command used or attempted. 
This type of context sensitivity is procedural, trying to anticipate the next step which the user wants 
to perform. The greater complexity of the CACW environment calls for a more sophisticated approach, the 
availability of conceptual help. Providing conceptual help in an appropriate context is still in eSrlY 
experimental stages. We need not only to understand how to recognize what conceptual help is appropriate 
but how to present that information. This problem is related to an information retrieval called selective 
dissemination of information (S DI.) In some SDI systems the documents that a user has recently retrieved 
are analyzed to construct a search request for similar material. This approach might give access to a 
more general conceptual explanation based on a continuing obsetiation of a user s actions. In all attempts 
to provide conceptual explanations we need to be concerned that a conceptual explanation seems more like 
a human response that does a procedural one and so the wrong conceptual response is more jarring. As 
a preliminary approach we propose a system that both tracks user actions and queries the user about his 
actions on a regular basis. Why are you opening this file? How does this fit in with what you did before? 
The questions must be infrequent and easily answered. This information can be combined with information 
in the database which ties a file into the concept network. Programs are also represented in the data 
base and have links to the concept network, although at present all of these links are buih by human 
intervention. User responses to the questions themselves form a weighted network linked to the concept 
network so that a set of responses together with the specific documents or programs being used represent 
a query. At present these are matched only to specifically designated concept statements and not to the 
entire data base. It is however for the user to examine the portions of the tree display which the query 
has activated and to construct a search of the data base from that. At present the technological feasibility 
of the process is under review and the development of appropriate questions to the user is being studied. 
Simulations of providing context sensitive conceptual descriptions have been promising. Summary and Conclusions 
The computer aided cooperative work place multiplies the quantity and kinds of information which must 
be controlled. The information needed includes technical knowledge, vocabulary coordination, organization 
and planning, project history and tracking, individual and group communications, and documentation. The 
variety of information needed requires many forms of documentation; documentation of the processes, documentation 
of the system, and documentation of the conceptual framework of the overall task, To control this information 
the system must provide its own organization of the information. All information is linked by a concept 
network. IMs approach integrates the many forms of information while allowing each individual piece of 
information to have special links to documents of its own type. The capture and control of this information 
is shared by the computer system and the users. A tree structured display of key terms is available to 
assist users in entering information items into the data base or retrieving the. T&#38; tree can reflect 
either the conceptual network or special vocabularies unique to the user. From a documentation viewpoint 
it is important that the system collect and organize both user generated documentation and system generated 
documentation. The latter, information necessary to understand both the current state of the system and 
its files and why the system is in that state, becomes especially important in CACW systems because of 
file proliferation and the capacity of the system for independent action. The expansion of traditional 
notions of documentation and the increased dependence on both the users and the system for part of that 
documentation raise important problems of documentation completeness, quality , and appropriateness. 
These issues will require much attention in the future. However the methods of documentation control 
used in thk experiment are promising. In this model the documentation is integrated into the information 
resources of the system. Formally designated documentation be retrieved. More important, other types 
of documents which serve to inform and duect users are available. This unified information model of a 
CACW system involves both users and the system in the collection and retrieval of information resources. 
It reflects more closely the actual working of groups of people, while providing an integration unavailable 
in more traditional systems.
			