
 Computer Gra~hics, 26, 2, JUIV1992 A TeleComputer Jim Clark Silicon Graphics, Inc. As digital computing 
costs decline over the next ten years, computer technology s most widespread use will be in consumer 
applications. The future digital television screen will be a natural visual control center for many new 
applications, such as normal television entertainment, virtual reality games, home control systems, interactive 
books, magazines and newsprirt~ and telephonic, televideo and data communications. A client-server network 
environment can exist in which the network is the merged cable-tv/telephone system, the client is a home 
telecomputer that controls the images seen, and the server is a multi-mdla computer system that is integral 
to the cable head-end or telecommunications central-office. 1 In this paper, I attempt to define the 
functionality of a telecomputer so that the broadest set of applications is possible. Introduction. Multi-meda 
means the integration of audio, video, graphics and computing into a single digital environment. It promises 
many new applications that can utilize this combination of techno 10gies. Most people expect the integration 
to come in next generation personal computers, and many computer companies are working to this end. But 
for the ordinary consumer, a more likely possibility is that a telecomputer will bridge the gap between 
television and multi-media computing. Think of this multi-media player as the digital equivalent of the 
cable-tv decoder --it will be the consumer s computer. It s central role will continue to be entertainment, 
such as movies, tv programs and interactive games, but it can also be capable of many functions, including: 
-textbooks that teach through graphic simulation and animation coupled with audio and videm -media reaieval 
from databases and libraries -newspaper and magazine retrieval -multiparticipant virtual reality games 
-digital television entertainment services -digital audio retrieval -media mail -video telephones A low-cost 
telecomputer in the home is important before authors will invest in writing interactive books. And interactive 
media services on demand, such as magazines, newspapers, books, encyclopedias, games, and digital audio/video 
entertainment, need a digital media player in the home before the services can develop. Computer Industry 
Milestone. The computer industry can benefit enormously by defining telecomputer building blocks so that 
they can be used in standard multi-media computers. This will ensure compatibility between the consumer 
and computing worlds --the client and the server. Also, the distribution volumes of consumer electronics 
can dramatically decrease the cost of computers, enabling portable (tele)computers far more powerful 
than possible today. Perrrussi{m10copywlthou!Iectill or pm (It [hISnmteritil ISgrunted provided thut 
the copies we nn[ miuk or d]str]bu[ed for direct conmwrcial whuntage. the ACM copyright notice and the 
title (i the publicwimr and IIS date qrptar. wrd notwc is given th~t copying is by permlssltm ~WIhe A\\twl:itwr 
Ihr Ctmputirrg Mwhincry, Tn copy otbcrv i.e. or I(I rcpuhllsb. requires ii ICCmd,(~r spccitic parrrissmn 
 A telecomputer s main elements will come from the technologies of networking, computer systems, computer 
graphics, image processing and semiconductors, all with a focus on the economies of scale of consumer 
electronics. But to achieve a low~st telecomputer for the cost of today s cable-tv decoder electronics, 
intermediate parts suppliers, distributors, gate array manufacturers, and expensive packaging common 
m the computer industry will be circumvented. Success might even require that a single company be able 
to integrate almost everything, from semiconductor fabrication to the telecomputer itself. The computer 
industry, especially the workstation segment, haa an advantage because it haa already started to develop 
multi-media technology. Today s dominant consumer electronics companies do not yet fully grasp the range 
of digital imaging and graphics technologies necessary to create digital televisions, which helps explain 
why they continue to focus on analog approaches to HDTV. Teleprocessing Power. An enormous amount of 
processing power is required to decode an incoming, high­resolution digital television signal. It will 
need to be scaled to a different output screen resolution and decompressed in real­time, and pay-per-view 
services will require encryption. The scaling function done generally requires significant image­processing 
power to properly sample and filter the incoming image. Compression and encryption are just as demsutdmg. 
The main message of this paper is that the power required for this is essentially the same 55 that required 
for virtual-reality quality 3D graphics. Moreover, building a telecomputer with the additional graphics 
capability cart enable a broad range of markets that art ordinary digital television can not. The goal 
here is to functionally define and rationalize a $200 building block module that has the required capability. 
It is a combination of RISC processing power with multiple parallel data paths, caches, program memories, 
double-buffered full­color screen memories with z-buffer, generalized ultra high­speed interconnect for 
I/O, and suitable specialized hardware support for image processing, encryption, compression, and real-time 
2D and 3D high-end, textured graphics. The goal is achievable in 2-3 years. Semiconductor yields for 
foriay s most advanced CPU s allow about 100,000 mansistors/dollar in high-volume ~ ~ --the cost to 
J 1992 ACM-()-X9791-479-I 92/[)070019 $01.s0 SIGGRAPH 92 Chicago, July 26-31, 1992 the semiconductor 
company to fabricate the silicon chip and test it, By the end of the decade this number will approach 
one million. Lkewise, the ~ ~ of memory is about 50,000 Bytes/dollar today, and it will approach 500 
kByte/S by the end of the decade. Four million transistors devoted to RISC, encryption, compression, 
graphics and image processing would make a digital teleprocessor comfortably capable of everything discussed 
in this paper. Today, this can be combined with up to 20 megabytes of image memory, for HDTV resolutions, 
and packaged economically on a single low-power module for under $600 silicon mamtfaeturing cost. Within 
two to three years, this number will fall below $200 end be compelling.  The Basic Technologies. Four 
basic technologies are required for multi-media: digital audio, digital video firnage processing, computer 
graphics and general-purpose processing. Digital Audio. Digital audio is the most thoroughly understood 
technology because of compact disks, which store two channels of 16-bit samples at the rate of 44 kHz, 
or 88 kBytes/sec/channel bandwidth. Sony Corporation has shown that 4:1 compression achievable with no 
perceptible loss, so 22 ~ yteslsecfchannel is probably minimum to keep high­fidelity. Processing at this 
data rate is not difficult compared to the date rates of digital video. Digital Video. Digital television 
transmission standards have been slow to develop. I think much of the reason for this is because the 
problem is viewed from traditional analog television perspectives. Those involved don t fully comprehend 
the benefits and capabilities of digital imaging. Much of the motivation for this paper is to give a 
computer graphics perspective to this, beeause I am convinced that the computer graphics community can 
solve many of the issues confronting the development of digital television. Transmission/Reception Decoupling. 
Analog systems are always in lock-step. For example, the vertical retrace pulse is tmmsmitted and after 
a freed phase delay related to the speed of signal travel to the receiver, it causes a retrace of the 
receiver. Sirrderly, if scan-lines are interlaced at trensmissiom the receiver must put them immediately 
to the screen in interlaced form as they arrive. In effect, buffering analog is very difficult. In contres~ 
a digital television receiver s input parameters can be completely decoupled from its output to the viewing 
device. This means interleaving, for example, is not even related to transmission. A complete incoming 
digital tv frame would be stored in a frame buffer memory before it is outpu~ i.e. it would be double-buffered. 
The complete frame data might even be transmitted over a fiber-optic link carrying several hundred other 
channels multiplexed onto the same carrier, which of course would require storing fragments of the image 
in a buffer until the complete fhme is received. It might tdso be encrypted for selective pay-per-view 
reception and compressed to save bandwidth, both of which require real-time processing on the incoming 
data. It might even be transmitted in a special color space. All of these can be altered by the telecomputer 
processor (teleprocessor) before display on the screen. Resolution Decoupling. In a digital system, the 
transmitted resolution can be totally decoupled from the displayed resolution. Digital subssmpling or 
supersempling and filtering can be done by a teleprocessor if neee-ssary to suite any output resolution 
or scan-line interlace discipline. NTSC, PAL end digital standards D1 and D2 can easily be generated, 
no matter what the resolution of the incoming signal, for compatibility with existing standards. A digital 
receiver with the right processor cart easily be made to filter a digital video transmission format to 
generate any output format. Compatibility with existing technology can be complete. The transmission 
resolution can be made imelevant. What s Important. Ignoring specifics related to the transmission network 
and protocols, a fairly smell set of specrlcations are necessary for digital video transmission -resolution 
-pixel aspect ratio number of bits pa pixel ~ encodiig of these bits (HSV, RGB, ...) -sequential or interlaced 
lines -compression algorithm used -encryption technique USed -and frame transmission rate. Even some 
of these are unnecessary. For example, the pixel aspect ratio should be square. Nothing is gained from 
ratios other than 1:1 except for compatibility with the analog High­vision format out of Japan, and uniform 
horizontal and vertical computer generated lines are more important than conformity with en unestablished 
analog broadcast approach. Vertical and horizontal computer generated lines should be the same. There 
also is no compelling reason to transmit scan lines in an interleaved manner, since input and output 
are naturally decoupled. The fact that this has been part of the HDTV &#38;bate points to the limitations 
of an analog perspective. If the output display requires interlaced scan lines, es with NTSC, the telccomputer 
processor will do this at output time. Sequential input simplifies everything and loses nothing. Soft 
Digital Transmission Parameters. The remaining soft parameters should be transmitted to the digital receive~ 
1. Resolution 2. Encoding and Bits/pixel 3. Frame Rate 4. Encryption Algorithm 5. Compression Algorithm 
  1. Resolution.. Transmission resolution should be completely independent of the display resolution 
on the output device. Any resolution should be allowed. High Definition Television (HIYTV) resolutions 
now being considered by the FCC range from roughly 1000x7OO to about 2WMX1OOO. Aspect ratios of 16x9 
are important for movie transmission, so perhaps the ideal high-definition resolution is 182OX1O24. The 
important thing is that the transmission resolution should depend on the source material, and nothing 
else --it should be soft. The telecomputer should map ~ input resolution (up to some Computer Graphics, 
26, 2, July 1992 maximum, of course) to ~ output resolution. Normally, input and output aspect ratios 
would be the same, but a window on the television might be of any size, and subssmpling or superssmpling 
is necessary for different resolutions or aspect ratios. Any teleprocessor must be able to do these image 
processing functions. 2. Encoding. The particular color-space encoding and number of bits per color-space 
component should be specified by the transmitter, because some formats might yield better compression. 
Yet the output display might require a different format. The receiver s teleprocessor should accept a 
range of possible formats and number of bits per component. Conversion to output format should be automatically 
handled by the teleprocessing engine using a simple 3x3 color space transformation. 3 Fnmne Rate. The 
update rate for animated images varies according to the source, and it should always be transmitted to 
the receiver. For example, 30 frames per second is common for today s analog video, 24 is common for 
movies recorded on film, and 12 is common for anirnat~ cimtoons. Any rate should be allowed --10 frrunes/sec 
might be adequate for videophones, for example. To save transmission bandwidth, the update rate should 
be part of the soft transmission parameters. Then the source material can be transmitted at its rate, 
not always at 30 frames/see as with analog video --this is mother form of compression that costs nothing. 
Also, just as in today s workstations, the telecomputer can synchronize the output refresh rate with 
the updote rute using conventional frame interleaving techniques. 4. Encryption. Encryption television 
and future provides selective access as pay-pw-view, and it many types of on-line with telecomputing. 
will be essential for digital telecommunications. Encryption to television programming, such will provide 
needed security for transactions that will be possible Public key encryption technologies, such as RSA 
are a natural fit. The teleprocessor should be able to encrypt and decode all transmissions and receptions 
at real-time rates, in addition to its other tasks. Specialized acceleration hardware will be necessary 
to do this in real-time, 5. Compression Algorithms. Compression is an area of considerable confusion 
and high expectation. Two things are driving it. First, cable television companies look to forthcoming 
digital optical fiber with compression as a solution to their bandwidth and signal degradation problems. 
Second, virtually all computer companies wish to compress video so that it can be stored and retrieved 
in real-time on CD-ROM S. Cable companies want to replace analog with a better product. Computer companies 
want video clips for multi-media. This has limitations. Trying to force a CD to store and retrieve video 
at audio rates of 1.408 Mbits/see is asking a lot. Perhaps as much effort should be exerted to cause 
a new VideoCD standard to be created. This could then replace old, sequential video tape, and consumer 
market volumes could be used to leverage into existence a powerful new storage mechanism. MPEG I is supposed 
to compress a 352x24, 30 frames/see signal into a 1 Mbit/see transmission rate, plus another 200k bits/see 
for sound. For general entertain ent quality, this seems unrealistic. MPEG II allows 5 to 10 Mbits/see 
on 720x480 resolution. Even this is only about one half to one blt ~r pixel. MPEG II seems overly complicated. 
h compresses 8x8 tiles of the image using a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT), combined with Huffmsn encoding 
and a time consuming, semch-based, predictive tracking algorithm that is applied to these tiles during 
compression to try to predict their frame to frame trajectory, as in a scene with a panning camera. Not 
only does this seem overly ad hoc, but also the tiling pattern is evident in fast moving scenes. For 
entertainment, the consumer will not tolerate anything that actually looks worse than old analog technology 
--CDs would have failed if digital audio had been worse than 33 rpm records. Although MPEG 11 will be 
useful for multi­media, it might not be adequate for digital video entertainment. The important thhg, 
however, is not the specifications for MPEG II, or any other compression scheme. Rather, it is that compression 
is an embryonic technology, and better compress ion methods wi 11 be invented. Moreover, there will be 
a variety of compression algorithms, some high­compression where it can be tolerated and others low. 
compression --perhaps even lossless --to maintain the highest quality, as for example in Sony s 4:1 audio 
compression. The proper approach is to build mechanisms in the teleprocessor to accelerate core elements 
of compression, such as perhaps cosine transforms and pattern recognition, but allow the general-purpose 
processor to control the algorithm. The decompression algorithm itself might even be downloaded before 
transmission. The challenge for the present is to invent a range of algorithms covering high to low compression 
applications. If the objective were simply to specify a High-resolution Digital Television --HDTV--we 
could stop here and ignore advanced computer graphics. Current television has no graphics ability. But 
new markets are available, such as education and virtual-reality games, that will make the transition 
to digital tv more compelling for the consumer. Moreover, the real-time compute power and memory bandwidth 
required to sample, filter, store, retrieve, compress and encrypt digital video signals is essentially 
adequate for real-time 3D color graphics. Computer Graphics. Two approaches to computer graphics have 
developed over the last decade. The first is bit-mappeW graphics, which is _ single-buffered, black and 
white, one bit,lpixel, 2D, page­image oriented graphics, commonly found on an Apple Macintosh or Sun 
Workstation. It has revolutionized desktop publishing but is inappropriate for dynamic media. The other 
graphics approach is @na~ double-buffered, real-time, color, 3D, simulation oriented graphics commonly 
found on workstations from Silicon Graphics. As previously outlined, simple digital videa requires dynamic, 
double-buffered, full-color frame storage and real-time image processing capability. This power is shared 
with real-time 3D graphics. For example, filtering, sampling and mapping SIGGRAPH 92 Chicago, July 26-31, 
1992 incoming digital images from one resolution to another is identical to the computations required 
for anti-aliesed mapping of textures onto three dimensional surfaces. It is natural to minimize the graphics 
primitives in a telecomputer to the essentials. Today s graphics systems have lots of bells and whistles, 
but the four most important geometric graphics primitives are: -characters -points -lines -and surfaces. 
 These primitives should be -arbitrarily scald rotated end translated -illuminated t%om multiple light 
sources -and have textures and transparencies mapped onto them in real-time to provide a very general 
geometric graphics environment. Add image processing capability to -point-sample geometry -filter and 
accumulate images -store, retrieve end map anti-eliesed textures. The result is a graphics environment 
virtually as complete as the most expensive systems available today. Note that characters, like points, 
lines and surfaces, are geometric, yet all real-time graphics systems made in the last ten years have 
treated characters as images --previously rendered objects. As a result, only specific font sizes are 
available, end generalized rotations, scaling and other operations have not been possible in real-time. 
Geometric outline fonts are now commonplace, however, and they should be rendered in real-time like any 
other geometry. Additional herdwere will be necessary to enable a smeenful of characters to be rendered 
m a frame time, but fully interactive reel-time print media wi~ need iL The Teleprocesaor. Today s workstations 
in complete form are too complex for a telecomputer, but some things should be in common between them. 
The most crucial for compatibility is the CPU instruction set end the multi-media environment. This doesn 
t mean, however, that we put a workstation or PC in every television. UNIX, MS-DOS, NT , X-windows interfaces 
and keyboards are complicated end mean nothing for the most common consumsr uses. RISC Core. The programs 
that run on a telecomputer require a CPU, end the most efficient CPU is a Reduced Instruction Set CPU. 
It doesn t waste silicon space with microcO&#38; for unused instructions. Also, for a given semiconductor 
technology, CISC CPUS will ~ically mn slower end use more power. A RISC CPU allows more space to be used 
for graphics, compression, encryption and network protocol hardware. What would be an ideal RISC CPU 
cotilguration for graphics and image processing? A RISC CPU with 4 data paths, each with 32-bit integer 
end floating-point capability, each data path capable of multiply-add in one cycle, clocked m excess 
of 100 MHz. This would enable 800 million arithmetic operations per seam~ which would help achieve virtual-reality 
graphics speeds. The CPU would tdso need caches and program memory sufficient for holding the essential 
algorithms, and it would have to control network IKl and the graphics, compression and encryption eccekators. 
It should also be compatible with a widely available RISC processor used in workstations, in order to 
leverage the available digital media development tools. Operating System. A completely new Real-time 
Execution­onty operating System will be required, because no current operating system environment is 
efficient enough to do real­time image processing, graphics, compressi~ encryption end digital audio 
in a small amount of memory. UNIX and Microsoft s various OS flavors are too complex, and their features 
are unnecessary in a low-cos~ consumer multi-me&#38;a player . On the other hand, applications require 
a complete development environment. This means that conventional workstation/PC platforms will need a 
compatibility mode to support the Real-time Execution OS for program development and debugging. The Memory 
System. Cument DRAM organizations are wrong for digital image generation, and computer graphics systems 
designers have struggled with this for over ten years. The market opportunity presented by tehcomputers, 
however, is sufficiently large to fmelly motivate memory manufacturers to make high-density memories 
with a specialized organization for telecomputers, rather than just continuing to make chips that are 
wmpatible with the previous generation DRAM s. he main problem is bandwidth. The solution requires changes 
in DRAM design that are motivated by this new high-volume application. Thii paper cannot address the 
potential erchhecture of this new memory, but it is a very important requirement. For this paper end 
associated tallG I ll assume the right memory is available. Basic Memory Requirements. A digital television 
image requires a minimum of about 2 bytes per pixel to store a static image. Using dithering tedmiques, 
it is possible to get by with somewhat less, but I believe the effort required to reduce the memory by 
a few percent is not worth i~ because of the rate of decline in memory prices. Two buffers are required 
for a dynamic image, so 4 bytes/pixel are the minimum. How much more storage does 3D graphics require? 
For the simplest case --no texture mapping --a total of about 4 bytes/pixel is required for z-buffer, 
transparency coefficient alpha and tags for window management. This doubles the memory requirements of 
a basic digital tv. Conventional NTSC resolutions will fit within a 640x512 pixel image memory of 327,680 
pixels. A basic digital tv with NTSC output would therefore need 1.32 MBytes, and the simplest 3D telecomputer 
requires twice this, not counting program storage. Advanced 3D Capability. Adding texture mapping dramatically 
increases the realism of 3D images, thus enabling virtual-reality quality. The additional memory needed 
depends upon the sizes and number of different texture maps. If 2 bytes/pixel are needed to store an 
image, 4 bytes/pixel are required for a fill-screen texture map using traditional MIP-map techniques 
for deslissing treatment. But even very small, cyclic texture maps can considerably emich a 3D scene, 
so 4 bytes/pixel is considerable texture storage. A typical telecomputer with NTSC output resolution 
would therefore have 1.32 MByte of memory for image buffers, 1.32 MByte for z-buffer and transparency, 
1.32 MBytes for textures and perhaps 2 MBytes of program memory. The total memory costs today for a virtual-reality, 
3D telecomputer with NTSC output would be under $120, and cart be under $30 in the mid 90 s. High-resolution 
Digital Television (HDTV). Digital television and telecomputers wilI finally allow variable transmission 
resolutions that can be different from receiver resolutions. Transmission resolutions can then be determined 
according to source material, not fixed for all time as with an analog system. Receiver resolution is 
variable too. The incoming picture might be subsampled to fh within a small window on the receiver s 
screen. The maximum resolution of the output CRT (or flat-panel display) determines the size of memory 
needed in the image buffer. Higher resolution input signals are filtered, sampled and stored in the image 
buffer as they amive. This requires a minimum of buffering if the incoming signal is not interlaced. 
If all receivers use the same teleprocessor, the main difference between them is evidently the amount 
of memory they have. But as resolution is increased, more pixels require more processing in order to 
maintain the same image processing and graphics update speed. Ideally, we d like a processor/memory module 
that can be replicated to make higher resolutions. Multiple copies would increase not only the memory 
available but also the processing power to change it. A module with 640x512 resolution memory and sufficient 
computing power to handle thk image size would work. First, it is adequate for NTSC output resolutions, 
which means it will work with standard televisions. Secand, four modules would make 1280x1 024, which 
is the commonly used resolution in color workstations. Finally, six modules makes 1920x 1024, which is 
adequate for an 1820x1024 HDTV resolution, with about 100 Kpixels left over. Each of these modules can 
have variable amounts of memory, according to the features desired, from plain digital television to 
virtual-reality capability. Summary and Closing Comments Over the next four to five years, unprecedented 
change will occur in the computer, telecommunications and television industries as multi-media technology 
enters the home via the telecomputer. This will require the development of a digital fiber-optic data 
communications network that replaces both the cable tv system and the telephone system. While this will 
certainly take many years to complete, just as cable systems have grown incrementally, so will dtk new 
system. But it will require the Computer Graphics, 26, 2, July 1992 telecomputer s capability to create 
a demand for the new services. The present local loop of the telephone system and the cable franchise 
for television will become one Multi-media Server Loop. Each loop will represent several tens of thousands 
of clients, each using a tekcomputer. In the loop will be high-speed computer systems for serving audio 
and movies on demand, virtual reality games, digital forms of daily newspapers, weekly and monthly magazines, 
libraries, encyclopedias and interactive books. In time, all media will be available in dynamic form. 
Switching systems for video conferences and telecommunications will be integrated, as well. A combination 
of semiconductor, computer graphics and computer industries have the capability to design a build a telecomputer 
with the power described in this paper. Current consumer electronics companies do not --they are encumbered 
by analog thinking and by preseming an irtstslled base. Yet a telecomputer cart be made so that it can 
still use existing television, as well as grow to higher resolution and higher quality in a modular way. 
The challenge is ours.  
			