
 Proceedings of the 1990 Winter Simulation Conference Osman Balci, Randall P. Sadowski, Richard E. Nance 
(eds.) A TUTORIAL ON UniFit II: A SYSTEM FOR TOTAL SUPPORT OF SIMULATION INPUT MODELING Stephen G. Vincent 
Averill M. Law The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Simulation Modeling and Analysis Company School 
of Business Administration 440 North Alvernon Way, Suite 103 P.O. Box 742 Tucson, Arizona 85711 Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin 53201 ABSTRACT This paper provides an overview of the UniFit II software package, which is 
used to select simulation input probability distributions. UniFit II is the successor to the original 
UniFit software package, which has offered state-of-the-art support for selection of distributions for 
nearly eight years. UniFit II provides more comprehensive and easier-to-use support for simulationists. 
UniFit II allows a simulationist to determine easily which of the standard probability distributions 
(e.g., exponential, gamma, normal, etc.) best represents a set of observations. The package then helps 
a simulationist deter- mine the quality of the correspondence between the selected probability distribution 
and the observations. In most cases the correspondence will be good enough for simulation purposes, and 
UniFit II specifies how to generate values from the selected distribution in any of the major simulation 
packages. In the situation where the correspondence is not good, UniFit reports how to generate values 
directly from the observed data. UniFit II supports two different methods for choosing distribu- tions 
when data are not available. The first method has been commonly recommended for this no-data case and 
may be used in almost any context. The second author developed the other method specifically for specifying 
the distributions of operating and repair time random variables needed for simulations of manufacturing 
systems. 1. INTRODUCTION In the fall of 1978 the authors began joint research on the t ic of fitting 
distributions to data as it related to simulation. er four years of research and development, the UniFit 
software for fitting distributions to observed data became available for mainframe computers (in 1982). 
Further develop- ment of the software resulted in the 1985 release of a version for personal computers. 
The UniFit package was designed to allow someone who was familiar with the process of fitting distributions 
to data to do so quickly and in a more comprehen- sive manner than was possible either with hand calculations 
or through the use of general statistical software. It is being used by simulationists, engineers, statisticians, 
and scientists in more than 150 organizations in a number of countries. The recently released UniFit 
II software package is the result of a two year redesign process. One of the major goals during the redesign 
was to make the comprehensive array of tools available within the original UniFit package accessible 
and indeed simple to use by simulationists who have little formal training in the relevant statistical 
methods. The design of the package reflects this goal in a number of ways, but perhaps the most dramatic 
example of the redesign is the inclusion of obability distribution ranking facilities within the package. 
e have created a procedure for automatically evaluating and ranking alternative probability distributions. 
During the twelve years of developing and using software to fit distributions to data for simulation 
studies, we have invented and evaluated a number of heuristics for assessing the quality of a probability 
distribution. The automatic ranking process uses heuristic procedures that we have found to be the most 
effective for choosing distributions. This ranking procedure is discussed in more detail in Sections 
2.3 and 2.4. Another major goal was to make the software as "user- friendly" as possible. One problem 
with current software is the variety of interfaces employed; some packages are menu-based, others are 
not, and few menu-based packages operate in exactly the same way. We recognized that because a package 
like UniFit II may be used intensively by a simulation- ist during the early stages of a long simulation 
study but then infrefluently until the next project commences, it is essential that httle time be spent 
learning to use the interface. We have therefore used a straight forward menuing scheme which is as easy 
to use with a mouse as without one, and have avoided the common practice of requiring a user to employ 
special non- obvious keystrokes when performing basic tasks. Context-dependent on-line help is available 
in four categories to allow the user to find quickly the help information relevant to the task the simulationist 
is performing with UniFit II. The third major goal for the redesign process was to increase the support 
for tasks performed by simulationists in selecting input distributions. The original version of UniFit 
was designed to be the state-of-the-art tool for fitting distributions to data. We have increased the 
applicability of UniFit by including options which support selecting distributions when no data are available. 
We have improved the usefulness of UniFit for simulationists by providing options that specify the exact 
usage of a probability distribution (e.g., the random value generator to use and its parameters) in the 
major simulation packages (languages or simulators). 2. SELECTING SIMULATION INPUT DISTRIBUTIONS In this 
section we present an overview of the input distribution selection process. We begin with an examination 
of the need for proper input distribution selection. We then discuss the objective of the process and 
a provide a philosophy for selecting input distributions in the simulation context. The section concludes 
with an overview of the selection process, including an example. 2.1 The Need For Proper Input Distribution 
Selection When performing a simulation study, the sources of randomness for the system under consideration 
must be repre- sented properly. (A source of randomness in the real-world system Is typically called 
a random variable.) In many manufac- turing systems, for example, correctly modeling machine operating 
times and repair times is critical to obtaining meaningful simulation results. In order to demonstrate 
the dramatic effect that the choice of input distribution may have on the performance of a simulated 
system, we performed a small experiment involving a simple system. The system of interest was the single-server 
queueing system, where interarrival times were exponentially distributed. The experiment had five cases 
corresponding to the choice of the service-time distribution. Five distributions (exponential, gamma, 
Weibull, lognormal, and normal) were fit to a set of observed service times. We then made 100 replica- 
tions of the system for each choice of service-time distribution, where each replication was run until 
the 1000th delay in queue was observed. The results of the experiment are summarized in Table 1. Each 
value in the table is the average of the measure of performance over the 100 replications for the appropriate 
distribution. 180 S.G. Vincent and A.M. Law Table 1. Empirical Results From 100 Replications For Each 
Distribution Average Average Percentage Delay Number of Delays Distribution In Queue In Queue At Least 
20 exponential 6.71 6.78 6.4% gamma 4.54 4.60 1.9% Weibull 4.36 4.41 1.3% loguorrnal 7.19 7.30 7.8% normal 
6.04 6.13 4.5% After a thorough analysis of the service-time data using UniFit II, which included distributions 
not shown in Table 1, we concluded that the Weibull distribution provided the best representation of 
the data, and the results produced by this distribution will be used as reference points in the discussion 
which follows. (An overview of this analysis is presented in Section 2.4.) The values for the average 
delay in queue for different service-time distributions highlight the impact of the choice of distribution 
on simulation results. In particular, note that the normal distribution, which has often been used as 
an input probability distribution due to its familiarity, leads in this case to an average delay value 
that differs by almost 39 percent from that produced by the reference Weibull distribution. What is more 
surprising is that the result produced by the lognormal distribution (which can have a shape very similar 
to that of the Weibull) differs from the reference by 65 percent. Similar results occur with respect 
to the average number in queue measure of system performance. We would expect that differences in simulation 
results should be the greatest when we consider the likelihood of extreme values occurring, because the 
service-time distributions considered in Table 1 differ most in their "tails." This expectation is borne 
out by the output measure reporting the percentage of delays that are at least 20. Here the result produced 
by the normal distribution differs from that of the reference Weibull by 246 percent. An even more striking 
discrepancy from the reference of 500 percent occurs with the result produced by the lognormal distribution. 
In many simulation studies little attention has been paid to the process of selecting input distributions. 
Some simulationists have used distributions such as the normal to represent sources of randomness in 
their simulations simply because they were most familiar with the normal. It should be evident from the 
example that such a practice calls into question the validity of the overall simulation results and, 
thus, any conclusions based upon those results.  2.2 The Desired Outcome of the Input Distribution Selection 
Process In the simulation context the desired outcome of the input distribution selection process is 
the choice of a mechanism for generating random values from a probability distribution. (In the simulation 
literature such mechanisms are known as random variategenerators.) Most simulation packages offer two 
different types of random value generators which differ in their overall approach to modeling a particular 
random variable. An empirical function generator generates values on the basis of a parameter list containing 
example values and their associated probabilities. This type of generator is given its name because of 
the common practice of using the sorted observations as the example values and values computed from the 
empirical (sample) distribution function as the set of associated probabili- ties. Generators of the 
second type produce random values from a specific standard probability distribution. These generators 
require specification of the parameter values corresponding to the specific probability distribution 
(e.g., the mean of the exponential). Most simulation packages include an empirical function generator 
as well as a number of generators for standard probability distributions. The simulationist must select 
an appropriate generator to represent a real-world source of randomness in a simulation model and then 
must specify the list of parameters required by the random value generator. We believe that a generator 
for a standard probability distribution should be selected whenever possible, for practical as well as 
more theoretical reasons. (The second author is participating in a panel discussion at this conference 
that addresses different approaches for specifying input probability distributions. His position paper, 
included elsewhere in these proceedings, discusses the reasons for our preference.) 2.3 A Philosophy 
to Guide The Input Distribution Selection Process In some disciplines analysts have used UniFit to meet 
the objective of determining whether a specified distribution (e.g, normal) is the true underlying distribution 
for their observed data. However, it is not clear that this is the correct objective for simulation applications, 
since none of the standard distribu- tions is probably exactly correct for most simulation input random 
variables. Instead, we feel that an appropriate goal is to find a standard probability distribution that 
provides a representation that can be assessed as being good enough for the purposes of the simulation 
study. We recommend a two-phase approach,for choosing a probability distribution that is representative 
of a simulation input random variable. In the selection phase the alternative probability distributions 
available within UniFit II are "fit' to the observed data and then compared in order to determine which 
one best represents the observed data. UniFit II provides many graphical and tabular options for comparing 
fitted distributions to the observed data. A simu|ationist may use any or all of these comparisons to 
select one of the distributions as being the most representative, or may elect to have UniFit II make 
the selection with a ranking methodology. The automatic ranking methodology utilizes the results of comparisons 
based upon goodness-of-fit test statistics as well as the results of comparisons based upon metrics computed 
from graphical procedures. We incorporated into the ranking methodology those comparisons that we have 
found to be most effective in discriminating between distributions during the past twelve years. In the 
confirmation phase the probability distribution identified in the selection phase is evaluated using 
formal goodness-of-fit tests and graphical comparisons to determine if it represents the observed data 
well enough to be used in a simulation model. In our experience goodness-of-fit tests do not necessarily 
provide by themselves a definitive assessment of the quality of fit of a distribution to be used for 
simulation. We prefer to use such tests as an indication of the amount of further evidence required in 
order to confirm the quality of a probability distribution: better representations as indicated by formal 
goodness-of-fit tests require less confirming visual evidence from comparison plots. Plots employed in 
the confirmation phase are demonstrated in the example found in the next section. 2.4 An Example of 
the Process of Selecting Input Distribu. tions In many situations it is possible to collect a sample 
from the system random variable of interest. We shall first consider this case and later discuss the 
situation where data are unavail- able. The following discussion is based upon the process we recommend 
a simulationist follow when using the UniFit II software and will be illustrated with example output 
from the package. We shall use the service-time data referenced in the example of Section 2.1 as our 
set of observations. Immediately after using an option in the UniFit II package to read observations 
recorded in a data file, the sample summary shown as Figure 1 is displayed. The sample has two hundred 
observations, ranging from .05395 to 2.13060, and a 181 A Tutorial on UniFit Ih A System for Total Support 
of Simulation Input Modeling mean of .88837. Summary of Sample: WSC Service-Time Data Sample Characteristic 
Value Observation Type Real Valued Number of Observations 200 Minimum Observation .05395 Maximum Observation 
2.13060 Mean .88837 Median .84913 Variance .20963 Coefficient of Variation .51539 Coefficient of Skewness 
.50552 Coe£ficient of Kurtosis 2.57707 Figure 1. Sample Summary of Example Data In addition to a set 
of observations, the simulationist should have a basic understanding of the random variable that produced 
the sample. The most important single piece of information is the range of the possible values of the 
random variable, for it identifies the class of candidate probability distributions. Most data sets collected 
for simulation purposes will be strictly non-negative, that is, the values must be greater than zero. 
This is true, for example, for operating times, repair times, and service times. The example data are 
service times and are therefore strictly non-negative. We began the selection phase by choosing an option 
that requested UniFit II to estimate all of the parameters for the seven distributions appropriate for 
non-negative data sets. An eighth probability distribution, the normal, was also fit to the data using 
a separate option. Once the distributions were selected and parameters estimated, the ranking methodology 
described in the previous section was invoked. The top two probability distributions found automatically 
by UniFit II were the Weibull and the gamma, in that order. After seeing the summary ranking, the default 
option provided by UniFit II is to reorder the fitted distributions to reflect their rankings; this option 
was selected. (All probability distributions are given numbers that serve as abbreviations for their 
complete names.) We began the confirmation phase by performing several goodness-of-fit tests with the 
Weibull distribution. The results of the tests, which are not shown here, indicated that the Weibull 
distribution was a good representation for the random variable. Following the recommended procedure for 
choosing an input probability distribution outlined in Section 2.3, only minimal additional confirming 
evidence concerning the quality of the correspondence between the WeibuU distribution and the sample 
was required before accepting the distribution. We first chose to perform a frequency comparison because 
it provides a very easy way to get a visual impression of how well a probability, distribution represents 
a sample. In a frequency comparison a subrange of the possible values is divided up into equal-width 
intervals and the proportion observed in the sample and that expected from theprobability distribution 
are plotted for comparison. UniFit II provides default values wherever choices may be made, such as for 
the specification of intervals. We displayed the frequency compari- son with the default intervals and 
then modified them slightly to obtain the comparison shown in Figure 2. (Please note that for clarity 
of reproduction, the multiple-co/or plots produced by UniFit II have been printed in black and white 
only.) In a frequency comparison like that shown in Figure 2 the outside (hollow) bars represent the 
observed frequencies (proportions) and the inside (fall) bars represent the frequencies expected from 
the distribution being evaluated. This plot indicated that there was general close agreement between 
the sample and fitted Weibull distribution frequencies. Another way to assess the quality of the representation 
is to compare the density function of a probability distribution and the sample density (this is just 
a rescaling of the sample histogram and thus has the same shape). We created such a comparison using 
the Weibull and exponential distributions which is shown in Figure 3. (The curve for the exponential 
density is the one with a large value at an x-value of zero). It should be noted that the exponential 
was rated by the ranking methodology as the worst of the candidate probability distribu- tions and was 
chosen for this plot to show how easily bad probability distributions can be ascertained using UniFit 
II plots. Thzs plot provided clear evidence of the bad representa- tion offered by the exponential distribution. 
The close match between the sample density and that of the Weibull distribution offered more evidence 
to its being a good choice to represent the sample. There are a number of additional plots available 
in UniFit II for assessing the quality of fit provided by distribu- tions. We chose to create one more 
plot called the distribution function difference plot, which is shown in Figure 4. In this type of plot 
the differences between the empirical distribution function (based upon the sample) and a specified probability 
distribution function are graphed. A good fit is indicated by small differences being detected across 
the range of data values. The plot provided another demonstration of the quality of fit of the Weibull 
distribution and the lack of quality of fit by FREQUENCY COMPARISON OF HODEL 1 RHD SAMPLE: W5£ SERVICE-TIME 
DRTR F U B. R-tlRLUES  DISTRIBUTION I-UEIBULL FREQUEMCIES F .1?$8B BELOW PLOT 8. 8. RBDUE PLOT B. .8BB88 
INTERURL QIOTH .2BBBB  2.28BOB Figure 2. Example Frequency Comparison 182 S.G. Vincent and A.M. Law 
DENSITY /HISTDGRRM OUERPLDT WITH MODEL5 8, i. RHD SRHPLE: WSC SERVICE-TIME DATA DISTRIBUTIOHS 8-EHPQNEHTIRL 
I-WEIBULL DENSITIES D 1.125G5 IHTERVflL MIOTH .2BBBB e. H-VRLUES 2.2BABe Figure 3. Example Density 
/ Histogram Overplot DF DIFFEREMCE PLOT OF MODELS 8, 1. RND SRNPLE: WSC SERUICE-TIME DRTA +~ DISTRIBUTIOHS 
8-EHPDH£NTIAL I-WEIBULL ] [ DIFFERENCES D .3BflO@ MOST POSITIVE :lE E 4 .23367 .B2??? MOST MEBRTIUE -.1BBq8 
-.~2739 RELATIVE DISC. .21BAG .AlgA4 .B5395 B-VRLUES 2.13868 Figure 4. Example Distribution Function 
Difference Plot the exponential. All of the evidence suggested that the Weibull distribution provided 
an excellent representation for the service-time random variable. The last required step in the input 
distribu- tion selection process was the specificatzon of a corresponding random value generator for 
the simulation. An option in UniFit II can perform this step for the major simulation packages. The representations 
of the Weibull distribution for the SIMAN, SIMSCRIPT 11.5, and SLAM languages were requested individually, 
and are shown together in Figure 5. The example demonstrates the process of selecting a simulation input 
distribution when data are available, but simulationists must often specify input distributions without 
data. Data may be unavailable because the system does not exist or because there is not time for data 
collection and analysis. In these cases, knowledge possessed by people most familiar with the system 
under consideration or similar systems must be used in place of a data sample. UniFit II supports two 
approaches to this problem. The first approach is well known and involves specification of minimum, maximum, 
and most likely values, which are then used in the triangular distribution. The other approach was developed 
by the second author and is appropriate in the context of simulation of manufacturing systems. The method 
is used to specify the distributions of operating and repair time random variables. SIMAN Representation: 
 Parameter Value(s) 1.00701, 2.04472 Model Usage WE(IP, IS) where IP is the parameter set and IS is the 
stream  SIMSCRIPT II.5 Representation: WEIBULL.F(2.04472, 1.00342, IS) where IS is the stream  SLAM 
Representation: WEIBL(i.00701, 2.04472, IS) where IS is the stream Figure 5. Simulation Language Representations 
183  
			