
 A Typology to Support HIS Design for Collaborative Healthcare Delivery Craig E. Kuziemsky Elizabeth 
M. Borycki Anne Brasset-Latulippe Telfer School of Management School of Health Information Science Telfer 
School of Management University of Ottawa University of Victoria University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON Victoria, 
BC Ottawa, ON kuziemsky@telfer.uottawa.ca emb@uvic.ca Anne.Brasset@uottawa.ca ABSTRACT Although healthcare 
delivery is increasingly being provided by collaborative teams there are few health informatics applications 
that are designed to support team based healthcare delivery. Before we can design health information 
systems to support teams we need a detailed understanding of the process and information requirements 
of teams. We must also consider the unique contexts of each healthcare setting. This paper presents a 
typology for HIS design to support collaborative healthcare teams. The typology provides considerations 
for processes, information, and contextual factors related to HIS design. The typology is a starting 
point for requirements engineering to support the design of HIS applications to support collaborative 
care delivery. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.1 [Software Engineering]:Requirements/specifications. 
J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]: Health General Terms Management, Design, Human Factors, Theory  Keywords 
Collaborative care delivery, requirements engineering, process, information, contexts 1. INTRODUCTION 
The 2001 Institute of Medicine (IOM) study Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Healthcare System for the 
21st Century described how our healthcare system fails to provide consistent, high quality care to all 
people who need it [21]. In particular the study pointed out that the healthcare system is poorly organized 
to meet the challenges it faces. Healthcare delivery is changing from care provided by a single healthcare 
provider and setting to care provided by multiple providers across multiple settings. Care processes 
need to be reengineered to be more in line with the changing needs of the healthcare system. Two of the 
key recommendations from the IOM study are the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior specific permission and/or a fee. SEHC 10, May 3 4, 2010, Cape Town, South Africa Copyright 2010 
ACM 978-1-60558-973-2/10/5 $10.00. development and delivery of care by high performing patient centered 
teams to coordinate care across different diseases, sites and services over time; and the use of information 
technology to enhance healthcare delivery [21]. However the development and delivery of team based healthcare 
delivery is complex with many concepts that need to be considered. Further, much of the existing health 
information system (HIS) design has been targeted at individual healthcare providers and not teams. Although 
there has been research to examine teamwork in healthcare a 2007 study described how electronic health 
record frameworks and associated informatics applications are still largely engineered towards individual 
healthcare providers [17]. To date there are few frameworks that support the design of informatics applications, 
including software, for collaborative healthcare teams. This paper provides a typology for HIS design 
to support collaborative healthcare delivery. Although we use the term health information system (HIS) 
in the paper we are referring to the broader context of informatics applications for collaborative healthcare 
teams including software. 2. BACKGROUND Poor information sharing in collaborative care delivery can 
be a source of medical errors [1]. However designing HISs to effectively support collaboration has been 
a challenging task with conflicting viewpoints. Reddy et al. showed that electronic health record (EHR) 
systems and computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems may support more collaborative activities 
then intended by their designers [30]. In contrast Dorr et al. [17] point out that EHR standards and 
frameworks tend to support individual rather than team based needs. The complexity of healthcare teams 
and the need to share data across different healthcare providers and settings makes it difficult to design 
HISs to support teams [7]. Further, studies have shown that different types of teams exist and that they 
have different information and process needs [14,15]. Thus HIS design to support teams must consider 
the specific context of the team it is being designed to support. In designing HISs to support collaborative 
care delivery we must recognize that healthcare teams support patient care over the entire continuum 
of care. To that end it is unfortunate that we commonly refer to HISs by a particular process such as 
a decision support or order entry system. A 2005 systematic review by Kawamota et al. identified context, 
computerized access, supporting information, and adaptation with workflow as the factors most needed 
for a computer decision support system (CDSS) to be successful [23]. From that perspective although decision 
support is the objective of the system it is as much about the overall fit of the CDSS to context and 
workflow and the type of additional support it provides that will determine its success. In a similar 
manner Ash et al. [3] have shown that orders are just one aspect of computer physician order entry (CPOE) 
and CPOE systems must enhance communication and fit into the larger aspect of patient care in order to 
be successful. Practically speaking, although a HIS may be developed to support a particular process 
such as a diagnosis or order entry, those processes do not occur in a vacuum. Healthcare delivery is 
a continuum and a decision or order will have additional processes and information needs that lead up 
to and follow it. To ignore those additional processes and information needs will result in a model that 
poorly represents the context of how a HIS will be used. Heeks refers to the design-reality gap as the 
distance between a system designer s vision and what actually takes place in a clinical setting [20]. 
It is not uncommon for that gap to be quite wide and thus a first step to closing it is to understand 
what factors constitute the gap. To that effect Balka et al. [8] developed a typology to help identify 
variations in healthcare practices that need to be accommodated in HIS design. Balka et al. suggest that 
the underlying tasks that are done in a healthcare setting will differ depending on the context of where 
the HIS is implemented. One part of their typology is the context of system and workplace design, which 
includes organization of information and the management of patient flow through the system. However their 
typology does not identify specific contexts that should be considered as part of HIS design but rather 
only suggests the need to pay attention to variation in needs. Key shortcomings in research on collaborative 
healthcare systems is that it has tended to focus on synchronous care delivery [18,25,31]. Asynchronous 
care delivery, where team members have minimal face to face interaction, is increasingly common in healthcare 
delivery. Analysis of how team members interact in asynchronous care delivery is required so that we 
can design HISs to support the new realities of care delivery [13]. Additionally, much of the existing 
research on collaboration has been on specific collaborative activities such as morning rounds, shift 
handover, and patient admissions and transfers [25,30]. We suggest that these are macro activities that 
are comprised of numerous micro activities. We propose that understanding the micro level needs is necessary 
to design HIS to support collaboration. From the literature described above it can be seen that engineering 
healthcare systems is difficult due to the variations in contexts that exist in the different settings 
where healthcare delivery is provided. Qualitative methods have been advocated for use in software engineering 
and HIS design [16,35]. Qualitative methods are valuable for studying how healthcare providers and HISs 
interact and for providing answers to the how and why questions about HIS usage that quantitative methods 
cannot provide [4,5,16]. Ash and colleagues used qualitative methods to uncover unintended consequences 
around the use of CPOE systems. It is essential to point out that the CPOE systems they studied functioned 
as required, meaning they facilitated order entry and thus the systems could be designated as successful. 
However it was other underlying issues such as communication, and workflow issues that made the system 
perform short of expectations [11]. Those underlying issues were only brought to light through the use 
of qualitative methods. Although HIS design has traditionally favored quantitative approaches studies 
have described the need for both qualitative and quantitative approaches to the design and evaluation 
of models for software design [16,35]. However, a challenge lies in how to use qualitative methods to 
understand the complexities of a healthcare setting and then to develop informatics applications to address 
those complexities. Ash and Guappone describe several qualitative methods for studying healthcare information 
exchange including interviews, observations and focus groups [5]. They also describe some of the challenges 
to qualitative studies including understanding the needs of multiple stakeholders and the need for rigor. 
When the complexity and range of qualitative research methods are combined with the complex and unstable 
nature of healthcare it can be difficult to determine what methods to use and what factors to study for 
HIS design. It would enhance our ability to apply qualitative approaches to HIS design if there was some 
methodological guidance or a framework for qualitative based requirements analysis of HIS needs within 
a healthcare setting. To date much of the research on software design and architecture has focused on 
technical issues such as architectures and notations [9]. However from the cited literature we can see 
that technical issues are only one challenge. We also need to better understand the process and information 
needs of collaborative healthcare teams. Pirnejad et al. described how a lack of attention to how technological 
artifacts will both impact and be impacted by a healthcare setting are the cause of many HIS failures 
[29]. They further described how integration problems are rarely technical issues but rather due to social 
and work process issues. The overall challenge is how do we design informatics applications such as software 
and HISs to support collaborative healthcare teams? This paper takes a first step towards addressing 
the above challenge by presenting a typology for HIS design to support collaborative healthcare teams. 
The typology is a starting point for requirements engineering to support the design of HIS applications 
to support collaborative care delivery. The typology provides considerations for processes, information, 
and contextual factors related to HIS design. 3. Methods 3.1 Data Sources The data collection took place 
in three healthcare settings in three Canadian Cities. The three settings were studied as they all practice 
using a collaborative approach to healthcare delivery. That means that tasks such as care planning, decision 
making and delivery of healthcare services was routinely done by at least two different types of healthcare 
providers. Site A was a 17 bed inpatient hospice. At site A we conducted 150 hours of meetings and interviews 
with 12 healthcare providers (3 physicians, 3 nurses and 3 counselors) as well as spending 40 hours doing 
qualitative observation and documentation on the clinical ward. Site B was a nine bed inpatient hospice. 
90 hours of non­participant observations of the clinical setting, and semi­structured interviews with 
30 healthcare providers (8 nurses, 6 physicians, 6 medical residents, 3 team coordinators (e.g. nursing 
coordinator), 2 personal support workers and 5 volunteers) were collected at site two. Site C was a 200 
bed rural tertiary care hospital. At site C team based care delivery was studied on 4 clinical units 
(medical-surgical acute care; day surgery; continuing complex care and diabetic education). 114 hours 
of non­participant observations of clinical settings and 15 semi-structured interviews were collected 
at site three. The interview participants at site C included 1 physician, 4 nurses, 1 ward clerk, 1 physiotherapy 
assistant, 1 clinical manager, 2 patients, 2 nursing students, 1 student physiotherapist, 1 student paramedic, 
1 medical student, and 1 medical resident. The observations, meetings and interviews in site A was to 
understand how the palliative care team managed severe pain. The objective was to develop a computer 
based severe pain management tool [24]. The observations, meetings and interviews in sites B and C were 
to study collaborative care delivery in general. The interviews asked questions related to how healthcare 
providers collaborated with each other, what information they used, and how it was communicated across 
different providers. We also asked questions about what information they currently do not have but would 
like to have and where communication difficulties arise in collaborative care delivery. The selection 
of data sources for studying collaboration was crucial as that helped provide rigor to the qualitative 
study. Although the actual data sources may vary according to project context there are three goals the 
data needs to accomplish. First is to be able to validate concepts and processes. Comparing what is described 
in interviews and meetings with ward observations are one way of doing such validation. Second is to 
incorporate conceptual models and other relevant research literature into the data as a means of linking 
research and practice. Third, historical data, such as retrospective patient cases, can be used to establish 
and understand empirical vocabulary and draw out the richness of knowledge contained in such data.  
3.2 Data Analysis Grounded theory (GT) methodology was used for data analysis. GT is a research method 
that uses a systematic set of procedures to develop an inductively derived grounded theory about a phenomenon. 
[34]. A GT study does not begin with a preconceived hypothesis or theory that needs to be proven. Instead, 
a theory emerges from the data. The hallmark of GT is three coding cycles: open, axial and selective 
coding [34]. Data is coded in open coding into concepts and categories that are refined and interconnected 
in axial coding. Selective coding establishes the final concepts and categories. GT was chosen for data 
analysis as it ties theory to data which provides a means of rigor.  4. RESULTS After the data was analyzed 
using GT a number of common themes emerged. One common theme was that healthcare delivery is not a onetime 
occurrence and continuous communication and monitoring of patient cases are needed to support ongoing 
patient care. Ongoing monitoring will be increasingly important as we design HIS for the management of 
chronic illnesses. For example once a patient has a diagnosis confirmed by a HIS they will receive treatment 
or diagnostic tests as part of follow-up care. That follow up care must also be supported by the HIS. 
Another common theme was in order to understand a healthcare team we really need to understand all of 
its parts. Teams can be very complex as the different team members have different backgrounds, education 
and clinical needs. All of the selective codes from GT were formalized into a typology for HIS design 
to support collaborative care delivery. The typology, shown in figure 1, is structured into process, 
information and contextual considerations. The rationale for the three types of considerations is that 
in order to engineer HISs to support collaborative care delivery we not only need to define the processes 
that take place in healthcare delivery and the information that supports those processes but also the 
relationships between the processes and information. However it is also essential that we consider the 
contextual factors that will impact usage of the HIS in each unique context where the HIS will be used. 
The typology provides a checklist of the processes, information and contextual considerations when capturing 
user requirements for HIS design to support collaborative teams. The typology is not a HIS in itself 
nor does it replace other types of HIS such as decision support or information management systems. Rather 
it is meant to serve as a requirements engineering framework to guide the design of such systems to support 
collaborative care delivery. 4.1 Process Considerations Four distinct process considerations were identified. 
They included the requirements of different team members,, team development, clinical decision making 
and education. 4.1.1 Process Requirements of Different Team Members As we design HISs to support teams 
we must ensure that it supports the requirements of different team members. We observed that team members 
may have different requirements for a HIS in order to complete a task. For example physicians and nurses 
have different processes requirements with respect to charting and both their needs must be supported 
in a HIS. At site A we were discussing diagnostic support for palliative severe pain management. Physicians 
stated that support for diagnostic decision making- -would be very helpful. However nurses were very 
adamant about the fact that although diagnostic support would be helpful there are many additional tasks 
that nurses do in their day to day practice. Much of the front line work such as charting, communicating 
between healthcare providers about a patient case, and tasks such as entering narcotics records and drawing 
up medications for patients are done by nurses. Thus decision support functionality by itself is not 
enough for nurses. If nurses are going to use a HIS it will need to support tasks such as charting and 
communication that are part of nurses day to day work routines. Nurses will not use a HIS if it simply 
adds to their workflow without providing any tangible benefit or if it only supports one task (e.g a 
diagnosis) within the continuum of a nurse s work routine. A key to understanding the requirements of 
different healthcare providers is to not just ask about their requirements in relation to one specific 
task (such as decision support) but rather to gain a comprehensive understanding of their work routines 
to understand how all the parts of the routine intersect with one another. The clinical observations 
we conducted were very helpful for gaining that perspective as it allowed us to see how all the clinical 
tasks fit together and how they differ across different providers. Figure 1. Typolgy of considerations 
for HIS design for collaborative healthcare delivery 4.1.2 Team Development All healthcare teams are 
not the same. Instead there are different types of teams and the degree of cooperation and collaboration 
will vary according to the type of team. Choi et al. [14,15] classified teams from unidisciplinary to 
trans disciplinary depending on the number and type of healthcare providers, and the degree of interaction 
between the providers. Drawing on the literature on different types of teams, our data identified differences 
in team functionality depending on the type of team. We provide an example of interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary 
teams. Multidisciplinary teams consist of multiple providers from different disciplines. A multidisciplinary 
team provides team based care but each provider generally works independently within the mandate of their 
own discipline. Collaboration only occurs as necessary. The different team members need to be aware of 
what other providers have done but they do not have extensive communication or collaboration needs. An 
example of a multidisciplinary team is a patient recovering from hip replacement surgery. The physician, 
nurse, and physiotherapist all work as a team but there is usually little interaction other than to inform 
each other what they have done. Interdisciplinary teams involve more complex patient cases and are instances 
when the knowledge and expertise of care providers from one profession are integrated together, in a 
collaborative manner, to set common goals for care. Interdisciplinary teams require frequent and in- 
depth collaboration and communication between team members. An example of an interdisciplinary team would 
be a patient with cancer who is being transitioned to palliative care. A task completed by one team members 
will have implications for the other team members and decisions are often made in a collaborative manner. 
Interdisciplinary teams would require an HIS to support collaborative tasks such as group decision making 
and brainstorming about a problem as well as automated notification to all team members of changes in 
patient data. Because of the availability of e-health and telecommunication technologies we can also 
design HISs to support the development of teams and the facilitation of team processes. For example a 
key aspect of palliative care is delivery through an interdisciplinary team. Site A is an inpatient hospice 
setting and thus interdisciplinary care is routinely done as part of day to day practice. However palliative 
care is not always provided in an inpatient setting where team members are all proxy to one another. 
What if an HIS is being designed to be used in a rural setting where there may only be a family physician 
or homecare nurse and thus no direct access to an interdisciplinary team? Thus it should not be assumed 
that a HIS will only be used in one particular type of setting but rather we need to leverage technological 
capabilities to support different contexts of care delivery. Emerging technologies such as Web 2.0 provide 
the means for collaboration to take place remotely as well as the means to incorporate resources such 
as literature about how to work within an interdisciplinary team perspective if no team is available. 
Links to websites that provide support for team practices, including real time support such as messaging 
or collaborative tools, can also be used. HIS applications can allow us to mimic a team setting if no 
team is physically available.  4.1.3 Clinical Decision Making One of the most common clinical processes 
is decision making such as for a diagnosis. However, the types of decisions made in a clinical setting 
can vary and those differences need to be considered when designing decision support systems (DSS). From 
the data analysis we identified two common but different types of diagnoses: provisional and differential. 
Differential and provisional diagnoses represent different approaches to clinical reasoning and thus 
require different support. The identification of reasoning strategies used by healthcare providers may 
be critical to the optimal design of DSS [2]. A provisional diagnosis is when a provider is relatively 
sure of the diagnosis for the patient but they need some additional information to confirm the diagnosis. 
Thus they need to drill down within the provisional diagnosis. A differential diagnosis is when a sign 
or symptom is present in multiple diagnoses and the provider needs help determining the correct diagnosis. 
In that case they need to navigate across severe diagnoses to determine the diagnosis of best fit. Therefore 
a provisional or differential diagnosis would be represented as two very different types of DSS and understanding 
the difference between the diagnoses is critical for DSS design.  4.1.4 Education The initial training 
and continuing education of healthcare providers are key issues for ensuring safe healthcare delivery. 
The level of expertise, and thus the educational needs, between users of an HIS will vary. However, we 
can draw upon the ability of an HIS to store and retrieve information to use it as a teaching tool for 
students and new staff to learn about processes such as diagnosis or team development, as well as for 
continuing education for existing staff. Part of education is the support of reflective practice, which 
is how individual professionals address uncertain and non-routine, yet repetitive, problems in practice 
[32]. Reflective practice has been described as a vehicle for learning by intertwining practice and theory 
[32]. HISs can retrieve information to promote research-practice linkages as a means of knowledge translation. 
Research practice linkages can allow the incorporation of patient specific evidence at point of care 
to ensure evidence based healthcare delivery that is tailored to each individual patient. However research 
evidence needs to be connected to the clinical processes at hand. For example in the previous section 
we described the difference between a provisional and differential diagnosis. Those two types of diagnoses 
require different research evidence and thus an HIS must be designed so the appropriate evidence can 
be retrieved to support the right diagnostic process at the right time.  4.2 Information Considerations 
Information challenges are reconciling information from different sources, different information formats,, 
navigation and presentation, feedback, and vocabulary. 4.2.1 Reconciliation It is common in team based 
environments to have charting done by multiple healthcare providers, owing to the complexity of patient 
care, and different contributions made by the multiple providers who provide patient care. At site B, 
nurses, personal support workers, physicians, trained volunteers and other care providers all record 
patient data. The perspectives of the different team members are a key part of understanding the overall 
picture of the patient. However a challenge that arises from that overall picture is that patient data 
may be in multiple documents and all the data has to be pieced together to obtain the entire picture 
of the patient. For example volunteers are part of the patient care team and have their own book for 
recording interdisciplinary notes. Volunteers spend a lot of time with the patients and are a good source 
of psychosocial data about a patient. However we observed that the volunteer charted data was rarely 
used by other providers. The challenge of reconciling multiple data source sources is particularly significant 
for external physicians as they are not on the hospice unit as frequently as other providers. It is difficult 
for external physicians to know what individual pieces of data are needed to obtain the entire picture 
of their patient. In interviews physicians described frustration with the charting and communication 
of data and said they want to be able to come into the hospice and get an overall understanding of how 
their patient is doing without having to piece multiple data sources together or read through the entire 
chart. 4.2.2 Information Formats Clinical information must be presented in different formats depending 
on the task the information is supporting. In section 4.1.3 we described the difference between a differential 
and a provisional diagnosis. Two commonly observed information formats were supporting and contrasting 
information. Supporting information provides a Show me how or help me do this functionality. Rather than 
simply suggesting what a healthcare provider ought to do (e.g. assess for neuropathic pain, differentiate 
between two symptoms), it is also important to show them how to do it by providing access to algorithms, 
care plans, or assessment tools. Contrasting information is used to provide information to support differential 
diagnostic processes where more than one option exists. A patient may have signs or symptoms present 
in two or more disease conditions and contrasting information provides a show me why functionality for 
differentiating the diagnostic options. Decision making tools such as decision tables or trees are two 
ways of providing contrasting information.  4.2.3 Navigation and Presentation In the process considerations 
we described how an HIS to support collaborative teams needs to support the processes of different healthcare 
providers and team types as well as supporting decision making and education. A HIS to support teams 
will be very complex in terms of the quantity of processes and information made available to the users. 
We must ensure we provide adequate guidance for navigating and applying such information. Simply providing 
a plethora of information or processes without appropriate navigation will not enhance clinical practice 
but rather will overwhelm providers. Part of the fit of information with clinical practice is navigation 
that provides the right information at the right time. Navigation must also ensure that screens and interfaces 
have a flow that fits with the workflow in the setting where the HIS is being used. Healthcare providers 
also expressed a desire for information to be presented in a way that is practical for use in a clinical 
setting. Although having evidence at point of care is helpful, it is not helpful if the provider has 
to read long passages of data or if the evidence is not useful for a clinical setting. A nurse at site 
A commented that key details like doses or adverse effects of medications should be highlighted to draw 
attention to it. Two other providers, one physician and one nurse, commented that a two or three point 
overview or quick facts would be better in clinical situations with the option to get more detailed information 
if needed. A physician at site A also pointed out differences between clinical and research information. 
The physician said that evidence often needs to be filtered as it may contain references to assessment 
tools that are used in research but not in clinical practice. Evidence needs to fit the context of the 
care delivery where the evidence will be used.  4.2.4 Feedback One important information consideration 
that needs to be addressed in terms of HIS design and development is the need for systems to provide 
relevant information early in a patient s hospital stay (i.e. upon admission) - such information is used 
by individual health professionals (i.e. physicians) and health care teams to make decisions about the 
type of treatment that best addresses the patient s health needs. Once the patient is being treated the 
HIS must adapt. The HIS must provide health professionals and the teams that are involved in the patient 
s treatment with sufficient information to: (1) evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment, (2) evaluate 
the patient s responses to individual health professional interventions and interdisciplinary team ones 
[22,33]. Therefore, a HIS must provide information about a patient s health status of sufficient relevance 
so that the information can be used in selecting treatments and evaluating treatment effectiveness over 
time. This is especially important as a patient s condition my initially deteriorate during a hospital 
stay, improve in response to a treatment, remain the same or deteriorate further requiring a change in 
treatment [22]. Such decisions about changing treatment approach cannot be undertaken unless feedback 
about the patient s health status is ongoing and relevant to patient health status. We know a patient 
s condition will change over time. HISs need to be designed to be sufficiently resilient to support health 
professional and interdisciplinary team decision making as a patient s condition changes to support health 
professional and team responsiveness to the patient s health status. 4.2.5 Vocabulary As more healthcare 
delivery is provided by interdisciplinary teams a challenge is that healthcare providers have different 
vocabularies owing to different clinical backgrounds, education and experiences. If an HIS is to be used 
as part of team based care delivery it must promote a common vocabulary between different health care 
providers. A lack of common vocabulary can be a facilitator of adverse events or medical errors. The 
most significant barrier we observed was professional socialization differences that were reflected in 
conflicting communication practices and expectations. We illustrate that issue with an example from site 
C where one physician described an incident where he was waiting to discharge a patient pending the patient 
regaining sufficient physical mobility. This physician generally conducted his rounds early in the morning 
and did not physically encounter the other care team members. Instead, this physician relied on the chart 
to acquire patient information from other professionals. After several days, the nursing staff contacted 
the physician to ask why the patient had not yet been discharged. The physician explained that the patient 
did not have sufficient mobility for safe discharge. The nurses informed the physician that the patient 
had in fact been walking for days. Upon further exploration, we learned that the physiotherapist s assessments 
in the patient chart used profession-specific terms and references that were not known to the physician. 
The physiotherapist and physician were missing common ground and thus could not communicate with one 
another.  4.3 Contextual Considerations Healthcare is a very context relevant discipline and the unique 
context of where and how a HIS will be used must be taken into consideration when designing HISs. Social, 
cultural, political and policies and procedures are some of the contexts we need to consider. 4.3.1 Social 
Considerations Developing a team is not just putting a group of healthcare providers together but rather 
it requires the formation of trust and other social factors. Those factors can influence how a HIS needs 
to be designed as system requirements can be dynamic depending on the social state of the team. Physicians 
and nurses described how the establishment of trust must take place when a provider is unfamiliar with 
the other staff. A physician at site B described how part of forming a team is developing trust of what 
people can do, and also understanding what they cannot do. As trust develops, and different healthcare 
providers have common understanding about what people can and cannot do, they are more likely to defer 
decisions or duties to other providers. The degree of trust can impact the duties different providers 
are permitted to perform, which can also impact the functions they can use in a HIS. We observed that 
physicians who trusted the nurses they were working with would give the nurses a lot of independence 
with respect to dosing and provision of medications since they trusted the nurses to make the necessary 
assessments for safe treatment provision. However, if trust was not established, we observed that a nurse 
would have to phone the physician to give a patient update and to develop a treatment option. Once that 
trust was established, these conversations were much less frequent. HISs need to be designed with a certain 
amount of fluidity to enable changing of permissions for HIS functions.  4.3.2 Cultural Considerations 
Oral communication is a very common communication media, particularly among nursing staff. While oral 
communication is an effective media of information exchange for synchronous care delivery it is problematic 
for asynchronous team based care delivery where healthcare providers come and go at different times. 
Details about a patient may be discussed orally but not recorded in the chart. Patient data has to be 
recorded in the chart for legal reasons but the data is often at a higher level than what is discussed 
on the unit. Oral communication is problematic when communication needs to go beyond the clinical unit. 
Physicians from our study frequently expressed frustration because the charted data was too linear and 
lacked richness of detail. Although we may develop a HIS to support documentation there still may be 
a reliance on oral communication. The longevity of oral communication in nursing culture will not change 
overnight simply because of an HIS. A transition period will be needed to change communication from oral 
to electronic. Further a physician at site A described how making the data electronic will not on its 
own solve the documentation problem but rather it is the attitude around the documentation that needs 
to change. We cannot ignore the cultural impacts of an organization on HIS design and usage and we need 
to ensure that system designers work with providers to make the transition process as easy as possible. 
 4.3.3 Political Considerations Political implications can impact HIS design as organizations may be 
mandated to implement particular data collection tools, privacy legislation or system architectures. 
In Canada the InterRAI assessment tools are being used by many healthcare authorities as a common assessment 
instrument. Common or mandated assessment instruments must be identified so databases and data collection 
tools can be designed to support the collection of requisite data. Countries including Australia, Canada 
and the United States [10,27] have developed accreditation standards for assessing delivery of healthcare 
services. As those standards gain acceptance there will be a need to link the data requirements of the 
standards to the collection of data in clinical settings. All three study sites were from health care 
jurisdictions in Canada, where the applicable privacy legislation is the federal Personal Information 
Protection and Electronic Documents (PIPEDA) act [28]. All electronic exchange of clinical data must 
abide by PIPEDA. Many countries have developed infrastructures for designing interoperable HISs. Australia 
s national E-health transition authority (NEHTA) has the sole purpose of defining the interoperability 
standards for any future national health information system [6]. Similar efforts are under way in the 
United States where the Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel is attempting to develop standards 
for local, regional and national health information networks [19]. Many of the efforts to introduce an 
interoperable health record in Canada have originated from Canada Health Infoway [12]. Those national 
level standards and infrastructures need to be part of any HIS design to ensure that we do not design 
a landscape of silo HISs. 4.3.4 Policies and procedures Policies and procedures can impact what can 
and cannot be done in a HIS, as well as how tasks need to be done. Site B did not have a pharmacy in 
house and thus medication requests were filled by an external pharmacy. The prescription requirements 
of the external pharmacy were far more detailed what they were used to in a hospital setting. Physicians 
often faced significant cognitive challenges in placing medication orders. One medical resident said 
that prescriptions needed specific details such as the ways in which medications are packaged (vials, 
ampoules etc) and the specific doses the medication was packaged in. If the requirements of the pharmacy 
were not followed there could be a delay in the processing of the prescription. Those specific requirements 
must be understood and incorporated into the design of systems such as order entry systems. HISs also 
need to be responsive to the policies and procedures of the health care organizations (i.e. hospitals 
and regional health authorities) where they are located. In addition to providing the team with information 
that can be used to treat patients (as outlined in section 4.2.4), HISs also need to be able to provide 
feedback to teams about how they manage patients at a hospital unit level and across hospitals units 
of similar type in a regional health authority. Such information is needed in order to evaluate the quality 
of patient care provided by health care teams. This information can then be used by individual hospitals 
and regional health authorities to identify high performing teams for a given patient population. High 
performing team practices can be studied and these practices can be codified in the educational practices, 
organizational policies, procedures and health information systems of an organization ­thereby disseminated 
throughout an organization such as a hospital or regional health authority. Such knowledge could then 
used to improve the quality of patient care provided by low performing teams while at the same time recognizing 
the leadership role high performing teams have. In addition to this, such collection and presentation 
of information to teams could lead to innovation in clinical practice. Teams could evaluate their own 
performance and develop new ways of practicing whether it be evaluating evidence-based approaches to 
treatment or streamlining and reengineering processes to improve the quality of patient care support 
activities (e.g. the speed with which a medication is delivered to a patient and used as an intervention) 
[26,33].   5. DISCUSSION The typology presented in this paper described the process, information, and 
contextual considerations for the design HIS to support collaborative healthcare teams. Although much 
of the existing research on software design and architecture has focused on technical issues the key 
message from this paper is that designing HISs to support collaborative teams requires attention to numerous 
non-technical considerations. Physicians and nurses from our study stated how it is far more important 
to have the data they need be it paper or electronic as opposed to ease of getting data through automated 
means. In fact one physician at site B described how automating clinical processes without understanding 
the underlying complexity will only lead to workflow and communication issues. The physician said automating 
data collection through EHRs in complex settings like collaborative care delivery as having the potential 
to create an automated mess if the automation is not done appropriately. The findings from this paper 
have implications for the research of HISs for collaborative care delivery. Research contributions include 
illustrating the value of qualitative based methods to support requirements engineering for HIS design. 
There are limited examples of the use of GT for requirements engineering yet it was useful for understanding 
different perspectives of HIS usage by collaborative teams. The method and data sources we used in the 
study (section 3.1) provide guidance for introducing rigor into qualitative based studies. The most important 
aspect of rigor is to be able to validate concepts and processes. Meetings or interviews with healthcare 
providers are a common means of obtaining system design requirements but they only represent one perspective 
of how an HIS will be used. Meeting notes need to be validated with a perspective on systems design from 
actual day to day practice settings such as observations on the clinical ward. Further, meetings or clinical 
observations with different types of providers (e.g.. physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and therapists) 
are necessary to fully understand all the different HIS requirements. We need to get beyond debating 
about whether a qualitative or quantitative approach is better for software engineering and instead we 
need to use the approaches in a complementary manner that draws on the strengths of each approach. Qualitative 
approaches are valuable for user engagement for building in-depth models that reflect the complexity 
of a healthcare setting. The models effectively act as a hypothesis. We can then apply quantitative approaches 
to validate the hypothesis. Further research is needed to understand how quantitative and qualitative 
approaches can complement each other and lead to better design and evaluation of HISs. The typology 
also has implications for the design and evaluation of HIS to support collaborative healthcare delivery. 
We suggest the typology could serve as a meta-model for HIS design to initiate discussions for requirements 
engineering and also used for auditing failed HIS implementations. From a system design perspective the 
key aspect for each of the process considerations is to understand how the functionality of an HIS can 
implement the processes. For example continuing education and reflective practice is encouraged as a 
means of helping healthcare providers provide evidence based medicine and to improve their clinical knowledge. 
However because continuing education is removed from routine day to day clinical tasks such as charting, 
formulating diagnoses and the provision of medications, it is not something healthcare providers routinely 
think of doing. Using a HIS to provide the means of doing continuing education one computer screen away 
from the charting screen is a way of incorporating and encouraging education as part of routine practice. 
In using the typology for requirements engineering it is important not to look at it simply a checklist 
of factors. Rather a key aspect of the typology is the relationship between the process, information 
and contextual considerations. Identifying processes without the necessary information to supplement 
that process will not provide the necessary support for collaborative care delivery. An example of the 
relationship between the process and information type practice supports can be described through the 
different types of diagnoses identified in section 4.2.1. We described how decision making consists of 
two types of diagnosis, differential and provisional, and how those diagnoses have different requirements 
for information support. That knowledge helps to facilitate information retrieval so that the right information 
is retrieved for the right task. A differential diagnosis needs navigation across different diagnoses 
(via contrasting information) to facilitate differentiation of common signs or symptoms between diagnoses. 
A provisional diagnosis requires information to drill down within a diagnosis (via supporting information) 
to help confirm the diagnosis. Although many of the concepts from our typology are known requirement 
engineering challenges we have presented them in a different perspective by looking at them in the context 
of collaborative healthcare delivery. The paper has also identified some unique system design requirements 
for HISs to support collaborative care delivery. As described in section 4.1.2 there are different types 
of teams and the team type will impact the communication and collaboration requirements. Further, the 
social status of a team may influence roles and mandates. Thus a HIS to support collaborative healthcare 
teams must allow flexibility in the design as roles and responsibilities can be dynamic. Common standards 
for vocabulary are also needed to ensure that charted data is understood by all team members. However 
we need to make a distinction between interoperable HISs and interoperable people. Standard terminologies 
such as SNOMED and semantic frameworks have improved system interoperability at the data level but interoperable 
people who access and use the data at the clinical process level are still an issue. There is little 
benefit in designing interoperable systems if the people using them are not interoperable. The key implication 
of this research on HIS design for collaborative care delivery is that HISs need to play a role as a 
communication facilitator and not just an integrator and transmitter of data. EHRs transmit data but 
that does not mean they support collaboration. Numerous healthcare providers in our study described how 
it was not enough to just get access to information. Instead they want access to the right data for the 
right process at the right time. HISs for interdisciplinary teams must support tasks such as problem 
solving in a collaborative manner and not just disseminate different information to different providers. 
While the latter might satisfy individual information needs, it does not necessarily facilitate collaboration. 
HISs can also play a role in providing proactive feedback to healthcare teams to ensure teams provide 
care that is responsive to a patient s changing needs. A shortcoming in our research is our typology 
has not been modeled in a formal language nor has it been empirically tested. As described earlier the 
model represents a hypothesis of collaborative healthcare delivery and now we need to test the model. 
We plan to address that need by using the typology to develop a formal ontological model using ontology 
formalisms such as Basic Formal Ontology and Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO syntax). We also intend 
to model in the typology in OWL as the basis for a prototype web based HIS to support collaborative teams 
for two of the settings we studied. One other limitation of this research is it was based on collaborative 
care delivery in three settings and other process, information, and contextual considerations may emerge 
in other settings.  6. CONCLUSION Although healthcare delivery is increasingly being provided by collaborative 
teams there are few health informatics applications that are designed to support team based healthcare 
delivery. We cannot engineer one size fits all HISs for collaborative teams owing to the complexities 
between different types of teams and how team based care is provided. HISs such as decision support or 
information management systems need to be tailored to the specific providers and settings where they 
will be used. We also need to ensure the regional and national landscapes are factored into systems design 
to ensure that we design systems that are interoperable with regional and national informatics infrastructures. 
This paper presented a typology of processes, information, and contextual considerations related to HIS 
design to support collaborative teams. The typology is a starting point for requirements engineering 
to support the design and evaluation of HIS applications to support collaborative care delivery.  7. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the three healthcare settings for allowing us to study them. We acknowledge 
research support from Lara Varpio, Pippa Hall, Lynn Casimiro and the Academic Health Council. We also 
acknowledge funding support from the National Science and Engineering Research Council.  8. REFERENCES 
[1] Alvarez G, Coiera E. Interdisciplinary communication: An uncharted source of medical error? Journal 
of Critical Care. 2006, 21, 236 242. [2] Arocha JF,Wang D, Patel VL. Identifying reasoning strategies 
in medical decision making: a methodological guide. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2005, 38,154­ 
[3] Ash JS, Berg M, Coeira E. Some Unintended Consequences of Information Technology in Health Care: 
The Nature of Patient Care Information System-related Errors. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2004;11:104 112 
[4] Ash J, Berg M. Report of conference track 4: socio­technical issues of HIS. Int J Med Inf 2003;69:305 
6 [5] Ash JS, Guappone KP. Qualitative evaluation of health information exchange efforts. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 2007, 40:S33-S39 [6] Australia National E-Health Transition Authority. Available 
at: http://www.nehta.gov.au/. Last Accessed: January 18, 2010 [7] Avison, D. and T. Young, Time to rethink 
health care and ICT? Communications of the ACM, 2007. 50(6) [8] Balka E, Bjorn P, Wagner I. Proceedings 
of the ACM 2008 conference on Computer supported cooperative work, pp 515-524 [9] Bass, L., Clements, 
P., Kazman, R., Software Architecture in Practice, Addison-Wesley, 2003 [10] Braithwaite J., Westbrook 
J., Pawsey M et al. A prospective, multi-method, multi-disciplinary, multi-level, collaborative, social-organisational 
design for researching health sector accreditation. BMC Health Services Research 2006, 6:113 [11] Campbell 
EM, Sittig DF, Ash JS, Guappone KP, Dykstra RH. Types of unintended consequences related to computerized 
provider order entry. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2006;13:547 56 [12] Canada Health Infoway. http://www.infoway­inforoute.ca/lang-en/ 
Last Accessed:January 18, 2010 [13] Carroll JM, Rosson MB, Farooq U, Xiao L. Beyond being aware. Information 
and Organization 19 (2009) 162 185 [14] Choi, B.C.K., &#38; Pak, A.W.P. (2006). Multidisciplinarity, 
interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in health research, services, education and policy: 1. Definitions, 
objectives, and evidence of effectiveness. Clinical and Investigative Medicine, 29(6), 351-364. [15] 
Choi, B.C.K., &#38; Pak, A.W.P. (2007). Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity 
in health research, services, education and policy: 2. Promotors, barriers, and strategies of enhancement. 
Clinical and Investigative Medicine, 30(6), E224-E232 [16] Ditrich Y, John M., Singer J. et al. For the 
Special issue on Qualitative Software Engineering Research, Information and Software Technology 2007,49: 
531 539 [17] Dorr DA, Jones SS, Wilcox A. A framework for information system usage in collaborative care. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics 2007, 40: 282 287 [18] Edwards A, Fitzpatrick LA, Augustine S, Trzebucki 
A, Cheng SL, Presseau C, Mersmann C, Heckman B, Kachnowski S. Synchronous communication facilitates interruptive 
workflow for attending physicians and nurses in clinical settings. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 
2009, 78(9):,629-637 [19] Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel http://www.ansi.org/standards_activities/standards_boards_ 
panels/hisb/hitsp.aspx?menuid=3 last accessed January 18, 2010 [20] Heeks R. Health information systems: 
Failure, success and improvisation. International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2006; 75:125 137 [21] 
Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the twenty-first century.Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press; 2001. [22] Kane, R. L., Ouslander, J. G., Abrass, I. B. (1994). Essentials 
of clincal geriatrics. McGraw Hill: Toronto [23] Kawamoto K, Houlihan CA, Balas EA, Lobach DF. Improving 
clinical practice using clinical decision support systems: a systematic review of trials to identify 
features critical to success. BMJ 2005; 330 (7494): 765-772 [24] Kuziemsky, C.E., Weber-Jahnke, J.H., 
Lau, F., Downing, G.M.,An Interdisciplinary Computer Based Information Tool for Palliative Severe Pain 
Management. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2008, 15(3): 374-382, May-June. 
[25] Malholtra S, Jordan D, Shortliffe E, Patel V. Workflow modeling in critical care: Piecing together 
your own puzzle. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2007, 40:81 92 [26] McLaughlin, C. P. &#38; Kaluzny, 
A. D. (2006). Continuous quality improvement in health care: Theory, implementations and applications 
(3rd. ed.). Jones and Barlett: New York [27] Nicklin W, Dickson S. The Value and Impact of Accreditation 
in Heathcare: A Review of the Literature. Accreditation Canada, 2008, accessed from http://www.accreditation.ca/uploadedFiles/Value%20of%2 
0Accreditation_EN.pdf, last accessed January 12, 2010 [28] PIPEDA, Government of Canada, Health Information 
Custodians in the Province of Ontario Exemption Order, 2001. http://canadagazette.gc.ca/partII/2005/20051214/html/sor3 
99-e.html, accessed January, 2010. [29] Pirnejad H, Roland B, Berg M. Building an inter­organizational 
communication network and challenges for preserving interoperability. International Journal of. Medical 
Informatics 2008, 77(12): 818-827 [30] Reddy MC, Shabot MM, Bradner E. Evaluating collaborative features 
of critical care systems: A methodological study of information technology in surgical intensive care 
units. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2008, 41:479 487. [31] Reddy MS, Spence PR. Collaborative 
information seeking: A field study of a multidisciplinary patient care team. Information Processing and 
Management 2008;44:242 255 [32] Schon D. The reflective practitioner: How profssionals think in action. 
1983, New York: Basic Books. [33] Shortell, S. M. &#38; Kaluzny, A. D. (2006). Health care management: 
Organization design and behaviour (5th. Ed.). Thompson Delmar Learning: United States [34] Strauss A, 
Corbin J. Basics of qualitative research: grounded theory procedures and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage Publications; 1990. [35] Zhang HE, Investigating the Gap between Quantitative and Qualitative/Semi-quantitative 
Software Process Simulation Models: An Explorative Study. ICSP 2009, LNCS 5543, pp. 198 211, 2009  
			