
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D. Goldsman A WORKFLOW ANALYSIS AND DESIGN ENVIRONMENT (WADE) Perakath C. Benjamin Charles Marshall Richard 
J. Mayer Knowledge Based Systems, Inc, 1500 University Drive East College Station, TX 77840. U.S.A. 
 ABSTRACT This paper presents the architecture of a Workjlow Analysis and Design Environment (WADE) that 
will provide robust support for simulation-based design of next-generation workflow systems. The architecture 
s utility will be illustrated by showing its use to design and analyze material ordering and control 
system workflow. INTRODUCTION The utility of simulation for the design and analysis of complex systems 
has been well documented (Pegden et al. 90). Workflow systems are an emerging infrastructure technology 
that facilitates the execution and control of work in real time. There are several advanced tools that 
support simulation and workflow. However, there is a dearth of robust support to integrate simulation 
with workflow systems. This paper presents the architecture of a Workjlow Analysis and Design Environment 
(WADE) that will provide robust support for simulation-based design of next-generation workflow systems. 
We will illustrate the architecture s utility by showing its use to design and analyze the workflow of 
a material ordering and control system. Workflow systems provide operational semantics to process descriptions. 
In a word, they execute process models. Different workflow engines execute different process models. 
Different process models focus on different aspects of processes. Some are designed for complex decision 
making and therefore encapsulate rules and logic needed for decision support, while other process models 
work with relatively routine and recurring processes and incorporate greater detail about individual 
activities within the process. Workflow systems are limited by tie nature of the process models they 
suppom. highly repetitive tasks vs. ad-hoc kinds of processes. Workflow systems also provide varying 
levels of both exception handling and monitoring and management reporting capabilities. Some workflow 
systems are integrated with Graphical User Interfaces (GUIS) or forms packages, some with imaging systems, 
Some workflow systems manage application data while others do not. No one workflow system is equally 
strong in all areas (BuNer and Jablonski 1994, Cleetus 1994, McCarthy et al. 1993). Workflow systems 
can be divided into what we can call departmental systems and enterprise systems. Departmental systems 
are usually built aroundl a central workflow server which contains a database of process descriptions 
and the workflow engine. Clients execute the activities in the workflow process as specified by the workflow 
process description at the server. Enterprise systems are more often Electronic Mail based. Often, the 
workflow process description is passed from client to client along with the speeific work. Despite rapid 
advances in the past few years, contemporary workflow software systems have been observed to have several 
limitations: Limited knowledge acquisition and knowledge representation suppofi lack of mechanisms for 
acquiring knowledge (especially process knowledge) and representing this knowledge in a form that is 
computer-processable (for automated reasoning).  Inadequate graphical support graphical support provided 
by existing systems is unsophisticated, non standard, and often difficult to understand.  Inadequate 
design support: there is little automated support to assist the design and development of workflow applications. 
 Limited analysis support: there is a lack of support for the (qualitative and quantitative) analysis 
of workflow system performance.  Lack of integration: workflow systems are not integrated with business 
process analysis and design tools, resulting in workflow process designs that are incompatible with the 
business processes they are supposed to support.  597 Benjamin, Marshall, and Mayer Workflow and simulation 
technology are important enabling technologies for the effective application of Business Process Reengineering 
(BPR) and Continuous Process Improvement (CPI) techniques (Hammer and Champy 1993). Simulation plays 
an important enabling role in BPR and CPI and has been successfully used to assist process improvement 
efforts in several different tasks including 1) measuring the performance of existing systems, 2) identifying 
improvement opportunities, 3) evaluating the effect of alternative operational policies on system performance 
(what if analysis), and 4) comparing alternative system designs. The role of simulation as a BPR enabler 
has been well documented (Mayer et al. 1995). Recent advances in information technology, such as workflow, 
have opened up new opportunities to use simulation more effectively to facilitate process improvement 
and change management. Workflow technology appears to have the potential to leverage the benefits of 
simulation for the design and analysis of work. Because the study of processes (in essence, how things 
work) is an integral part of BPR and CPI efforts, there is much to be gained by combining the power of 
these two technology areas. Motivated by this opportunity, we have leveraged the results of our research 
on knowledge based simulation to formulate an architecture that embeds a simulation-based expert system 
within a workflow environment (Mayer 1988, Benjamin et al. 1993, and Erraguntla et al. 1994). The resulting 
WADE software has significant application potential in many areas including BPR and CPI, production systems 
design and analysis, workflow design and analysis, and change management systems. 2 WADE PHILOSOPHY AND 
CONCEPT OF OPERATION WADE is intended to support the design and analysis of workflow systems in the context 
of continually evolving business processes. Just as the industry has recognized the need for concurrent 
engineering of products and manufacturing processes that produce those products, WADE supports a philosophy 
of concurrent design of the business process with the workflow process that must support the business 
process. In today s environment, the business process is developed by process owners or business stakeholders, 
whereas the workflow process is developed by the information systems engineers and programmers. Bringing 
concurrency to these activities results in business processes that take maximum advantage of the workflow 
automation and workflow processes that conform to the business goals. Workflow simulation models are 
used to analyze and improve workflow processes. Workflow execution models are used to execute the work 
within the context of an information system (a set of applications). The relationship between business 
process models, workflow models and the analysis data generated ffom these models is summarized in Figure 
1. + -----­ ~~ --------­ ~~ -----Mcdds -----­ ----, , Par Data B Pmass_m BQSineSFTOmSS simlla!ionma 1 
 wc&#38;fknvP@aa.s9 wcmkIlOwsidalim w~ workPe6mmm% Figure 1: Relationships Between Business Models and 
Workflow Models WADE is a design and engineering analysis environment intended to support concurrent 
engineering of the business process and the workflow process which supports that business process. This 
section describes the concept of operation of WADE, that is, the activities performed by a typical WADE 
user while designing and analyzing business process workflows. A simple material acquisition process 
is used to illustrate the concepts and structure the discussion. Consider the (simplified) procurement 
process for inventory material at Enterprise XYZ. Material is requested by different functional _ within 
the organization. Material requests are routed to the procurement department. If the requested item is 
available (that is, in stock ), the item is issued out and the inventory records are updated. If, on 
the other hand, the material is not available, a vendor is identified and a purchase order is generated 
and sent out to the supplier(s). Once the ordered material is received, it is sent to the requester. 
The finance department then makes payment for the purchased material. Suppose that the purchase manager 
at XYZ would like to 1) model the procurement process, 2) analyze the process for determining improvement 
opportunities, 3) design an enhanced procurement process based on the simulation-based analysis, 4) model 
the workflow process, 5) use simulation analysis to improve the workflow process, 6) build a workflow 
execution model to automate the process, 7) use data generated through the execution of work (and recorded 
by the worktlow engine ) to control the work, and 8) analyze the work data (generated by the execution 
of work) to determine potential improvements to the workflow process. Figure 2 summarizes the activities 
involved in designing and analyzing workflows in the context of a business process. WADE 599 Note that 
although the diagram suggests a precedence ordering between the activities, these analysis and design 
activities are invoked iteratively and opportunistically in actual workflow analysis and design situations, 
depending on the context of application. R-----:@ Workaow execution , models Execufc work d, 8 work 
I ~ execution1 enhmxmem tiomm= -ii 2.2 Design Business Process Simulation Model Designing a business 
process simulation model starting  &#38; iiii!i TiEh 8 1 1 I I , I k Wolktlow I :busi , simkionJ ~si~-.1, 
~ ,4!,,. u BP -, hmktion b­ -E -- * d Performance &#38;Yents Figure 2: WADE Concept of Operation he 
following sections describe the type of support that WADE provides for these activities. 2.1 Acquire 
Business Process Descriptions The knowledge of the focus business processes must be acquired from domain 
experts and stored in a representation format. WADE facilitates the acquisition of this information using 
the IDEF3 process description capture language (KBSI 1992). IDEF3 provides intuitive and structured mechanisms 
to acquire knowledge about how things work in a system. Also, IDEF3 has a graphical language that provides 
a standard format for displaying and communicating such process knowledge. As noted manager would like 
to procurement process. powerful technique for (Pegden et al. 1990). earlier, XYZ S procurement determine 
how to improve the Discrete event simulation is a analyzing business processes WADE supports the design 
of simulation It is descriptions belief and models starting from process descriptions. important to 
make the distinction between and models. Descriptions are recordings of are either true or false (that 
is, they have truth value ). Models on the other hand, are idealizations of the world that are developed 
for a particular purpose (or to address a specific set of goals) (Mayer 1988). Models are not true or 
false, rather they are valid or invalid, with respect to the modeling goals. A valid model is one that 
satisfies the gords for which it is built. With reference to the WADE concept of operation, the product 
of the description acquisition activity is independent of the modeling goals. In the procurement example, 
the goal of building the business process model is to analyze the process to determine improvement opportunities. 
Here, we use business process model to refer to the discrete-event simulation model developed from the 
business process description. from a business process description involves several inter-related model 
design activities such as identifying the relevant activities that need to be modeled and specifying 
their attribute values, designing the model flow logic, designing the model control logic, etc. The BP 
Model Designer component of the WADE architecture (Section 3) provides support for these (business process) 
simulation model design tasks. An IDEF3-based model of the procurement business process is shown in Figure 
3. The labeled boxes (Request Material, etc.) represent distinct real-world activities that are individuated 
for the simulation model design. The box with an X in Figure 3 represents a decision situation: in the 
XYZ example, the decision logic is: if the inventory level is greater than the requested material quantity 
then (perform) Transfer Material else (perform) Generate Purchase Order This logic specification will 
be subsequently encoded in the language of the target simulation engine. The bordered text box beneath 
the Receive Material activity box (Figure 3) shows the kinds of additional information that may be recorded 
about the an activity. Thus, the name of the entity that participates in this activity is Material, the 
name of the Resource that is needed to perform this activity is Receiving Officer, and the duration of 
the activity is 10 minutes. m 1. I CenMme realm Ordu Rcqxa!t.faldd Paymmt Mylltctiul Omcfa llmx 10nlilluted 
l mrMfa IIKamng +-cl+ Figure 3: IDEF3-Based Description of the XYZ Procurement Process  Benjamin, Marshall, 
and May= After the simulation model has been designed, it is converted to a target simulation language. 
 2.3 Execute Business Process Simulation The business process model is executed under a set of pre-specified 
experimental conditions. The executions yield output data that is recorded and compiled. These tasks 
are supported by the Simulation Engine component of the WADE architecture. Other WADE functions include 
accessing and editing model information, viewing key performance metrics while the simulation executes, 
and observing animations of the model. The output data from the simulation is analyzed and interpreted 
with reference to the modeling goals. For example, if the specific objective of the XYZ manager was to 
determine bottleneck resources in the procurement process, the manager might examine the resource utilization 
statistics produced by the simulation. Resources with very high utilization are candidate bottlenecks. 
Bottleneck resources, will, in turn suggest ways to improve the business process through resource re-assignment, 
job enrichment training, etc. The results of the simulation output analysis are often used to make process 
reengineering decisions. Suppose that the utilization of the Receiving Officer is found to be 97%. Suppose 
further that there are two Purchase Agents assigned to the activity Generate Purchase Order and that 
their average utilization is only 30%. The situation suggests that one of the Purchase Agents is re-assigned 
(with some retraining, if necessary) to the Receive Material activity.  2.4 Acquire Workflow Process 
Descriptions Workflow processes are normally distinguished from the more general business process in 
that they are generally centered around the flow of a single information artifact (work-item) that triggers, 
enables, or controls an instance of the business process. In more complex cases, a work­item in a workflow 
may tie together multiple business processes. Thus, workflow processes support the execution of the business 
process. In WADE, knowledge about the workflow processes is acquired using the IDEF3 process description 
capture method. Workflow process descriptions contain information about the workflow applications that 
are used within the enterprise operational environment, the information needed to launch these applications, 
and routings between these applications. Workflow processes are subsumed by the business processes that 
they support. Often, business process descriptions are acquired prior to the workflow process descriptions 
(see the dotted arrow in Figure 2). In fact, following a re-engineering of the business processes the 
workflow processes must often be designed from scratch. A distinguishing feature of WADE is that it 
provides automated support for the generation of workflow models, starting from workflow process descriptions. 
WADE supports the generation of two kinds of workflow models: 1) workflow simulation models (Section 
2.5) and 2) worldlow execution models (Section 2.7). The first enables the quantitative analysis of the 
workflow process design. The second enables the automatic programming of the workflow controllers in 
the enterprise information infrastructure. We describe the difference between workflow process models 
and business process models. Recall that there are two kinds of workflow models that are generated by 
WADE: workflow simulation models and workflow execution models. We will describe the difference between 
1) business process simulation models and Workflow simulation models and 2) workflow simulation models 
and workflow execution models. A business process simulation model is a specification of a business process 
that can be executed by a discrete event simulation engine. It must thus encode enough structure and 
contain enough information that simulation executions will produce sufficient data to answer the simulation 
analysis questions. Therefore, in the context of a BPR situation, the business process model must have 
sufficient fidelity to generate metrics such as resource utilizations, mean process times, mean wait 
times, etc. A workflow simulation model, on the other hand, is developed to execute a simulation that 
mimics that flow of work between different workflow applications. The data generated by such models must 
enable the answering of questions about performance measure of the workflow applications, such as mean 
processing time for an application, mean queue time of a document at an application, etc. The main difference 
between business process simulation models and worMow process simulation models is the difference in 
the kinds of analysis questions they seek to answer. Business process simulations generate data to answer 
questions about the performance of a business process; worMow process simulations provide data to answer 
worMow application performance questions. Workflow execution models are workflow specifications that 
are executable by a worMow engine. They contain enough information so that the flow of work between the 
applications occurs as required of the operational environment in real time. The main difference between 
a worMow simulation model and a worMow execution model is the kind of information contained in these 
models and the level of detail. A worMow execution model will contain information such WADE as me routing 
of work between applications, the information needed to launch applications (such as input data passed 
to an application), exception handling information (for example, if an application crashes, send a notification 
to the system administrator). Workflow execution models are often human in the loop models, requiring 
human involvement during an execution cycle. A workflow simulation model contains information such as 
processing times and resource requirements for various workflow process steps. Their execution typically 
requires little human intervention (for non mission critical workflow applications). 2.5 Design Worktlow 
Simulation Models A workflow simulation model is a representation of a process that can be directly executed 
by a discrete-event simulation engine. Workflow simulation models are useful in analyzing and designing 
workflow systems. Activities of workflow simulation model design supported by WADE are similar to those 
listed in Section 2.2 (for the BP simulation model design), the difference being in the type of information 
specified to support the workflow system-specific analysis goals. Workflow simulation model design is 
supported by the Workflow Model Designer component of the WADE architecture. 2.6 Execute Worktlow Simulations 
Workflow simulation models are executed under controlled experimental conditions. The executions yield 
output data that is recorded and compiled. These task are supported by the Simulation Engine component 
of the WADE architecture. Commercially available workflow simulators allow model editing, animation, 
and graphical display of performance statistics. Analysis of the workflow simulation data is performed 
to identify potential improvements to (or problems in) the workflow description. Such analysis may be 
performed 1) for the design of new workflow systems and 2) for the redesign of existing workflow systems. 
 2.7 Design Workflow Execution Models A workflow execution model is a representation of a workflow process 
that can be directly executed by a workflow engine. An IDEF3-based description of the workfiow execution 
model specification for the Generate Purchase Order activity is shown in Figure 4. Note, that in general, 
workflow systems will cut across multiple business functions. Thus, the workflow specification illustrated 
in this example may need to be extended to include accounts receivable and invoicing (business) processes 
associated with activity boxes Receive Material and Send Payment in Figure 3. Oenerate Purchase Or&#38;r 
Ll­ ..  - ---c&#38;l oot Jnventmy Pmhasc &#38; Record ) \ m -+l=zl Figure 4: Example of a Workflow Execution 
Model Therefore, the design of a worlcflow model starting from a business process description thus involves 
specifying sufficient information to enable the encoding of the workflow application. In particular, 
workflow model design involves activities such as identifying the information objects that are managed 
by the work and their attributes, identifying the sequence of the workflow, characterizing the information 
transformations that are performed during the work performance, etc. 2.8 Execute Workflow The workflow 
model specifications are used to generate the workflow system. The worlcflow system is used to automate 
the flow of work. A sample sequence of work activities that will be invoked by XYZ s procurement process 
workflow system are: 1) receive the material request information, 2) determine that a purchase order 
must be placed, 3) retrieve material information from the Inventory Database, 4) retrieve supplier information 
from the Supplier Database, 5) merge information from 3) and 4) to create a purchase order, and 6) dispatch 
the electronic purchase order through XYZ S Value Added Network (VAN) to suppliers. Note that these activities 
may only be partly automated. For example, the decision to place an order (Step W2) may require a human 
to sign-off. While the work is being executed by the workflow system, data is collected to measure the 
performance of work. For example, the durations (times to complete) of the activities are recorded. Statistical 
analysis such as distribution fitting and determination of mean and standard deviations are performed 
on the workflow data (for example, on the Benjamin, Marshall, and Mayei­ activity time data). This type 
of data is then fed back for use by the workflow simulation models (Figure 2). The analysis of performance 
data may also lead to the identification of workflow and business process improvement opportunities. 
Data analysis activities are supported by the Data Analyzer component of WADE. WADE ARCHITECTURE The 
conceptual architecture of WADE is shown in Figure 5. WADE is a distributed software system that provides 
intelligent assistance for the design and analysis of workflow systems. WADE can be plugged in to different 
enterprises. The enterprise information systems that WADE supports are shown in Figure 5. (Note that 
several WADE components have been implemented.) The main components of the WADE architecture are described 
in the-following paragraphs. WADE Graphical User Interface F,:w Designer ResultWorkrlow InterpreterEngine 
n Simulation n Engine u Enterprise Information Systems n -1 Figure 5: WADE Architecture The Knowledge 
Acquisition Module facilitates the capture and maintenance of process knowledge about the business processes 
and the associated workflows, This component is based on the IDEF3 process description capture language. 
It allows for the description of activities, the precedence and logical relationships between activities, 
and the objects that participate in these activities. The knowledge captured by this module will be used 
as the basis for subsequent business model and workflow model design activities. This module has been 
implemented as a commercial tool, PROCAPTM. The Business Process (BP) model designer provides assistance 
for the design of a business process (simulation) model starting with an IDEF3-based process description 
and a set of analysis questions to be answered. The activities involved in simulation model design are 
described in Section 2. This module has been implemented as a commercial tool, PRoSIMTM. The Simulation 
Engine provides support for the execution of discrete event simulation and the compilation of simulation 
output for analysis. AT&#38;T s simulation tool, WITNESSTM, executes code that is automatically generated 
by the PROSIM model designer. The simulation engine can be used to simulate both business process simulation 
models and workflow process simulation models. The Workflow Model Designer provides intelligent assistance 
for the design of 1) workflow simulation models and 2) workflow execution models, starting from IDEF3-based 
descriptions of the workflow processes. The Workflow Engine provides support for the execution of workflow. 
This component will execute the specifications generated by the Workflow Model Designer. The activities 
supported by the Workflow Engine include 1) invoking different work applications, 2) routing work between 
different work applications, 3) maintaining work status information, and 4) performing other process 
control functions such as error notification, failure recovery, etc. The Data Analyzer provides different 
kinds of data analysis support. Data analysis is used for 1) analyzing work performance data generated 
by the workflow systems and 2) analyzing output data generated from workflow simulations and business 
process simulations. The Result Interpreter assists in the interpretation of the simulation data and 
the presentation of the analysis results in a form that facilitates decision making. The Enterprise Information 
Systems box shown in Figure 5 refers to the set of software applications and databases that are invoked 
by the Workflow Engine. The Workflow Engine automatically manages the invocation of these application 
services in a distributed computing environment. Note that these applications and databases are not part 
of WADE or the workflow system itself. Rather, they are part of the user enterprise environment. The 
workflow system manages the sequencing and often the marshaling of necessary data for the applications. 
 4 BENEFITS AND POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS Implementations of the WADE architecture have the potential to 
benefit different kinds of users. Potential WADE applications include: WADE 1. Enterprise Planning: 
WADE facilitates model­based planning of enterprises. Process models can be used as the basis for analysis 
and planning tasks relevant to enterprise planning. 2. Business Process Reengineering: The model based 
analysis capabilities of WADE help with 1) identifying opportunities for BPR and 2) evaluating alternative 
business process designs. 3. Enterprise Change Management: Real time data collected by the workflow 
and feedback to the analysis and design components of WADE provide powerful mechanisms for change management 
at the enterprise level. With WADE, tomorrow s enterprise engineers can use models of the business to 
monitor and control operations of the business on an ongoing basis. 4. WorMow Systems Engineering: Process 
modeling and simulation technology can be used synergistically in the WADE environment to design and 
engineer workflow systems. WADE will help with both the rapid prototyping of new workflow systems and 
the reengineenng of existing worlctlow systems in response to a rapidly changing business environment. 
 REFERENCES Benjamin P. C., F. Fillion, R. J. Mayer, and T. M. Blinn. 1993. Intelligent support for 
simulation modeling: a description-driven approach. In Proceedings of the 1993 Summer Simulation Conference, 
273-277. Proceedings of the Business Process and Workjlow Conference (BPWC), Orlando, Florida, February 
1995. BIS Strategic Decisions, NorWell, MA. Buf31er, C., and Jablonski, S. 1994. An approach to integrate 
workflow modeling and organization modeling in an enterprise. In IEEE Proceedings of Third Workshop on 
Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 81-95. Morgantown, WV: IEEE Computer 
Society Press. Cleetus, K. K. 1994. Working group report on enterprise modeling and workflow management. 
In IEEE Proceedings of Third Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 
3-13. Morgantown, WV: IEEE Computer Society Press. Erraguntla, M., P. C. Benjamin, and R, J. Mayer. 1994. 
An architecture of a knowledge-based simulation engine. In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation 
Conference, 673-680. Hammer, M. and J. Charrtpy. 1993. Reengineering the corporation: a manifesto for 
business evolution, New York: Harper Collins Publishers. Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1992. 
ZDEF3 process description capture method report. Report 603 prepared for the U.S. Air Force Human Resources 
Laboratory, Contract No. F33615-C-90-0012. May, T. A. 1994. Know your workflow tools. Byte. July: 103-108 
Mayer, R. J. 1988. Cognitive skills in modeling and simulation. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Industrial 
Engineering, Texas A&#38;M University, College Station, TX. Mayer, R. J., P. C. Benjamin, B. E. Caraway, 
and M. K. Painter. 1995. A framework and a suite of methods for business process re-engineering. In Business 
Process Reengineering: A Managerial Perspective, 245-290. Idea Publishing Group, Harrisburg, PA. Pegden 
C. D., R. E. Shannon, and R. P. Sadowski. 1990. Introduction to simulation using SIMAM, McGraw Hill: 
New York. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES PERAKATH C. BENJAMIN received a Master of Science degree in Industrial Engineering 
from the National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering in 1983. He received his Ph.D. in 
Industrial Engineering from Texas A&#38;M University in May 1991, As Vice President (Innovation and Engineering) 
at KBSI he manages and directs the organizations research and development projects. CHARLES MARSHALL 
received a Master of Science degree in Computer and Information Science (Artificial Intelligence) from 
the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1973. Before joining KBSI as a Research Scientist in 1994, 
Mr. Marshall worked as a sotlware engineer, focusing on internal applications of artificial intelligence 
to electronics manufacturing, specifically new product introduction and technology transfer from universities 
to industry, His research interests include knowledge representation, distributed systems, ontology, 
process modeling and workflow systems, organizational design, integration architectures for modeling, 
and computer aided software engineering environments. RICHARD J. MAYER received a Master of Science degree 
in Industrial Engineering from Purdue University in 1977. In 1988, he received a Ph.D. in Industrial 
Engineering from Texas A&#38;M University. From 1984 to 1989, he was Project Manager and Principal Investigator 
on thirty-nine funded research efforts in the Knowledge Based Systems Laboratory. He founded KBSI in 
1988 and has received funding for applications in engineering design assistance, systems analysis and 
concurrent engineering methods and tools. Currently, he is an Associate Professor of Industrial Engineering 
at Texas A&#38;M University.  
			