
 Achieving Rapid Service Deployment in an Academic Environment Shea Nangle University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign 1304 West Springfield, MC-256, Urbana, Illinois, 61801 1-217-244-7374 nangle@uiuc.edu 
ABSTRACT Rapid product or service deployment is most commonly thought of in the corporate, rather than 
academic, environment. Utilizing a rapid deployment process and a number of highly dedicated team members, 
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign deployed a new email system for approximately 10,000 users 
in 2 months after delivery during 2002. We were able to do this without the large influx of additional 
personnel often seen in corporate deployment projects. Before the deployment, we developed and tested 
auxiliary software needed to support the email system. Utilizing the assistance of vendor-supplied professional 
services, user accounts and user data were migrated from the legacy email system to the new email system. 
One of the keys to the success of this rapid implementation was use of the implementation timeline as 
one of the criteria for the selection of the new email system. Such factors as working the timeline into 
the decision process and partnering with vendors are applicable to other projects as well. The paper 
will provide guidelines for application of the rapid deployment process for other projects and institutions. 
In addition to identifying benefits of the rapid deployment process, this paper will discuss weaknesses 
in the process, as well as process improvements that will be made for future rapid deployments. Also 
addressed will be planned deployment of the new email system for an additional 40,000 users on our campus, 
in light of lessons learned in the initial deployment.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.1 [Management 
of Computing and Information Systems]: Project and People Management strategic information systems planning, 
staffing. General Terms Management Keywords Email, service deployment, project management, colleges 
and universities, rapid deployment. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 03, September 21 24, 2003, San Antonio, Texas, USA. Copyright 
2003 ACM 1-58113-665-X/03/0009 $5.00. 1. INTRODUCTION In the summer of 2002, a new email system was deployed 
for roughly 10,000 students at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The deployment 
was accomplished in roughly 2 months after delivery of hardware and software for the email system. Analysis 
of the processes used for this deployment identified several best practices and an overall system for 
service deployment, which will be applied for the campus-wide deployment of the new email system, as 
well as for future service deployment projects. 2. INSTITUTION AND PROJECT BACKGROUND The UIUC email 
system supports roughly 50,000 email users, including students, faculty, and staff. In 2001, it was decided 
that the existing email system, which had been in place for roughly 7 years, was due for replacement. 
Maintaining accounts for the approximately 10,000 new students estimated for the Fall 2002 would have 
required a significant financial investment in labor to operate the general purpose Unix servers used 
for email. Additionally, significant development effort would have been required in order to provide 
users with expected email service features, such as a more feature-rich and stable web interface. As 
a result, the decision was made to implement the new email system in time for use by students at the 
opening of the Fall 2002 semester. Migration of user accounts for the new system from the legacy system 
was necessary, as accounts had already been created automatically when the students were accepted to 
the university. While these accounts were capable of receiving email and being used by the account holders, 
most of the students would not access their accounts until the opening of the Fall 2002 semester. 3. 
PRODUCT EVALUATION AND SELECTION Evaluation of potential email products began in the winter of 2001. 
During the product evaluation phase of the project, project team members experienced significant amounts 
of downtime while waiting for items such as product delivery and communications from vendors. This downtime 
was devoted to planning and development of preliminary versions of utility software, such as account 
provisioning/management and system monitoring, which would be needed for the initial deployment. This 
planning and initial development was done for each of the two leading email products. Permission was 
granted by the vendors for extended evaluation of software, which allowed UIUC-developed utility software 
to be debugged and readied for deployment along with the email service, especially given the amount of 
time devoted to the RFP and purchasing process. In order to ensure that the new email system could be 
deployed in the relatively short amount of time required, the decision was made to heavily weight the 
time to deployment for each product considered in the product selection process. During the evaluation 
and bidding process, the deployment needs for the system were clearly defined to the competing vendors, 
in order to enable each vendor to accurately estimate the amount of time that it would take to deploy 
the system and migrate data for the required users. These vendor estimates of deployment times were used 
along with UIUC time estimates for internal tasks needed for the deployment in order to generate implementation 
scenarios. 4. DEPLOYMENT For migration of user data from the legacy email system to the new system, 
the decision was made to outsource the migration to the professional services organization provided by 
the vendor. While the use of the professional services organization was an unaccustomed expense, the 
decision to outsource migration to the vendor was made based on the amount of time that would be required 
to internally develop the software that would be required to migrate users to the new email system. The 
vendor s professional services organization came to the table with already developed applications and 
utilities for migration needs. This allowed UIUC personnel to devote time to other tasks related to the 
deployment of the email service, such as development of management and maintenance software for the email 
system and customization of the email web interface. The software applications used by the vendor s professional 
services organization were primarily pre-built applications. This resulted in less availability of custom 
features to handle specific needs of the environment presented by UIUC. One of the primary reasons for 
choosing to outsource the migration tasks to a professional services group was to provide UIUC staff 
with additional time to spend on other tasks related to the project deployment, such as hardware installation 
and configuration. However, the migration process still required that some UIUC staff be entirely available 
to assist the professional services consultant during the actual migration process. This required that 
the members of the deployment team work entirely on the migration for roughly five days near the end 
of the deployment process, rather than being able to devout time to other deployment tasks. While this 
time commitment is significantly less than it would have been if the deployment had been handled entirely 
by UIUC staff, it still represents a higher amount of time than originally expected. Several of the types 
of data that we requested the vendor migrate to the new email system could not be converted using the 
applications available through vendor professional services, such as some addressbook formats and all 
mail filters. While this did represent an unexpected inability by the vendor to deliver all items promised 
for the migration, UIUC s choice of the audience for the migration resulted in a lessened impact this 
failure on the part of the vendor. By choosing to migrate data for users who had not been actively using 
UIUC s legacy email service for a significant amount of time, it was acceptable to be limited in the 
data formats that could be converted. For the deployment of the email service to the rest of the UIUC 
campus, the decision was made not to use the vendor s professional services. This decision was due to 
budgetary considerations, a need for UIUC-specific migration functionality that was not available through 
stock applications from vendor professional services, and the decision to migrate users incrementally, 
rather than en masse, as was originally done. The additional flexibility provided by development of the 
migration software in-house allows us to migrate significantly more data than was available through vendor-provided 
professional services, including additional addressbook formats and many types of mail filters. Providing 
users with the ability to initiate their own migration to the new email system is expected to increase 
user acceptance of the new email system, since individual users will be able to migrate their accounts 
on a timeframe that is convenient for them, rather than having the migration occur on a date decided 
by the service manager. 5. WEAKNESSES While the deployment of the email system was successful, there 
are several weaknesses in the practices used for the deployment that must be discussed. Due to a lack 
of available staff members for the deployment team, the success of the deployment was mainly dependent 
on the work of two people on the project team. As such, there were two definite points of failure in 
the project. If either of these people had become incapacitated or left employment at the UIUC during 
the course of the deployment, it is highly unlikely that the deployment could have succeeded in anywhere 
near the timeframe required, since the staffing model used did not provide for any backup personnel. 
The relatively small size of the deployment project team resulted in a good deal of the project being 
dependent on large volumes of work beyond normal work hours. While the deployment was successful, the 
significant amounts of work that was required resulted in much higher stress levels than normal for the 
team members involved in the deployment project. This level of pressure did not continue past the completion 
of the initial deployment, due to the fact that the amount of work required post-deployment was significantly 
less. However, further projects deployed using the methods described here should take into account the 
significant time demands on project staff. Additionally, staffing models should provide some backup personnel 
where appropriate. 6. LESSONS LEARNED/FURTHER DEPLOYMENT From the successes and identified weaknesses 
of this system as applied, there are a number of lessons learned for future project deployed using this 
methodology. These lessons learned are currently being applied in the campus-wide deployment of the email 
system for the UIUC campus. First, the size of the deployment team has been increased, although it is 
still smaller than the typical project team for a deployment of this scale. This maintains the greater 
agility of a small-scale team, while reducing the unusually high work and stress levels for each project 
team member. Additionally, for the deployment of the email system to the UIUC campus in general, the 
project plan includes plans for greater collaboration among the team members involved in the project. 
This increased collaboration will allow for greater knowledge sharing and transfer among team members. 
As a result of this increased collaboration and knowledge transfer, the project will be less dependent 
on specific personnel, resulting in greater flexibility and reliability for the project in case of unavailability 
of individual project team members. 7. CONCLUSION While this methodology was used specifically for the 
implementation of an email system, it is also applicable for other information technology deployments. 
The general best practices from this project that can be applied to other projects are use of deployment 
time as a product selection criterion, parallelizing software development during product evaluation, 
selection of project team members with an eye towards work ethic, and use of outsourcing where appropriate. 
Additionally, this project was well served by choosing an initial target audience that could be more 
easily migrated to the new system. Choosing to deploy the service for a smaller initial target audience 
allows for a faster deployment, as well as allowing service managers to gain experience with the new 
system before deploying the service campus-wide. These factors outweigh the additional cost inherent 
in running two services in parallel until the campus deployment is complete. This methodology will be 
used again for future projects at UIUC, and will scale well for other sizes of projects. 8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Kathleen Kern and Allan Tuchman for their editing of, and suggestions for, this paper. Additionally, 
thanks to everyone involved with the deployment of the new email system described in this paper.  
			