
 Acoustic Imaging and Visualization of Plumes Discharging from Black Smoker Vents on the Deep Seafloor 
 Abstract Visualization and quantification methods are being developed to analyze our acoustic images 
of thermal plumes containing metallic mineral particles that dis­charge from hot springs on the deep 
seafloor. The acoustic images record intensity of backscattering from the particulate matter suspended 
in the plumes. The visualization methods extract, classify, visualize, mea­sure and track reconstructions 
of the plumes, depicted by isointensity surfaces as 3D volume objects and 2D slices. The parameters measured, 
including plume vol­ume, cross sectional area, centerline location (trajec­tory), surface area and isosurfaces 
at percentages of maximum backscatter intensity, are being used to derive elements of plume behavior 
including expansion with height, dilution, and mechanisms of entrainment of sur­rounding seawater. Our 
aim is to compare the observa­tional data with predictions of plume theory to test and advance models 
of the behavior of hydrothermal plumes through the use of multiple representations. 1 Introduction 
We are developing innovative new acoustic and visual­ization methods to image and analyze thermal plumes 
containing metallic mineral particles with the appear­ance of black smoke that discharge from hot springs 
on the deep seafloor [l, 2]. Our objective is to advance un­derstanding of the dynamics of the black 
smoker plumes as major agents of dispersal into the ocean of heat and chemicals derived from the Earth 
s interior. The plumes consist of a stem and a cap. The stem is formed of parti­cles suspended in thermally 
expanded fluids which mix with surrounding seawater. The fluids buoyantly rise up several hundred meters 
to a level of neutral buoyancy where they spread laterally to form the cap. Plume studies prior to our 
development of the plume imag­ing sonar have used a combination of other techniques including: video 
and photo imagery which illuminates only small volumes within meters of a vent (owing to rapid attenuation 
of light in seawater); construction of 2D cross sections of plumes from asynchronous indi­vidual profiles 
of temperature, conductivity (salinity) and optical light attenuation or scattering properties versus 
depth (Conductivity-Temperature-Depth profil­ing method); records made with standard sonar instru­ments; 
and laboratory tank simulations. Of these vari­ous approaches, acoustic methods are particularly well 
suited to synoptically image 3D hydrothermal plumes since they are large (linear dimensions 10 and contain 
suspended particulate matter.   2 Acoustic Imaging Acoustic imaging of black smoker plumes is based 
on Rayleigh backscattering from the metallic mineral par­ticles suspended in the entire volume of the 
plume. The particles are small (microns) relative to the wave­length of the acoustic frequency employed 
at 330 kHz; [3]). Our initial calculations indicated that this type suspended particulate matter could 
be detected at ranges of up to hundreds of meters using acoustic fre­quencies of hundreds of kHz [3]. 
We modified an existing sonar system to calculate specifications (frequency 330 kHz; pulse duration 100 
microseconds; transmit power level of 220 dB).  The sonar device was mounted in a forward-looking configuration 
on a submersible, and it imaged plumes discharging from black smoker-type vents at a depth of 2300m at 
a known field of hot springs at latitude on a submerged volcanic mountain range, the East Pa­cific Rise 
just south of the Gulf of California [4]. A photograph of the plume is shown in Figure 1. The imaging 
was done with a fixed geometry by setting the submersible on the seafloor with the sonar transducer 
 475  478  571  
			