
 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF DECENTRALIZED COMPUTING SERVICES Deborah A. Truesdale Health Sciences 
Computing Laboratory University of South Carolina 204 Benson School Columbia, South Carolina 29208 (803) 
777-4562 Abstract As computers expand further and further into all academic communities, so must the 
user services group. However, this expansion places a burden on a centralized computer center, and therefore, 
it is not surprising to see a trend developing in many large universities where the primary user services 
function is transferred from the main computer center to colleges and departments within the university. 
This results in the main computer center providing secondary user services and the college or department 
providing primary user services. Such is the situation at the University of South Carolina. The University 
is the largest in the State of South Carolina with approximately 35,000 students enrolled. For many years 
certain computing services functions have been the responsibility of the various colleges within the 
university, although the main computing center provides some short courses on programming languages, 
programming packages, and utilities plus, a newsletter, limited consulting, and techinical support. The 
bulk of the teaching, consulting, and dissemination of information is the responsibility of the individual 
colleges within the university. This paper will discuss the problems encountered in establishing an individual 
college computing center as well as its advantages and disadvantages based on our experiences at the 
college or department level. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided 
that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice 
and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or 
specific permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM0-89791-088-5/82/011/0169 $00.75 I ntrod uction At the University 
of South Carolina, the main computer center is known as Computer Services Division (CSD). CSD houses 
a 12.0 meg Amdahl 470/V6-11 and an 8.0 meg IBM 4341-2 running under OS/MVS with JES2. Central and remote 
job entry are provided as well as fast batch turn around. A large number of languages and special software 
processors are supported including interactive facilities provided by IBM's VSPC (Virtual Storage Personal 
Computing): VS APL, VS BASIC, VS FORTRAN, and VS PL/I. The central computing facility is located on the 
Columbia campus, at the hub of an extensive network comprized of sixty high speed remote batch terminals 
and approximately 500 keyboard terminal devices. This network services a large number of agencies of 
state and county governments and six separate institutions of higher learning in addition to the university 
and its (eight) regional campuses (CSD User's Guide, page 1). Consulting is provided by the Academic 
Services group of CSD. It is the policy of Academic Services to provide secondary user consulting in 
the following areas: use of statistical packages, statistical techniques, job control language, general 
batch procedures, general interactive procedures, programming languages, available software, system utilities, 
data management and data collection techniques. The user is requested to first seek counseling from an 
appropriate batch terminal facility. If further help is required, then the user should contact Academic 
Services (CSD User's Guide, page 2). Other services offered by Academic Services are (1) a series of 
short courses offered each semester and during the summer; (2) a newsletter published every other month; 
(3) selected manuals available through CSD or the campus bookstore; and (4) several informational handouts 
designed by CSD made available through VSPC. The university structure is composed of colleges which consist 
of schools and departments. For example, the College of Health consists of the School of Public Health, 
the Departments of Physical Education, Health Education, and Communicative Disorders. The School of Public 
Health is further divided into the Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Health Administration, 
and Environmental Health. Remote batch terminals originated through the needs of the different colleges 
and departments such as Business Administration, Physical Sciences, Social and Behavioral Sciences, and 
Computer Science. Users seeking primary consulting services are encouraged to use those provided by these 
terminals. The remote terminals provide users with card readers, card punches, video display terminals 
(VDTs), high speed printers, manuals and limited consulting through students working in the college. 
Getting Started As the College of Health grew larger and began offering classes utilizing the computer, 
it became necessary to develop the college's computing facilities. This development began with one video 
display terminal (VDT) and one hardcopy device. A director, a systems analyst, and a computer programmer 
were hired whose primary concern became establishing the lab. Problems facing the new staff included 
changing existing attitudes and obtaining recognition of the lab as a college site, not only from the 
College of Health community but also from the university and main computer center. To solve these problems, 
the director began by soliciting input from students and faculty in the college. The unanimous response 
was that additional equipment, documentation, and consulting were needed as soon as possible. Therefore, 
over a period of time, additional space was allocated and several more VDTs plus two hardcopy devices 
were acquired. Next, to expand the user services, the systems analyst and computer programmer not only 
began aiding, faculty with their projects but also were available for consultation with students. In 
addition, instruction for new users, class lectures, and appropriate documentation were made available. 
Changing attitudes was more difficult. Many of the older computer users were reluctant to change sites 
or consultants. Nevertheless, memos and later a newsletter were circulated advertising the services of 
the lab. Gradually, the majority of users in the College of Health began utilizing the services of the 
lab. Today, the lab, known as the Health Sciences Computing Lab, offers primary consulting services five 
days a week to faculty and students of the College of Health. Short courses are offered by the lab staff 
during the spring and fall semester on various computer related topics. A monthly newsletter is published 
and circulated to users in and out of the college. All of these services make the lab a decentralized 
computer site offering primary consulting services. There are many advantages and disadvantages to having 
a decentralized site such as the lab. The following discussion illustrates many of these.  Advantages 
The major advantage to a decentralized computing site is specialization. Staff at a site are specialized 
in the area defined by their college whereas the computer center staff are spread over several areas. 
Another advantage is that some of the student oriented consulting can be off loaded to graduate students 
working in the college and thereby relieving staff for other tasks. Also, graduate students generally 
work with particular classes in the college and can easily help students with their assignments. Because 
consulting, equipment, and documentation are available at the college level, users have easier and more 
flexible access to resources. An additional advantage to a decentralized computing site is the fact that 
the college controls its own resources: staff, equipment, documentation, and user services. Because a 
college knows its computing needs better than anyone, the college can acquire and schedule its resources 
as needed. Equipment can be requisitioned (via the computer center) on a site by site basis. Staff can 
be added or scheduled at the discretion of an individual site. Also, grant money when available can be 
used to fund additional equipment, staff, or supplies for the site. Because control exists at the college 
level, members of the college are more free to contribute ideas and suggestions for computing at the 
site and to see the results. Disadvantages Several disadvantages arise when computing services are decentralized. 
One of the main disadvantages is duplication of effort -staffing, applications, equipment, and documentation. 
Staff working in similar positions must be available from one site to the next providing similar user 
services, and at some point working on similar applications. The equipment, VDTs, hardcopy devices, and 
documentation each site provides will be alike. Also, because sites are not associated and computing 
is not organized on a university-wide basis, it is not easy to know what equipment or programs already 
exist for public use. Another disadvantage to a decentralized computing site is that the site is located 
away from the main center. All major information regarding changes in hardware, software, services, and 
so on, is learned on a secondary basis. Sites learn information by word of mouth from the computer center, 
the computer center newsletter, USERNEWS when signing on to the system, or JOB logs on printout. Needless 
to say, a user could miss important news. Many sites try to disseminate this and other information to 
its users. This location disadvantage also means that sites are dependent on major decisions made by 
the computer center. For example, when requisitioning new equipment, sites must depend on the computer 
center for final decisions or approvals on the requisition -a site cannot have total control. One final 
disadvantage is dual consulting. Many users prefer to bypass the primary consulting available at the 
site for secondary consulting from the computer center, or frequently they choose to go back and forth 
between both services. This can be quite confusing for both the consultants and for the user, since two 
consultants will probably never answer a question or respond in precisely the same manner. Also, the 
situation arises when users supported by one site tensions between sites important to maintain go attempt 
as well od comm to as uni overuse colleges. cations be resources at Therefore, tween sites. another it 
is n site ecess causing ary and Future Expectations In the College of Health, expansion is planned for 
"ROUTE TO" printing capabilities, additional VDTs and hopefully additional staff. The concensus within 
the College of Health is that the lab is a powerful resource and asset to the college and therefore, 
all effort should be made to maintain it, keep it up-to-date, and make it as available as possible. As 
172 computing expands within the College of Health and other colleges as well, more sites can be expected 
within a decentralized computing structure. Since a college can build its resources depending on its 
own needs, the dependency on a centralized computer center will be eliminated. On the other hand, a centralized 
computer center can expect increased demand on its services and probable expansion of resources. If these 
demands are not resolved, it will affect all users of the centralized computer center. Therefore, from 
the department's or college's point of view, the advantages of a decentralized computer site far outweigh 
the disadvantages and contribute to the efficiency of computing throughout the university system. 
			