
 An Analysis of Short-Term Fairness in Wireless Media Access Protocols Can Emre Koksal, Hisham Kassab, 
and Hari Balakrishnan Massachusetts Institute of Technology {emre ,hans, hari}@mit, edu Motivation 
We analyze the fairness of decentralized, randomized MAC protocols and introduce two metrics for measur- 
ing short-term fairness. Unlike past efforts that studied fairness over long time scales, we focus on 
the distribu- tion of accesses of different stations to a shared channel over short time scales. Our 
first metric uses a sliding- window analysis of packet traces, while the second is an analytical approach 
that uses the renewal reward theory of Markov chains to model the MAC protocol. To see why short-term 
fairness is important, we ex- amined typical packet sequence traces of multiple sta-tions contending 
for a wireless channel using Lucent WaveLAN's CSMA/CA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access/ Collision Avoidance) 
protocol. We observed that each station tends to monopolize the channel for several packet transmission 
times before it is captured by the other sta- tion, which in turn monopolizes the channel for a long 
time, even though at each point in time the other sta-tion has packets waiting to be sent. An example 
of such a trace can be found in [Koksal00]. This behavior greatly degrades the performance of applications 
and transport protocols. For example, real- time audio and video are delay-sensitive and perform better 
when jitter is low. TCP performance degrades greatly when MAC protocols exhibit short-term unfair- ness, 
as shown in Fig. 1. Here, acknowledgments (ACKs) sent from the receiver do not reach the sender in a 
timely manner, resulting in large transmission bursts. Thus we observe a severe form of ACK compression. 
We analyze the reasons for such behavior by certain MAC protocols and formalize the notion of short-term 
unfairness. We build on the intuition that a short-term Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advant -age and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGMETRICS 2000 6/00 Santa Clara, California, 
USA &#38;#169; 2000 ACM 1-58113-194-110010006... $ 5.00 ~oooo °T/ACK * ssoooo 64oooo 62oooo !  8 /i/I 
/, E~ z ~ s8~o s6~o /i / I il t i 620ooo ; L ,:, ;, ,:, ; ElapsedUrn= (s) Figure 1: TCP transfer across 
a WaveLAN channel. fair protocol will, over small time scales, provide equal access to all the contending 
stations, where a small num- ber of stations do not monopolize the channel. 2 Sliding Window Method 
(SWM) SWM starts with a packet trace of channel accesses and slides a window of size w across it. We 
refer to the elements within a window as a snapshot, where each el- ement corresponds to a channel access 
by some station. As we slide the window one element at a time, we ob- tain a series of snapshots where 
consecutive snapshots have (w -1) elements in common. For each snapshot we compute a per-snapshot fairness 
index using Jain's index [Jain91] or a metric based on the Kullback-Leibler distance [Cover91] from information 
theory. After slid- ing the window through the entire sequence we end up with a sequence of fairness 
values, and we calculate its average. This average corresponds to the fairness metric associated with 
window size w. We repeat the process with increasing window sizes, and plot the average fair- ness value 
versus the window size. 118 Renewal Rewards Method (RRM) Because SWM can only be used post-]acto after 
packet traces are obtained, it has little predictive power. We therefore seek to develop an analytic 
framework in which short-term fairness can be analyzed. Given that many MAC protocols can be completely 
represented by Markov chains, it is natural to use the theory of Markov chains with rewards to evaluate 
the fairness of MAC protocols. Here, each transition from state i to j in the Markov chain is associated 
with some reward, rij, where each state is an N-element vector where each element k is the backoff level 
of station k. As the chain proceeds from state to state, there is an associated sequence of rewards that 
are related by the statistics of the Markov chain. The steady state expected reward-per-stage can be 
calculated as, g= ~ Tri ~.l:~ijrij iES jES where ~i is the steady-state probability of state i and Pij 
is the transition probability from i to j. The expected reward-per-stage clearly depends on the reward 
structure we use. By using Markov chains with different reward structures, we can calculate differ- ent 
parameters. For example, since the self-transitions in the chain of a CSMA/CA system correspond to colli- 
sions, if we consider the reward structure where 0 units of reward are assigned to all the out-of-state 
transitions and 1 unit is assigned to self-transitions, then the result- ing expected reward-per-stage 
gives the collision proba- bility of the protocol. Our reward structure for short-term fairness favors 
transitions between stations over self-transitions, as this reduces channel monopoly. Furthermore, a 
higher re-ward is assigned to transitions to a station that is has been denied access for a long time, 
corresponding to a higher backoff state. We separate the notions of through- put and fairness, so losses 
due to collisions are treated as zero-reward self-transitions. The maximum expected reward is 1, achieved 
by an ideal TDMA protocol. A re- ward of 0 is assigned to transitions after which the same station keeps 
the channel. Let rij be the reward assigned to a transition from state i to state j. rij is a function 
of the backoff b of the MAC protocol, and satisfies the following properties: (i) rij (b) is non-decreasing, 
(ii) rij (b) should reach its maximum at b = N-1, which is the largest number of backed-off stations, 
and (iii) it should be concave (it can be shown that linear and convex functions are in-appropriate). 
For our analysis, we use the square-root reward function and analyze the fairness of CSMA/CA and ALOHA. 
An example Markov chain for CSMA/CA can be found in [Koksal00] and the corresponding re- sults in Figure 
2.  I K=15 O. 7_7~_ K=IO K=5 0,8 0.7 0.6 .~ 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 t 2 f I I I 3 4 Number of users f I 
5 I Figure 2: CSMA/CA fairness vs. N for K = 15, 10, and 5, where K is the maximum number of times that 
a packet is backed off before it is dropped (K > N). 4 Conclusion Both SWM and RRM can be used to analyze 
experimen- tal packet traces that capture channel accesses by differ- ent stations for a known source 
workload. In addition, RRM is an analytical approach that does not require traces, and can be used in 
the design stage to evalu- ate a protocol and compare it to others. It can provide insights into why 
protocols exhibit bad short-term fair- ness. We believe that the notion of short-term fairness is important 
in other networking and systems contexts in addition to MAC protocols. While we do not claim that the 
same measures as in this paper will be generally applicable, we believe that system and protocol design- 
ers should include short-term behavior in performance characterizations. A detailed treatment of this 
extended abstract appears in [Koksal00].  References [Jain91] JAIN, R., "The Art of Computer Systems 
Per- formance Analysis." John Wiley and Sons, 1991. [Cover91] COVER, T. AND THOMAS, J., "Elements of 
Information Theory." John Wiley &#38; Sons, 1991. [Koksal00] KOKSAL C. E., KASSAB H. AND BALAKR- ISHNAN 
H., "Analysis of Short-Term Fairness in Media Access Protocols," TR-Laboratory for Infor- mation and 
Decision Systems, 2000 119  
			