
 An Integrated Probabilistic Model for Functional Prediction of Proteins Minghua Deng, Ting Chen, Fengzhu 
Sun Molecular and Computational Biology Program Department of Biological Sciences University of Southern 
California 1042 West 36th Place, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1113, USA Contact: fsun@hto.usc.edu or tingchen@hto.usc.edu 
 ABSTRACT We develop an integrated probabilistic model to combine protein physical interactions, genetic 
interactions, highly cor­related gene expression network, protein complex data, and domain structures 
of individual proteins to predict protein functions. The model is an extension of our previous model 
for protein function prediction based on Markovian random .eld theory. The model is .exible in that other 
protein pairwise relationship information and features of individual proteins can be easily incorporated. 
Two features distin­guish the integrated approach from other available methods for protein function prediction. 
One is that the integrated approach uses all available sources of information with dif­ferent weights 
for di.erent sources of data. It is a global approach that takes the whole network into consideration. 
The second feature is that the posterior probability that a protein has the function of interest is assigned. 
The pos­terior probability indicates how con.dent we are about as­signing the function to the protein. 
We apply our integrated approach to predict functions of yeast proteins based upon MIPS protein function 
classi.cations and upon the interac­tion networks based on MIPS physical and genetic interac­tions, gene 
expression pro.les, Tandem A.nity Puri.cation (TAP) protein complex data, and protein domain informa­tion. 
We study the sensitivity and speci.city of the inte­grated approach using di.erent sources of information 
by the leave-one-out approach. In contrast to using MIPS physical interactions only, the integrated approach 
combining all of the information increases the sensitivity from 57% to 87% when the speci.city is set 
at 57%-an increase of 30%. It should also be noted that enlarging the interaction network greatly increases 
the number of proteins whose functions can be predicted. Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. RECOMB 03, April 10 13, 2003, Berlin, Germany. 
Copyright 2003 ACM 1-58113-635-8/03/0004 ...$5.00.  Categories and Subject Descriptors J.3 [Computer 
Applications]: Life and Medical Sciences Biology and genetics  General Terms Algorithms Keywords Function 
Prediction, Pfam Domain, Protein-Protein Inter­action, Markov Random Field, Gibbs Sampler 1. INTRODUCTION 
Protein function prediction is one of the most important problems in the post-genome era. The classical 
method of protein function prediction is to .nd homologies between a protein and other proteins in protein 
databases using pro­grams such as FASTA [34] and PSI-BLAST [1] and then to predict functions based on 
sequence homologies. An­other sequence-based approach is called the Rosetta stone method where two proteins 
are inferred to have similar functions if they are together in another genome [27]. By comparing a number 
of sequenced genomes, the phyloge­netic pattern (the presence and absence of the protein in these sequenced 
genomes) of a protein can be determined. It is believed that genes with similar phylogenetic patterns 
are likely to share similar functions. Using this idea, the functional links between genes can be predicted 
[28] based on phylogenetic patterns. Recent developments of high-throughput bio-techniques have generated 
a variety of di.erent sources of data that are useful for the study of protein functions. Clustering 
analysis of gene expression data can be used to predict functions of unknown proteins based on the idea 
that co-expressed genes are more likely to have similar functions [3, 11, 33]. Methods have also been 
developed to predict protein functions based on protein physical or genetic interactions using the idea 
of guilt-by-association: the neighborhood-count method [12, 36] and the chi-square method [18]. Protein 
complex data can be used for protein function prediction based on the idea that proteins in the same 
complex tend to have similar function. For the variety of di.erent interaction data and how they relate 
to protein functions, see [29]. We developed a Markov random .eld (MRF) model for protein function prediction 
using protein-protein interaction data [6]. Two main features distinguish the MRF-based methods from 
other guilt-by-association methods. One is that the MRF model uses global information on the entire interaction 
network instead of the local interaction network. The second is that the MRF model gives the probability 
that a protein has a function of interest instead of predicting whether the protein has or does not have 
the function. This probability indicates how con.dent we are about assigning the function to the protein. 
The method was applied to the prediction of protein function based on cellular role using protein functions 
de.ned in Yeast Proteome Database (YPD) [5]. The results showed that the MRF-based method outperforms 
the two guilt-by-association methods. Features of individual proteins have long been used for protein 
function prediction. A feature here refers to an ob­servation about a protein. It can be the presence 
or absence of a motif signal, the protein s isoelectric point, its absolute mRNA expression level, or 
mutant phenotypes from exper­iments about the sensitivity or resistance of disruption mu­tants under 
various growth conditions. Features have been used for protein function prediction [15, 16, 22, 39], 
and for protein function prediction as pattern recognition problems [4, 23, 24]. Drawid and Gerstein 
[9] developed a general Bayesian approach to predicting protein localization based on a large number 
of features of individual proteins. However, no methods are available for predicting protein functions 
combining all of the di.erent sources of informa­tion. In this paper, we extend the MRF-based method 
to create an integrated approach that includes other protein pairwise relationships such as correlations 
of gene expres­sion patterns, genetic interactions, and features of individ­ual proteins such as domain 
information. The model is .ex­ible in that other protein pairwise relationship information such as pairwise 
protein sequence similarities and features of individual proteins can be easily incorporated. We ap­ply 
our integrated approach to predict functions of yeast proteins based upon MIPS protein functions and 
the in­teraction networks based upon MIPS physical and genetic interactions, gene expression pro.les, 
Tandem A.nity Pu­ri.cation (TAP) protein complex data, and protein domain information. We study the sensitivity 
and speci.city of the integrated approach using di.erent sources of information by the leave-one-out 
approach. In contrast to using MIPS physical interactions only, the integrated approach combin­ing all 
of the information increases the sensitivity from 57% to 87% when the speci.city is set at 57%-an increase 
of 30%. It should also be noted that enlarging the interac­tion network greatly increases the number 
of proteins whose functions can be predicted. The paper is organized as follows. In the Method section, 
we .rst brie.y describe the MRF model developed in [6], then the integrated MRF model, and .nally the 
computa­tional methods. In the Results section, we apply the inte­grated approach to predict protein 
functions using a variety of di.erent information. Finally, we discuss the implications and limitations 
of our integrated approach.  2. METHOD To make this paper self-contained, we will brie.y describe the 
MRF model based on protein physical interactions [6]. In this model, given a function of interest, the 
objective is to predict the probability that an unknown protein has the function, using the protein physical 
interaction network and the functions of the known proteins. Suppose a proteome has N proteins P1,··· 
,PN . Some proteins have already been studied and have known func­tions, while others have unknown functions. 
Following the tradition, we will refer to proteins having known functions as known proteins and to proteins 
with unknown functions as unknown proteins throughout the paper. Let P1,··· ,Pn be the unknown proteins, 
Pn+1,··· ,Pn+m be the known proteins, and N = n+ m. Throughout this paper, we will .x a function of interest. 
Let Xi =1 if the i-th protein has the function and Xi =0 otherwise. Let X =(X1,··· ,Xn+m) be the con.guration 
of the functional labelling, where X1 = .1,··· ,Xn = .n are unknown and Xn+1 = µ1,··· ,Xn+m = µm are 
known. We infer the function of the unknown proteins using the protein interaction network obtained from 
biological experiments. We .rst give the prior probability distribution of X based on the interaction 
network-the Gibbs distribution [25]. In the following, Xi will be the random variable and xi will be 
its observed value. Without considering the interaction net­work, the probability of a con.guration of 
X is proportional to N N1 1-xi N pxi (1 -p)=p (1 -p), (1) 1 -p i=1 N where N1 =i=1 xi and p is the probability 
of a protein having the function of interest. Next, we consider the protein physical interaction net­work. 
The probability of the interactions in the network conditional on the functional labelling is proportional 
to exp(ß1N10 + .1N11 + .1N00), (2) where Nll' is thenumberof(l,l')-interacting pairs in S and L N11 
= xixj (i,j).S =#{(1 .1) pairs in S}, L N10 = (1 -xi)xj +(1 -xj )xi (i,j).S (3) =#{(1 .0) pairs in S}, 
L N00 = (1 -xi)(1 -xj ) (i,j).S =#{(0 .0) pairs in S}, where S is the set of all the physical interaction 
pairs under consideration. Therefore, the total probability of the network based on the functional labelling 
of the proteins and the interactions is proportional to exp(-U(x)), where U(x)= -aN1 -ß1N10 -.1N11 -.1N00 
N LL = -axi -ß1 (1 -xi)xj +(1 -xj )xi (4) i=1 (i,j).S LL -.1 xixj -.1 (1 -xi)(1 -xj ), (i,j).S (i,j).S 
 where a= log( p ). Under the above model, one parameter 1-p is redundant, and we can set .1 =1. Using 
the above MRF model, we developed a Gibbs sam­pling scheme to estimate the posterior distribution of 
(X1, ···, Xn) conditional on Xn+1 = µ1, ···, Xn+m = µm.The posterior probability distribution of Xi can 
be obtained by summing over all of the possible con.gurations of Xj ,j = i, 1 =j =n. 2.1 The general 
MRF model The MRF model and the Bayesian approach described above can be extended to include all protein 
pairwise re­lationships and features of individual proteins for protein function prediction. 2.1.1 Using 
protein complex data to assign prior probabilities Mass spectrometry has been used to identify protein 
com­plexes [13, 19]. Researchers have used a set of proteins as baits to prey other proteins in the same 
complexes, followed by tandem mass spectrometry experiments to identify each protein in the complexes. 
Proteins in a complex do not nec­essarily physically interact with each other, although they are more 
likely to physically interact than random protein pairs. A direct physical interaction map cannot be 
estab­lished through the protein complex data. It is generally believed that proteins within a complex 
are more likely to have the same function. For a given function of interest and an unknown protein Pi 
in a protein complex, we give a prior probability that the protein has the function by Pr(Xi =1 |Complex) 
#{Proteins having the function within the complex} = . #{Known proteins within the complex} (5) A protein 
may belong to di.erent protein complexes. For example, in TAP protein complex data [13], protein RPN10 
was observed to appear in six protein complexes. For each protein complex, we compute the prior probability 
that the unknown protein has the function of interest and use the maximum of these prior probabilities 
as the true prior prob­ability that the protein has the function. The basic idea behind this choice is 
that proteins in a large complex are more likely to have di.erent functions than proteins in a small 
complex. For those proteins that belong to at least one of the iden­ti.ed protein complexes, we can use 
the above approach to give a prior probability that the protein has the function of interest. For other 
proteins, we use the fraction of pro­teins in the entire proteome having the function as the prior. Then, 
without any information on protein pairwise relation­ship, the probability of a con.guration of X is 
proportional to N P{labelling}. (pi)xi (1 -pi)1-xi , (6) i=1 where pi is the prior probability that the 
i-th protein has the function of interest. The main di.erence between this equa­tion and equation 1 is 
that pi can be di.erent for di.erent proteins.  2.1.2 The MRF model including multiple sources of pairwise 
relationship It is generally believed that co-expressed genes generally have similar functions. We built 
a co-expressed network by connecting protein pairs if the correlation coe.cient of the expression pro.les 
of the proteins was greater than a certain threshold, say 0.8. Another data source is genetic interactions 
obtained through mutation analysis. Based on genetic interaction data, we can build a genetic interaction 
network by connecting proteins if they genetically interact with one another. Generally speaking, suppose 
that we have L sources of protein pairwise relationship that may be useful for protein function prediction, 
and a network that can be built based on each source of data, denoted as Net1, Net2,··· ,NetL, respectively. 
The entire network we consider is the union of all the networks denoted as S. Basedonthe l-th network, 
similar to equation 2, our belief for the functional labelling of all the proteins is proportional to 
(l)(l)(l) P{Netl | labelling}.exp(ßlN10 + .1N11 + .1N00 ), (l)(l)(l) where (N,N,N) are de.ned in a manner 
similar to 10 11 00 equation 3, with S replaced by the l-th network. Multiplying over all the networks, 
our belief for the func­tional labelling of all the proteins is proportional to L (l)(l)(l) P{networks 
| labelling}. exp(ßlN+ .1N+ .1N) 1011 00 l=1 L ( )L (l)(l)(l) =exp ßlN+ .lN+ .lN. 1011 00 l=1 (7) Our 
total belief for the functional labelling of all the proteins is proportional to the multiplication of 
equations 6 and 7. Then an MRF over all the functional labelling is de.ned by P{labelling, networks}=exp(-U(x))/Z(.), 
(8) where n+mL LL( ) (l)(l)(l) U(x)= - , (9) xiai - ßlN10 + .lN11 + .lN00 i=1 l=1 where ai = log( pi 
) and is given based on protein complex 1-pi data, . indicates the vector of parameters, and Z(.)isthe 
summation of exp(-U(x)) over all the functional labelling. Under the above model, all the parameters 
(.1,.2,··· ,.L) are redundant and are set to 1 in the rest of the paper. In the terminology of MRF, U(x) 
is called the potential function. The MRF model de.ned in equation 8 gives the prior distribution for 
the functional labelling using information from protein complexes as well as from di.erent sources of 
pairwise relationship. 2.1.3 Using domain information The function of a protein is determined by its 
structure. Therefore, the structure or the amino acid sequence of a protein can be very useful for predicting 
protein functions. However, it is impossible to directly use the amino acid se­quence data for protein 
function prediction because very large number of parameters are needed. Instead, protein features extracted 
from sequence data should be used. As a .rst step toward showing the proof of principles, we simply use 
the domain information of the proteins: the presence or the absence of a set of domains. Several investigators 
have shown that protein domains are an informative feature for protein function prediction [17, 37]. 
For a given domain set D1,D2,··· ,DM , the domain structure of each protein Pi, di =(di1,di2,··· ,diM 
)can be de.ned, where dim =1 if the i-th protein Pi contains domain Dm and dim = 0 otherwise. Let p1m 
( p0m)bethe conditional probability of dm = 1 given that a protein has (does not have) the function of 
interest. For simplicity, we assume that all the domains independently contribute to the functions of 
proteins. For a given domain structure d=(d1,d2,··· ,dM ), we let M dm 1-dm P1(d)= p1m(1 -p1m), m=1 M 
dm 1-dm P0(d)= p0m(1 -p0m). m=1 Then we are able to calculate the probability of the domain features 
of all the proteins given the functional labelling. P{domain features | labelling}= P1(di)× P0(di). i:Xi=1 
i:Xi=0 (10) Multiplying equations (8, 10), we have the following prob­ability model P{labelling, networks, 
domain features}= P{labelling, networks}×P{domain features | labelling}. The problem is how to estimate 
the posterior distribution of the functions of the unknown proteins given the features of all the proteins, 
the di.erent sources of protein pairwise relationship, and the annotations of the known proteins.  
2.2 Computational Issues To implement the above procedure for protein function prediction, we need to 
estimate the parameters involved in the model. A maximum likelihood estimation procedure for estimating 
the parameters is impractical due to the high dependency among the functions of the proteins introduced 
by the interaction networks. In this paper, we consider the following estimation procedures. We estimate 
pi in equation 5 by the functions of the known proteins. Similarly, we estimate p1m and p0m using the 
domain features of known proteins as follows. p1m #proteins having the function and containing domain 
D = m , #proteins having the function p0m # proteins not having the function and containing domain Dm 
= , # proteins not having the function We use a pseudo-likelihood approach to estimate ßl,.l, 1 = l =L 
[25]. Based on the above general model, we have Pr(Xi =1 |D,X[-i],.) L (i)(i) ai+ l=1(ßl-1)M0 (l)+(.l-ßl)M1 
(l) (11) e = , L (i)(i) ai+(l)+(.l-ßl)M(l) 1+ e l=1(ßl-1)M01 or, equivalently, Pr(Xi =1 |D,X[-i],.) 
log 1 -Pr(Xi =1 |D,X[-i],.) L (12) L (i)(i) =ai +(ßl -1)M0 (l)+(.l -ßl)M1 (l), l=1 where D is the domain 
information for all the proteins, piP1(di) X[-i] =(X1,··· ,Xi-1,Xi+1,··· ,X), ai =log , n+m(1-pi)P0(di) 
(i)(i) M0 (l)and M1 (l) are the numbers of neighbors of protein Pi labelled with 0 and 1 according to 
the l-th network, re­spectively. We used the network consisting of the known proteins to estimate those 
parameters by an S-plus routine [41] using equation 12. Once all the parameters have been de.ned, we 
use a Gibbs sampler to estimate the posterior probability distribution of (X1,··· ,··· ,Xn). The algorithm 
can be described as follows: 1. Randomly set the value of missing data Xi = .i,i = 1,··· ,n with probability 
pi. 2. For each protein Pi, update the value of Xi using Equation 11. 3. Repeat step 2 T times until 
all the posterior probabil­ities Pr(Xi |D, X[-i],.) are stabilized.  In Gibbs sampling, the burn-in 
period and the lag pe­riod need to be speci.ed [26]. The burn-in period is the time it takes the Markovian 
process to become stabilized, and the simulation results in the burn-in period are dis­carded to reduce 
or eliminate the e.ect of initial values. After the burn-in period, the probability that an unknown protein 
has a particular function is estimated by averaging the simulation results in steps of the lag-period 
to reduce or eliminate the dependence of the Markovian process. In this study, the burn-in period and 
the lag period are 100 and 10, respectively. The total number of simulations is 2000.  3. RESULTS 3.1 
Sources of data We applied the above integrated approach to predict func­tions of unknown proteins in 
Yeast. First, we used 6278 genes from the SGD database [10]. Second, we used the Protein Families Database 
of Alignments and HMMs (Pfam domain) to de.ne the domain structures of all the proteins. The SwissPfam 
(Ver7.5) de.nes the mapping between pro­teins SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL accession numbers and Pfam domains. The 
.nal mapping between SGD proteins and their Pfam domains was built by their SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL accession 
numbers. Third, we used the functional classi­.cation catalogue based on the Munich Information Cen­ter 
for Protein Sequences (MIPS) to de.ne functions [30]. The MIPS functional classi.cation catalogue is 
hierarchi­cal, and, for simplicity, we used only the level-one classi.­cation. There are 18 level-one 
functional classes, including classi.cation not yet clear-cut and unclassi.ed proteins which were merged 
as a single class unknown . The follow­ing functional classes contained small numbers of proteins and 
were thus merged into one class: cellular communica­tion/signal transduction mechanism (59), protein 
activity regulation (13), protein with binding function or cofactor requirement (structural or catalytic) 
(4), and transposable elements, viral and plasmid proteins (116). We thus had 13 known functional classes 
and one unknown in our anal­ysis. Fourth, we used three sources of protein pairwise rela­tionship, including 
MIPS physical interactions, TAP protein complexes, and the cell cycle gene expression data of [38]. The 
MIPS physical interaction data contain 2,448 interac­tion pairs (excluding 120 pairs of self-interactions) 
involving 1,877 proteins extracted from the literatures It is generally believed that this data set is 
more reliable than other pair­wise protein-protein interaction data [7, 29, 31]. The TAP protein complex 
data contain 232 complexes involving 1,088 known and 237 unknown proteins with respect to MIPS function 
classi.cation [13]. The cell cycle gene expression data [38] contains expressions of 6,086 genes with 
77 data points (2 cln3, 2 clb, 18 alpha, 24 cdc15, 17 cdc28 and 14 elut). We studied the sensitivity 
and the speci.city of the in­tegrated approach using di.erent combinations of protein pairwise relationship 
and domain information of individual proteins using the leave-one-out approach. The sensitivity (or speci.city) 
is de.ned as the fraction of overlaps between the known functions and predicted functions over all of 
the known (or predicted) functions.  3.2 Combining different sources of pairwise relationship We used 
the MIPS physical interaction data as the ba­sis for comparison because it contains the largest number 
of interactions. We then added the MIPS genetic interaction data and the network de.ned by highly co-expressed 
protein pairs (correlation coe.cient = 0.8) to the MIPS physical interaction data. Figure 1 shows the 
relationship between sensitivity and speci.city of the integrated approach using (1) physical and genetic 
interactions, (2) physical interac­tions and gene expressions, and (3) physical interactions, genetic 
interactions, and gene expressions. In contrast to using physical interactions only, the genetic interactions 
can substantially increase the performance of the method (Fig­ure 1a). It should be noted, however, that 
although the prediction method based on MIPS genetic interaction data seems to outperform that using 
the combined physical and genetic interactions in some cases, the number of proteins that can be predicted 
based on genetic interactions alone is much smaller than that of the combined physical and ge­netic data 
(See Table 1). Figure 1b shows that adding gene expression data to the physical interaction data does 
not signi.cantly increase the performance of the method based only on physical interactions. Figure 1c 
shows that the per­formance of the integrated approach that combines the three sources of pairwise relationship 
is similar to that combining MIPS physical and genetic interactions. The above obser­vations also hold 
when we use di.erent thresholds for the correlation coe.cients of gene expression pro.les for de.n­ing 
the network (data not shown).  3.3 Combining physical interactions with pro­tein complexes and domain 
information We added the protein complex data and the domain infor­mation onto the MIPS physical interaction 
data in the inte­grated approach. Figure 2 shows the relationship between the sensitivity and speci.city 
of the integrated approach us­ing (1) the MIPS physical interactions and the TAP protein complexes, (2) 
the MIPS physical interactions and the do­main information, and (3) the MIPS physical interactions, the 
TAP protein complexes, and the domain information. There were 1,008 known and 237 unknown proteins in 
the TAP complex data, and the prior probabilities for those pro­teins could be estimated as described 
in the method section. For other proteins, we used the fraction of proteins having the function among 
all of the proteins as the prior. For the prediction by domain only, we simply computed the poste­rior 
probability Pr(X =1 | D) without other information as predictions. Figure 2 shows that both the protein 
complex data and the domain information can signi.cantly improve the performance of the methods.  3.4 
Combing all the information for protein function prediction Finally, we combined all of the information, 
including the MIPS physical interactions, the MIPS genetic interactions, the gene expressions, the TAP 
protein complex data, and the Pfam domain information. Figure 3 shows that for a given speci.city the 
sensitivity of the integrated approach increases rapidly as more information is added. For example, when 
only the MIPS physical interaction data were used, the sensitivity and speci.city were roughly the same 
when the speci.city was set at 57%. At this speci.city, the sensitivity of the integrated approach incorporating 
all of the informa­tion reached 87%. When all the information was used, the sensitivity and speci.city 
were roughly the same at 76%. Figure 3b shows that for a given speci.city the sensitivity increases as 
the number of interaction partners increases.  4. DISCUSSION We developed an integrated probabilistic 
model to com­bine the protein physical interactions, the genetic interac­tions, the highly correlated 
gene expression network, the protein complex data, and the domain structures of individ­ual proteins 
to predict protein functions. We estimated the posterior probability that the protein has the function 
of in­terest given all of the available information. The posterior probability indicates how con.dent 
we are about assigning the function to the protein. The distinction of the Bayesian approach we develop 
here is that it is a global approach tak­ing into consideration all of the interaction network and the 
functions of known proteins. We applied our integrated approach to predict functions of yeast proteins 
based upon MIPS protein function classi­.cations and upon the interaction networks based on MIPS physical 
and genetic interactions, the gene expression pro­.les, the TAP protein complex data, and the protein 
domain information from the Pfam database. We studied the sensi­tivity and speci.city of the integrated 
approach using di.er­ent sources of information by the leave-one-out approach. In contrast to using MIPS 
physical interactions only, the inte­grated approach combining all of the information increases the sensitivity 
and speci.city signi.cantly, and at the same time, it uses a much larger interaction network, greatly 
in­creasing the number of proteins whose functions can be pre­dicted. It should be noted that the probability 
model is .exible enough to be able to incorporate other information. There are several limitations to 
our approach. Both the interaction network and the functional annotations of the proteins are incomplete. 
The actual number of interacting protein pairs might be much higher than what have been obtained in MIPS. 
Our method treats each function independently and sep­arately. Generally, that fact that a protein has 
one function does not prevent it from having other functions. Therefore, our model determines each function 
for each protein without a bias. However, there are correlations between functions. The fact that a protein 
has a function A may increase the chance of it having function B because functions A and B are highly 
correlated. Incorporating these information into a generalized model remains a challenging task. Our 
model assumes that known proteins have complete functional an­notations, and it predicts functions for 
unknown proteins using this information. In reality, we know that these known proteins may have other 
functions that have not been deter­mined. As biologists continue to experimentally determine the functions 
of proteins, the functional classi.cations of proteins will be more and more complete. Electronic-Database 
Information URLs for data presented herein are as follows: SGD database, http://genome-www.stanford.edu/ 
Saccharomyces/ SwissPfam, ftp://ftp.genetics.wustl.edu/pub/pfam/ MIPS, http://mips.gsf.de/  5. REFERENCES 
[1] Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Scha.er, A.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W., and Lipman, D.J. Gapped 
BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a New Generation of Protein Database Search Programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 3389 
- 3402. 1997. [2] Bateman, A., Birney, E., Cerruti, L., Durbin, R., Etwiller. L., Eddy, S.R., Gri.ths-Jones 
S., Howe, K.L., Marshall, M., and Sonnhammer, E.L. The Pfam Protein Families Database. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 30: 276 - 280. 2002. [3] Brown, M., Grundy, W. N., Lin, D., Cristianini, N., Sugnet, C.W., Furey, 
T.S., Ares, M. Jr., and Haussler, D. Knowledge-based Analysis of Microarray Gene Expression Data by Using 
Support Vector Machines Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 262 - 267. 2000. [4] Clare, A. and King, R.D. 
Machine Learning of Functional Class from Phenotype Data. Bioinformatics 18: 160 - 166. 2002. [5] Costanzo, 
M.C., Crawford, M.E., Hirschman, J.E., Kranz, J.E., Olsen, P., Robertson, L.S., Skrzypek, M.S., Braun, 
B.R., Hopkins, K.L., Kondu, P., Lengieza, C., Lew-Smith, J.E., Tillberg, M., and Garrels, J.I. YPDTM,PombePDTM,and 
WormPDTM: Model Organism Volumes of the BioKnowledge Library, an Integrated Resource for Protein Information. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 29: 75 - 79. 2001. [6] Deng, M., Zhang, K., Mehta, S., Chen, T. and Sun, F. Prediction 
of Protein Function Using Protein-protein Interaction Data. Proceedings of the First IEEE Computer Society 
Bioinformatics Conference (CSB2002): 197 - 206. 2002. [7] Deng, M., Chen, T., and Sun, F. Assessment 
of the Reliability of Protein-protein Interactions and Protein Function Prediction. Paci.c Symposium 
of Biocomputing (PSB2003): 140 - 151. 2002. [8] Devos,D., and Valencia, A. Pratical Limits of Function 
Prediction. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics 41: 98 - 107. 2000. [9] Drawid, A. and Gerstein, 
M. A Bayesian System Integrating Expression Data with Squence Patterns for Localizing Proteins: Comprehensive 
Application to the Yeast Genome. J. Mol. Biol. 301: 1059 - 1075. 2000. [10] Dwight, S.S., Harris, M.A., 
Dolinski, K., Ball, C.A., Binkley, G., Christie, K.R., Fisk, D.G., Issel-Tarver, L., Schroeder, M., and 
Sherlock, G. et al. Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) Provides Secondary Gene Annotation Using the 
Gene Ontology (GO). Nucleic Acids Res. 30: 69 - 72. 2002. [11] Eisen, M.B., Spellman, P.T., Brown, P.O., 
and Bostein D. Cluster Analysis and Display of Genome-wide Expression Patterns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 95: 14863 - 14868. 1998. [12] Fellenberg, M., Albermann, K., Zollner, A., Mewes, H.W., and Hani J. 
Integrative Analysis of Protein Ineraction Data. In Proc. of the Eighth Int. Conf. on Intelligent System 
for Molecular Biology (ISMB2000): 152 - 161. 2000. [13] Gavin, A., B¨oche, M., Krause, R., Grandi, P., 
Marzioch, M., Bauer, A., Schultz, J., Rick, J.M., Michon, A., and Cruciat, C. et al. Functional Organization 
of the Yeast Proteome by Systematic Analysis of Protein Complexes. Nature 415: 141 - 147. 2002. [14] 
Greenbaum, D., Luscombe, N.M.,Jansen, R., Qian, J., and Gerstein, M. Interrelating Di.erent Types of 
Genomic Data, from Proteome to Secretome: Coming in on Function. Genome Research 11: 1463 - 1468. 2001. 
[15] Gupta, R. and Brunak, S. Prediction of Glycosylation Across the Human Proteome and the Correlation 
to Protein Function. Paci.c Symposium of Biocomputing (PSB2002): 310 - 322. 2002. [16] Hegyi,H. and Gerstein, 
M. (1999). The Relationship Between Protein Structure and Function: a Comprehensive Survey with Application 
to Yeast Genome. J. Mol. Biol. 288: 147 - 164. 1999. [17] Hegyi,H. and Gerstein, M. Annotation Transfer 
for Genomics: Measuring Fuctinal Divergence in Multi-domain Proteins. Genome Research 11: 1632 - 1640. 
2001. [18] Hishigaki H., Nakai K., Ono T., Tanigami A., and Takagi T. Assessment of Prediction Accuracy 
of Protein Function from Protein-protein Interaction Data. Yeast 18: 523 - 531. 2001. [19] Ho, Y., Gruhler, 
A., Heilbut, A., Bader, G.D., Moore, L., Adams, S., Millar, A., Taylor, P., Bennett, K., and Boutilier, 
K. et al. Systematic Identi.cation of Protein Complexes in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae by Mass Spectrometry. 
Nature 415: 180 - 183.2002. [20] Ito, T., Tashiro, K., Muta, S., Ozawa, R., Chiba, T., Nishizawa, M., 
Yamamoto,K., Kuhara, S., Sakaki, Y. Toward a Protein-protein Interaction Map of the Budding Yeast: a 
Comprehensive System to Examine Two-hybrid Interactions in All Possible Combinations Between the Yeast 
Proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 1143 - 1147. 2000. [21] Ito, T., Chiba, T., Ozawa, R., Yoshida, 
M., Hattori, M. and Sakaki, Y. A Comprehensive Two Hybrid Analysis to Explore the Yeast Protein Interactome. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 4569 - 4574. 2001. [22] Jensen, L.J., Gupta, R., Blom,N., Devos, D., Tamames, 
J., Kesmir, C., Nielsen, H., Stærfeldt, H.H, Rapacki,K., and Workman, C. et. al. Prediction of Human 
Protein Function from Post-translational Modi.cations and Localization Features. J. Mol. Biol. 319: 1257 
- 1265. 2002. [23] Kell, D.B. and King, R.D. On the optimization of Classes for the Assignment of Unidenti.ed 
Reading Frames in Functional Genomics Programmes: the Need for Machine Learning. Trends Biotechnol. 18: 
93 - 98. 2000. [24] King, R.D. , Karwath, A., Clare, A., and Dehaspe, L. The Utility of Di.erent Representations 
of Protein Sequence for Predicting Functional Class. Bioinformatics 17: 445 - 454. 2001. [25] Li, S.Z. 
(1995). Markov Random Field Modeling in Computer Vision. Springer-Verlag: Tokyo. [26] Liu, J.S. (2001). 
Monte Carlo Strategies in Scienti.c Computing. Springer-Verlag: New York. [27] Marcotte, E.M., Pellegrini, 
M., Ng, H.L., Rice,D.W., Yeates, T.O., and Eisenberg, D. Detecting Protein Function and Protein-protein 
Interactions from Genome Sequences. Science 285: 751 - 753. 1999. [28] Marcotte, E.M., Pellegrini, M., 
Thompson, M.J., Yeates, T.O., and Eisenberg, D. (1999). A Combined Algorithm for Genome-wide Prediction 
of Protein Function. Nature 402: 83 - 86. 1999. [29] C.V. Mering, R. Krause, M. Snel, S.G. Oliver, S. 
Fields, and P. Bork. Comparative Assessment of Large Scale Data Sets of Protein-protein Interactions. 
Nature 417: 399 - 403. 2002. [30] H.W. Mewes, D. Frishman, U. Guldener,G. Mannhaupt, K. Mayer, M. Mokrejs, 
B. Morgenstern, M. Munsterkotter, S. Rudd, and B. Weil. MIPS: a Database for Genomes and Protein Sequences. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 30: 31 - 34. 2002. [31] R. Mrowka, A. Patzak, and H. Herzel. (2001) Is There a Bias 
in Proteome Research? Genome Research 11: 1971 - 1973. 2001. [32] Oliver, S. Guilt-by-association Goes 
Global. Nature 403: 601 - 603. 2000. [33] Pavlidis, P. and Weston,J. Gene Functional Classi.cation from 
Heterogeneous Data. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Computational Molecular Biology 
(RECOMB2001): 249 - 255. 2001. [34] Pearson,W.R. and Lipman,D.J. Improved Tools for Biological Sequence 
Comparison. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85: 2444 - 2448. 1988. [35] Pellegrini, M., Marcotte, E.M., Thompson,M.J., 
Eisenberg, D., and Yeates, T.O. Assigning Protein Functions by Comparative Genome Analysis: Protein Phylogenetic 
Pro.les. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 4285 - 4288. 1999. [36] Schwikowski, B., Uetz, P., and Fields, 
S. A Network of Protein-protein Interactions in Yeast. Nature Biotechnology 18: 1257 - 1261. 2000. [37] 
Schug,J., Diskin, S., Mazzarelli, J., Brunk, B.P. ,and Stoeckert, C.J,Jr. Prediction Gene Ontology Functions 
from Prodom and CDD Protein Domains. Genome Research 12: 648 - 655. 2002. [38] P.T. Spellman, G. Sherlock, 
M.Q. Zhang, V.R. Iyer, K. Anders, M.B. Eisen, P.O. Brown, D. Botstein, and B. Futcher. Comprehensive 
Identi.cation of Cell Cycle-regulated Genes of the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by Microarray Hybridization. 
Molecular Biology of the Cell 9: 3273 - 3297.1998. [39] Stawiki, E.W., Mandel-Gutfreund, Y., Lowenthal, 
A.C. ,and Gregoret, L.M. Progress in Predicting Protein Function from Structure: Unique features of O-Glycosidases. 
Paci.c Symposium of Biocomputing (PSB2002): 637 - 648. 2002. [40] Uetz, P., Giot, L., Cagney, G., Mans.eld, 
T.A., Judson, R.S., Knight, J.R., Lockshon, D., Narayan, V., Srinivasan, M., and Pochart, et al. A Comprehensive 
Analysis of Protein-protein Interactions in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae. Nature 403: 623 - 627. 2000. [41] 
Venables, W.N. and Ripley, B.D. Modern Applied Statistics with S-Plus. Springer-Verlag; New York. 1996. 
[42] Wu, L., Hughes, T.R., Davierwala A.P., Robinson, M.D., Stoughton,R., and Altschuler S.J. Large-scale 
Prediction of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Gene Function using Overlapping Transcriptional Clusters. Nature 
Genetics 31: 255 - 265. 2002. [43] Zhou, X., Kao, M., and Wong, W. Transitive Functional Annotation by 
Shortest-path Analysis of Gene Expression Data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99: 12783 - 12788. 2002. Data 
Known Unknown Total Phy Gen Exp Phy+Gen Phy+Exp Phy+Exp+Gen 1429 823 373 1736 1655 1931 455 17 210 463 
622 630 1884 840 583 2199 2277 2561 Table 1: The numbers of proteins having at least one partners in 
the di.erent networks. Phy: MIPS physical interaction, Gen: MIPS genetic interaction, Exp: highly co-expressed 
protein pairs. (a) (b) 100 80  80 70 70  90 Sensitivity, % Sensitivity, % 60 60 50 50 40 40 30 30 20 
20 10 10 0 0 (c) Figure 1: The relationship between sensitivity and speci.city for the integrated approach 
by combining a) MIPS physical and genetic interactions, b) MIPS physical interactions and gene expressions, 
and c) MIPS physical interactions, genetic interactions and gene expressions. In a) and b), the numbers 
in the bracket are the numbers of proteins used in calculating the sensitivity and speci.city. (a) (b) 
100 100 90 90 80 80 70 70  20 40 60 80100 Sensitivity, % Sensitivity, % 60 50 40 30 30 20 20 10 0 0 
 Specificity, % Figure 2: The relationship between sensitivity and speci.city of the integrated approach 
by combining a) MIPS physical interactions and TAP protein complexes, b) MIPS physical interactions and 
domains, and c) MIPS physical interactions, TAP protein complexes and domains. In a) and b), the numbers 
in the bracket are the numbers of proteins used in calculating the sensitivity and speci.city. (a) (b) 
100  95 90 85 Sensitivity, % Sensitivity, % 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 Specificity, % Figure 3: Prediction 
of the integrated approach by combining MIPS physical interactions, TAP protein complexes, Pfam domain, 
MIPS genetic Interaction and highly co-expressed gene pairs. a) The relationship between sensitivity 
and speci.city. b) The speci.city and sensitivity of those proteins with di.erent interac­tion partners, 
the numbers in the bracket are the numbers of proteins used in calculating the sensitivity and speci.city. 
 
			