
 An Introductory Course in the Applications of Computer Technology in the Health Sciences G. Bordage, 
M.D.* and Robin B. Lake, Ph.D. Department of Biometry, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106 Abstract This paper discusses the contents of an introductory course in the applications 
of computer technology in the health sciences. A set of instructional goals is described, designed to 
meet the basic needs of the health professional involved in understanding and developing computer-based 
applications in his environment. From these goals, a list of specific objectives is constructed and presented 
as the stu- dent's minimum level of achievement for the course. The implementation, evaluation and impact 
of the course are reviewed. Introduction Each fall semester, the Department of Biometry in the School 
of Medicine at Case Western Reserve University offers an intro- ductory course in the applications of 
com- puter technology in the health sciences entitled 'Biometry 414: Computers in the Health Sciences'.** 
This graduate level course is intended for people in the health sciences (i.e. graduate students in the 
different Health Sciences Schools, house staff, interns, and practicing pro- fessionals), with various 
types and degrees of health related experiences (i.e. in medicine, nursing, pharmacy, hospital administrators), 
and with or without com- puter technology background. The outline of the underlying philosophy and general 
purpose of an introductory course on computer techno- logy in the health sciences will be followed by 
the detailed contents and organization of this course as it is now being offered. *Supported by a fellowship 
grant from the Department of Health and Welfare-Canada, National Health Research and Development Program 
(605-1126-22) **Supported in part by a grant from the National Library of Medicine (5-Ti5- LM07001-01) 
 The Purpose The use of computer technology in the health sciences has become an everyday reality (4,5,7,14) 
yet when one examines the training program of a health profes- sional, little or no formal (2,3,10,12,13, 
14,16,17) instruction is made available to the students in this area. The specific introductory instruction 
is the concern of this presentation. In applying computer technology, as with any other type of technology 
(15), the tool (i.e. the technology) is not an end in itself but a means of better reaching some organizational 
or personal goal. Computer technology, characterized by its ability to store and process large and complex 
amounts of information, can thus be an important and at times a necessary tool in the health sciences. 
 The Goals For the effective application of com- puter technology by the health professional, three 
areas of learning must be considered. First, one should know what is a computer and how it operates. 
Second, one should be able to merge the characteristic features of the computer with one's individual 
pro- fessional goals by using a methodical approach such as systems analysis and design. Third, one should 
know what has been done in computer applications in the health sciences, what is the current state of 
the art and what are the future trends (both in computer technology developments and in specific computer 
applications in the health sciences). Given these general guidelines, the overall learning outcome 
of this introduc- tory course is to provide to the health sciences students and personnel a basic pool 
of information and skills relevant to computer-based applications in the health sciences. To achieve 
this, six instructional goals have evolved. They are described below both in terms of student behaviors 
and corresponding subject matter (9): 84 ...upon completion of this course the stu- dent will: Student 
Behaviors Subject Matter i. know and understand Computer techno- the elements of com-logy: puter technology; 
-definition and components - historical development 2. know the different Review of compu- areas of 
computer ter applications applications in the in the health health sciences; sciences  3. understand 
and Systems approach apply the systems in the analysis, approach in a design, imple- variety of mentation, 
computer-based operation and applications; evaluation of a  computer-based (information) system 4. 
 understand the Computer hardware concepts of com-and software puter hardware and software; 5. operate 
a Computer manipu- computer; lation integrate learning Systems analysis from systems and design; com- 
approach and from puter programming computer manipula-and maniputation. tion into a plan for solving 
a health related problem. 6. The Objectives From these six goals, a list of specific objectives was 
constructed and is expected to be achieved by each one of the students upon completion of the course. 
An elaboration of each one of these goals and objectives follows. i) The student knows and understands 
the elements of computer technology: 1.1 -Identifies the different compo- nents of a computer; defines 
and explains their functions; diagrams a logical model of a computer system; 1.2 -Describes the key 
events in the historical development of computer technology; 1.3 -Outlines the advantages and dis- advantages 
of computer-based com- putation or manipulation of infor- mation over manual procedures; 1.4 -Describes 
and analyzes the prin- ciples of human factors related to information systems and computer technology. 
 2) The student knows the different areas of computer applications in the health sciences: 2.1 -Lists 
and appraises the different computer applications in the health sciences; 2.2 -Differentiates between 
"informa- tion" for numeric computation and "information" for data-base appli- cation. 3) The student 
understands and applies the systems approach in a computer-based application: 3.1 -Defines and gives 
examples of the systems concept; 3.2 -Lists and defines different types and classes of systems; 3.3 
-Defines and gives examples of the control of systems (feedback) concept; 3.4 -~Describes the systems 
approach in terms of an operational tool: systems analysis (including prob- lem definition) and systems 
design; 3.5 -Describes the typical components of an information systems life cycle and their corresponding 
content; 3.6 -Points out and appraises the dif- ferent life cycle phases of an existing information 
system. 4) The student understands the concepts of computer hardware and software: 4.0 -Defines and 
explains the following terms: Computer hardware: i) central processing unit: - registers and processor 
 - arithmetic logic unit - timing sequence control: fetch and execute cycles - microprocessors - microprogramming 
 ii) memory: - main memory (memory address and buffer registers) - secondary memory iii) peripherals: 
 - input and output devices. 85 Computer software: i) operating system ii) assembler, compiler, interpreter 
 iii) higher level programming languages iv) data base management system. 5) The student operates a 
computer: 5.1 -Observes the connection of the peripherals to the central pro- cessing unit (CPU); 5.2 
-Powers up the C.P.U. and peri- pherals; 53. -Bootstraps a particular computer operating system and 
signs on;  54. -Creates a program file and a data file;  5.5 - Executes a program; 5.6 - Prints the 
results; 5.7 - Signs off; 5.8 -Halts and powers down the C.P.U. and.peripherals.  6) The student integrates 
learning from systems analysis and design, and from computer manipulation into a plan for solving a health 
related problem: 6.1 -Analyzes (including problem defi- nition) a problem and generates solutions tO 
it (involving some computer-based processing); 6.2 -Writes an application program (in a programming 
language of his choice); 6.3 -Prepares the data and programs for computer processing; 6.4 -Executes 
steps 5.2 to 5.8 from objective 5; 6.5 -Prepares a brief report, includ- ing description of the problem, 
methods of procedure, estimates of cost, and results obtained.  Th__J~ Implementation The preceding 
goals and objectives are the underlying guidelines to the de- velopment of this introductory course. 
The implementation of these objectives was gradual over the past four years. The current course now being 
offered covers each one Of the previously stated objec- tives; in other words, each student in the 19'75 
class has fulfilled upon completion of the course, each one of the objectives. At the onset of the course, 
the stu- dents are given a copy of the goals and objectives; from these, each student has to select between 
two levels of achievement. First, all students are required to fulfill objectives one through five inclusively: 
this level is referred to as the "minimum essentials level" (9). The second level is optional for most 
students but compulsory for all graduate students in Biometry and includes all six objectives: this level 
is referred to as the advanced or 'develop- mental level' (9). As a second option within the developmental 
level, the student can also elect to learn a programming language. The course is organized around a 
series of fourteen weekly one and one half hour lectures (a total of twenty one hours in the classroom). 
Because of the vast amount of knowledge and skills to be acquired by the student during such a short 
period of time (fifteen weeks), the lec- tures are designed to organize the learning material into compact 
modules, consequently allowing the student to concentrate on specific key aspects of computer technology 
and its application in the health sciences. The teaching load for these lectures and related activities 
is shared by the two authors. This partitioning offers a double exposure to the students, including both 
a technological viewpoint (the latter author) and an applications viewpoint (the former author). From 
these lectures stem a variety of learning activities for the students. The following paragraph is a brief 
description of five of these learning activities. Selected readings are assigned weekly. They are taken 
either from one of the three textbooks used for the course (Abrams (1973), Davis (1973) and Collin (1974)) 
or from pertinent references in the journal literature. From these readings evolve weekly problem-solving 
exercises dealing either with the understanding of computer hardware and software (i.e. system configu- 
ration and functioning, number systems arithmetic) or with the application of systems analysis and design 
techniques (i.e. problem definition, flowcharting). Whenever motor skills are to be learned, the students 
use either of the two mini- computers in the 'Biometry Computer Laboratory' (: two DEC PDP ii/45's,* 
one operating under DOS/BATCH single user operating system, the other using UNIX** time-sharing operating 
system). The Computer Laboratory is also used to demon- strate the hardware and software components of 
some of the ongoing projects in the department (i.e. an ambulatory care regis- tration system, food table 
(nutritional *DEC and PDP are trademarks of Digital Equipment Corporation. **Under license from Western 
Electric Corporation. 86  data) retrieval system, computer-aided clinical information retrieval system, 
physiologic signal analysis and display system, and a variety of biostatistical data analysis projects). 
The formal learn- ing of a computer language is an option for the students: usually, two-thirds of the 
class elect to do some programming. Fin- ally, the out of class activities for the course include some 
systematic review of ongoing computer applications in the health sciences. These reviews are usually 
done through written case studies followed by group discussions; occasionally a guest speaker is invited 
to present a computerized system. Fblms (i.e. ambula- tory uare systems) and video tapes (i.e. computer 
history, medical information systems) are also used to supplement various aspects of the lectures. The 
student evaluation is twofold. The first component is a formative (on- going) evaluation based on the 
weekly hune- work assignments. The second component is a summative (terminal) evaluation based on an 
in-class examination. The final exami- nation is constructed in such a way to test each one of the five 
initial goals. Discussion Having. defined and implemented an introductory course in the applications 
of computer technology in the health sciences, two questions now arise: did the course attract the intended 
students? and, did the course contribute to the integration of computer technology in the health com- 
munity? As for the first question, the intended target population of students for the course included 
both students from the different health sciences schools on the campus and practicing health professionals 
in the community. As listed below, the class enrollment over the past four years (1972-1975) does reflect 
the intended heterogeniety of students: Student<Back@round Total Biomedical engineering ....... 1 Biostatsitics 
........... 4 Corporate Systems Analyst ..... 1 Health Science Education ...... 2 Hospital D.P. programmer 
....... 1 Laboratory technician ....... 6 Medical school graduate depts .... 16 Practicing Physicians 
....... 4 Nursing .............. 6 Nutrition ............. ii Psychology/Social Sciences ..... 9 Undergraduate 
(pre-med.) ....... 17 BIOMETRY 414 Enrollment: 1972 to 1975.  As for the second question, two answers 
have evolved: one relating the impact of the former strudents on their environment; the other describing 
the newly developed curricular activities within the Department of Biometry at Case Western Reserve Univer- 
sity. The impact of the former students on their environment can be appraised at two different levels: 
the first reflecting each one's particular area of interest (i.e. primary care, laboratory instrumenta- 
tion, education, etc.), the other reflect- ing their general attitude toward the use of computers in 
the health community. A sample list of some of the computer-aided projects that have emerged from the 
students includes: a primary care auto- mated history system, a computer-aided primary care diagnostic 
support system, statistical processing of health related data, feature analysis of vectorcardiograms 
in pediatric patients, computer-aided instruction in clinical case studies, and computer-aided nutrition 
counseling. Although there has yet to be a formal analysis of the impact of this introductory course 
on the understanding and development of computer-aided projects by former stu- dents, the overall assessment 
indicates some beneficial contributions. The most outstanding of which is probably one of demystifying 
the role of computer technobgy in the health sciences. Upon returning to their respective working environments, 
the former students are able to better under- stand and explain to their peers the advantages and limitations 
of computer technology as it relates to the local prob- lem at hand. This type of dialogue is most important 
if a meaningful communication is to be established between the computer technologists and the end users 
in a health organization. This inter-communication is often the crucial element of a successful application. 
 Finally, this initial course provided a focus for further curricular developments in the area of computer 
technology and its application in the health sciences. The developments occurred at three levels. First, 
an additional course was added: offered during the spring semester, Biometry 415, 'Health Science Information 
Systems', deals with the logical and physi- cal structuring of information as it relates to computer-based 
storage and pro-  cessing of medical data bases. Second, a series of four two-hour lectures and laboratory 
sessions were offered to the second year medical students during their Biostatistics Subject Committee. 
Third, this introductory course helped recognize the very real and urgent need to educate some health 
professionals in becoming leaders in the application of computer technology in clinical medicine and 
medical education, since the fall 1974, the Department of Biometry at Case Western Reserve University 
offers a master's degree 87 Training Program for health professionals in the 'Applications of Computer 
Technology in the Health Sciences' The curricular content of the Training Program (4) is de- signed to 
help the students build an expertise in information and computer tech- nology, thus capable of complementing 
hheir existing clinical skills. Su__~nmary We have presented the contents and organization of an introductory 
course in the applications of computer technology in the health sciences, as it is now being offered 
to the health sciences students and personnel at Case Western Reserve University. The course emphasizes 
three areas of learning: i) computer technology per se, ii) systems analysis and design, and iii) a review 
of computer based appli- cations in the health sciences. From an initial set of instructional goals related 
to these three areas, a list of specific objectives and their implementation are described and presented 
as the minimum level of achievement for the students in the course. After four years of operation, this 
introductory course has not only attracted the intended student population but has also stimulated the 
more effective use of computers in the health sciences. This response has in turn created the in- centive 
for further curricular develop- ments in the area of computer technology and its application in the health 
sciences. ~Supported in part by a grant from the National Library of Medicine (5-Ti5- LM07001-01) References 
 1. Abrams, M.D., Stein, P.D., Computer Hardware and Software. An Interdis- ciplinary Approach, Addison-Wesley, 
1973.  2. Anderson, J., Gremy, F., Pages, J.C.  (eds.), Education in Informatics of Health Personnel, 
~FiP medical i~r- matics monograph series, Vol. l, North-Holland Publ. Co., 1974.  3. Ackerman, L.V., 
Harris, D.K., "Architecture for a graduate level educational program in the area of computer systems 
in medicine", National Computer Conference, 1975, pp. 765-68.  G L , " Overvlew of computer applications 
in a variety of health care areas", CRC Critical Reviews i__q Bioengineering, Jan. 1975, pp. 183-208 
 4. Ball, M.J., Hammon, .  5. Barnett, O.G., "Computers in patient care", NEJM, 1968, Vol. 279, No. 
24, pp. 1321-27.  6. Brigham, C.R., Kamp, M. and Cross, R.J., "A guide to computer-assisted instruc- 
tion in the health sciences", NTIS Report number PB-214-351, 1973.  7. Collen, M.F., Hospital Computer 
Systems, John Wiley &#38; Sons, N.Y., 1974.  8. Davis, G.B., Computer Data Processin@, McGraw-Hill, 
1973.  9. Gronlund, N.E., Stating Behavioral Objegtives for Classroom Instruction, The MacMillan Co., 
London, 1970  10.Kahn, A.B., "Computer education within medical education", J.Med.Ed., Vol. 4% Feb. 
1972, pp. 137-39. ll.Lake, R.B., "Prospectus: Computer Applications in the Health Sciences", (Fall 1975), 
Department of Biometry, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. 12.Pinkerton, 
M.,. Hamilton, J., and Steinrauf, L.K., "A course for teach- ing medical computer applications to medical 
students", J.Med.Ed., Vol. 49, March 1974, pp. 284-85. 13.Schoenberg, B.S., "An introductory course 
in biomedical computing", J. of the Assn. for the advancement of Med~ Instrume~tat~n, Vol. 4, No. 6,-- 
Nov.-Dec. 1970, pp. 230-36. 14.Schannon, R.H., "A reexamination of computers in medicine", Postgraduate 
Medicine, Vol. 57, No. 4, April 1975, pp. 55-60. 15.White, K.L., Murnaghan, J.H. and Gaus, C.R., "Technology 
and health care", NEJM, Vol. 287, No. 24, Dec. 14, 1972, pp. 1223-27. 16.Woodrow, K.M., "Computer education 
for physicians: a computer service in an internship program", J.Med.Ed., Vol. 45, July 1970, pp. 531-34. 
 17.Yoder, R.D., "A course in biomedical computing applications", J.Med.Ed., Vol. 44, Nov. 1969, pp. 
1056-62. 88  
			