
 278 December 5-7, 1977 JANET L. SHOWERS is a Member of Technical Staff at Bell Telephone Laboratories. 
She received the ScB degree in applied mathe- matics from Brown University in 1973 and the M.S. degree 
in operations research from Stanford in 1974. Since that time she has worked on inventory problems in 
the Operations Research Center at Bell Laboratories. She is currently pursuing the D.E.S. degree in operatlo~s 
research at Columbia University. AN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT SIMULATION GAME ABSTRACT The inventory management 
simulation is a multiechelon, mu!tiproduct computer simula- tion of the Bell System inventory loop which 
can be controlled over a series of time periods. In the simulation the inventories, material flows, and 
account- ing procedures of the inventory system are modeled in detail. The simulation was designed as 
a tool for teaching and illustrating inventory management concepts. Each period decisions must be made 
to control the flow of items throughout the loop. At the end of each period, stock information reports 
and financial state- ments are available to evaluate the deci- sions and the system's behavior. In this 
paper, the inventory system modeled in the simulation is described. In addition to the general operation 
and features, the education and research uses of the simulation are also presented. INTRODUCTION 
Two Bell System inventory management simula- tions have been developed. The first was used as part of 
an AT&#38;T sponsored Exec- utive Seminar on Inventory Management Principles which was offered at the 
Bell System Center for Technical Education. This simulation designed by A. B. Hoadley (i) was effective 
in illustrating to high level executives that good inventory management can improve the financial per- 
formance of the company. As a result of the success of the first simulation, a more detailed simulation 
of the Bell System supply pipeline was developed for use in a new course, Inventory Management Fun- damentals, 
which is offered to middle level Bell System managers. This new simulation more closely approximates 
the actual telephone company inventory system and is designed to develop the user's ability to make actual 
operational decisions. It is this second simulation that is described in this paper. Janet L. Showers 
Bell Telephone Laboratories OVERVIEW OF THE FLOW DIAGRAM Figure i is a flow diagram of the simula- 
tion. It models the inventory loop of a single telephone company. This flow di- agram is appropriate 
for any class of telephone company equipment that can be recycled. The design was motivated in particular 
by station apparatus such as telephones and data sets. The computer simulates the movement of units 
from one inventory location (denoted by a box) to another. The allowable flows (indicated by arrows) 
are controlled either by the player through his decisions (indicated on the diagram by valve symbols), 
or by the computer through parameters uniquely identified with the product. Associated with some of the 
flows are fixed delays (indicated by saw-toothed symbols). The inventory loop has four main components. 
These are the Western Electric Company (WE) factory, the telephone company central stock, the service 
center repair process and the work locations (the part of the loop inside the dashed box). In practice, 
many of these work locations (WL) are served by a single central stock. In the simula- tion there may 
be three work locations. All inventory units enter the inventory loop at central stock. Items may be 
either purchased new from Western Electric stock, or purchased used from other tele- phone companies. 
Central stock is also supplied with recycled items from the service center repair process. If the inventory 
level at central stock gets too high, units may be disposed of through sales to other telephone companies. 
 In the work locations, customer demand must be met. The revenue producing box contains all items of 
the product that are in service, i.e., on the customer premise and producing revenue. -Here, the simulation 
is driven by service orders that cause equipment to move in and out of revenue producing (RP). Three 
classes of equipment enter RP: inward move- ment (items for new service), changes-ln Winter Simulation 
Conference 279 AN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT GAME ... Continued (replacements at the customer's request), 
and failures-in (replacements for defective equipment). Central stock supplies the work locations with 
items. Two types of inventory may be kept in the WL for meeting demand for items into RP. Maintenance 
spares can only be used for replacing failed items in service. Work location stock is used for meeting 
the other demands. If no maintenance spares are available, an emergency replacement is shipped from 
central stock. If there are no items in work location stock and if the play has allowed for quick response 
 shipments (generally at a higher cost), an item is ordered from central stock. If such shipments have 
not been allowed, then the customer demand becomes backordered. Work location stock is supplied also 
by items that have been turned around in the field. If too many items accumulate in WL stock, they may 
be returned to central stock. Three classes of items leave RP: outward movement (items associated with 
disconnec- tion of service), changes-out and failures- out. In order to disconnect service, it is assumed 
that no visit to the customer premise is required. Items that are no longer producing revenue, but have 
not yet been removed from the customer's premise, are contained in the awaiting recovery box. Some of 
these items may be lost. The player controls the removal rate for such items. The recovered items are 
candidates for field turnaround, which is assumed to be cheaper than service center repair but results 
in a higher failure rate. Items not sent through field turnaround plus the failures are returned to 
the service center. Some items are visibly damaged and thus junked. Others may be junked at the player's 
request. Of the rest, the player may choose to repair some. When repair is completed, the items are 
returned to central stock for reuse. DEFINITION OF A GAME A game is defined to be a set of parameters 
that describe the specific products and inventory system to be simulated. By appropriately choosing values 
for these parameters, different products and portions of a product's life cycle can be modeled. The simulation 
can store up to six games in memory. The game parameters are of five types: I) Structure defining parameters 
such as length of simulation, number of products, number of work locations, delays, and available 
manhours. 2) Flow rates such as failure rates, junk rates, loss rates, reconnect rates, fraction of 
lost items becoming unauthorized equipment, and per- centage of lost sales. 3) Financial items such 
as ordering and shipping costs, prices, of new items, repair charges, labor rates, revenues, inflation 
rates, interest rate, and tax rate. 4) Initializations of in- ventories and depreciation rates. 5) Demands 
represented by service orders for connecting or disconnecting service. FORMAT OF PLAY The length of 
the simulation is divided into several major time intervals called decision periods. A decision period 
is divided into minor time intervals called simulation cycles. At the beginning of each decision period 
the user inputs his inventory control decisions such as how much to order, junk, remove, and repair. 
The computer simulates the flow of items and the financial activities for each simulation cycle in the 
decision period. At the end of the period, operating results which are a series of performance measures 
are printed. Figure 2 is an example of the operating results report. There are ten information reports 
that contain more detailed information on the system's behavior and may be selectively requested by the 
user as needed. These reports include income statement, balance sheet, service level distributions, inventory 
levels, movement of items. Figure 3 and 4 are examples of reports. In a classroom environment, the students 
will be grouped into teams. In a single computer session up to six teams can play. All teams are independent 
in the sense that i) each team can play at its own speed, 2) the results of any team depend only on its 
decisions and not on the decisions of any other team, and 3) each team can play a different game. FEATURES 
OF THE SIMULATION Some of the features included to make using the simulation both realistic and interest- 
ing are described below. l) Service order demands for each cycle can be input manually or randomly generated. 
When random the demands are generated from a truncated normal distribution according to distributional 
parameters input by the user. The same parameters apply to the demands in all work locations, but because 
of the randomness they result in different particular series for each work location. Seasonal fluctuations 
can be incorporated into the random series.  2) One or two products can be controlled in the same simulation 
game. Sub- stitution between the two products when meeting demand can be allowed. 280 December 5-7, 
1977 3) Associated with the inventory system is a cradle-to-grave accounting system. This means an item 
remains on the books from time of purchase until final disposal. The values of these accounts are computed 
according to Bell System account- ing rules. 4) The simulation includes the equa- tions to compute an 
income state- ment for the inventory system. The sources of revenue are the fixed installation charge 
and the con- tinuing revenue from items in service. The expenses that are affected by inventory management 
are itemized. These are service center repair cost, field turn- around, transportation and order- ing, 
service maintenance, and depreciation accruals. 5) If orders cannot be met on time, they become backordered 
and must be met in some later cycle. As a penalty for not meeting customer demand on time, a fraction 
of the in-service orders that are back- ordered will become lost sales. 6) There are two ways in which 
each inventory control decision can be input to the simulation: by quantity or by rule. As an example, 
consider the decision of ordering items for maintenance spares. If the decision is made by quantity, 
the user specifies the number of items to be ordered dur- ing the decision period. In the other method, 
the computer deter- mines the quantity according to a rule input by the player. For maintenance spare 
orders, the quantity ordered each cycle is determined so as to keep the number of maintenance spares 
at a level set by the user. The rules that must be determined by the player are similar to decisions 
that must be made when managing telephone company inventory. 7) In addition to the information reports, 
the detailed time series of certain key variables in the simulation are available. This facility of being 
able to examine the cycle-to-cycle fluctuations of inventories and flows was included in the design for 
research applications. 8) The effects of inflation can be considered. There are three separate inflation 
rates: one affects new purchases from Western Electric, one affects revenues, and the last affects labor 
rates and all other costs. The number of items that fail each cycle from RP items is randomly generated 
from a Poisson distribu- tion. The mean failure rate depends upon the amount of field turnaround that 
is done. The assumption is made that items repaired locally are not repaired as thoroughly as items 
repaired in the service center. Thus, inventory strategy will affect the failure rate and thus the 
maintenance expense.  i0) A mathematical model of the factory is included in order to demonstrate certain 
characteristics of its real counterpart. The factory produc- tion rate should be able to provide central 
stock with a specific objective level of service. The cycle-to-cycle fluctuation in factory output should 
be small, since production capacity in a real factory cannot change abruptly. The model uses past orders 
to fore- case future orders on Western Electric from central stock. The production rate that will provide 
the objective level of service is computed, and exponential smoothing is used to reduce the cycle varia- 
tion in factory output. ii) The mathematical model of the service center repair process incorporates 
several realistic features of a repair shop. Although the repair rate cannot change abruptly, it does 
depend on the number of items in the repair queue. The repair rate is chosen to meet an objective average 
delay through the repair process; the delay for each item is random. EDUCATIONAL TOOL Over i000 Bell 
System managers have been exposed to the inventory management simula- tion in the Inventory Management 
Fun- damentals course. The simulation is used as a full-day exercise to reinforce the inventory theory 
that has been presented in lectures. Students and instructors are enthusiastic about the simulation. 
Some of the things they learned playing it are: i) Although a manager may be respon- sible for controlling 
only one part of inventory loop, he must be aware of howhis decision will affect other parts of the system. 
 2) Optimal inventory decisions change as a product progresses through its llfe cycle. Winter Simulation 
Conference 281 AN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT GAME ... Continued 3) Utilization, the percent of in- ventory 
producing revenue, is not the only measure of good inventory management. Capital expenditures, rate of 
return, and service level to the customer are also important.  RESEARCH TOOL The simulation has been 
used to aid in the study of the Bell System inventory loop. The recycling of items creates depend- encies 
between the components of the loop. Although analytic results are often difficult to obtain, the simulated 
system gives insight to the behavior of the actual system and can be used to test inventory control algorithms. 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY  1. Hoadley, Bruce and Showers, Janet, "An Inventory Management Simulation/ Game of the 
Bell System Inventory Loop," Talk at ORSA/TIMS Miami Joint National Meeting, ORSA/TIMS Bulletin, No. 
2, November 3-5, 1976. Z82 December S-7, 1977 4 b > --] n, I i I I I I 0 a: J.NO SIONVHO I~ ~.<--~ 
I i L~ x+m<~ <--<~-- I L , !! i ", art! Winter Simulation Conference 283 AN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT GAME...Continued 
OPERATING RESULTS FIGURE 2. TEAM 2 CUMULATIVE RATE OF RETURN CURRENT RATE OF RETURN OPERATING INCOME 
AVERAGE NET PLANT BUDGET: SPENT TO DATE % OF BUDGET EQUIPMENT REPAIR CONSTRUCTION EXPENDITURES EQUIPMENT 
CONNECTIONS OR PIOC  * TOTAL UTILIZATION REPAIRS&#38;TURNAROUND PER 100 TOTAL REPAIRS&#38;TURNAROUND 
PER 180 TOTAL OUT ORDER RECOVERIES PER I%00M LOSSES PER 100 OM JUNKS PER i@00M ANNUAL FAILURES PER UNIT 
RP LOST SALES AS % OF TOTAL SALES DELAY THRU REPAIR SHOP IN CYCLES 381273 121138 DEMAND OUTS SERVICE 
LEVELS: % MET ON PRODUCT i: WECO STOCK CENTRAL STOCK CUSTOMER MOVEMENT DATA: CENTRAL sTocK AX PURCHASES 
AX SALES NEW PURCHASES REPAIR COMPLETIONS JUNKS SHIPMENTS OUT OF CENTRAL RETURNS TO UNREPAIRED RETURNS 
TO CENTRAL STOCK SERVICE LEVEL DISTRIBUTIONS DELAY PRODUCT: 1 8 1 2 3 4 >= 5  284 December 5-7, 
1977 TIME 65.89 89.58 91.54 FIGURE 3 AND SERVICE STOCK  FIGURE 4 CUSTOMER 91.54 8.06 .40 .g% 
 .8g .g% 58.66 48.46 PRODUCT 1 381273 484866 786139 97.74 59.12 97.20 87.84 2.89 11.43 .06 
.87 6.24 CENTER TEAM 2 PRODUCT 1 728 0 3153 4289 685 8279 4891 8 TEAM 2 % DEMAND MET AT CENTRAL 
STOCK 89.58 9.60 .83 .80 .00 .08 PERIOD 14.071 14.%71 129803 922483 PERIOD PERIOD WECO STOCK 65.89 
 16.71 9.87 7.52 .00 .00   
			