
 An Internship in Information Systems: Combining Computer Science Education with Realistic Problems 
 John Buck and Ben Shneiderman Department of Computer Science Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana 
47401 Introduction Computer science graduates who become pro- fessional programmers will have a direct 
and substantial influence on the impact of applications, but little in traditional computer science training 
curriculum pre- pares them for this serious responsibility. Recognizing this situation, we designed a 
two term sequence for advanced under- graduates and masters students which would not only provide them 
with the required academic knowledge, but would develop the pragmatic skills and professional attitude 
necessary for dealing with realistic problems and working environments. The educational atmosphere that 
we tried to create resembles the internship phase followed in teacher training, medical schools, law 
schools, clinical psychology and other disciplines. Theory vs. Practice The dual aspects of computer 
science, theory and practice, have been discussed by a number of commentators (Wegner, 1970; Shnelderman, 
1971; Finerman, 1975). The theoretician works in greater isolation, deriving feedback, through the Journal 
literature, from the small number of specialists familiar with the particular subfield. Objective criterion 
for creative ideas are more feasible for the theoretician and the impact of a poorly conceived paper 
is limited. By contrast, the practitioner develops programs by intense interaction with diverse indivi- 
duals: programmers with a wide range of skills and subject area specialists who have called the programmer 
analysts to develop an implementation. Feedback from users and management is more imme- diate and more 
complex. Practitioners must respond to the diverse demands of users who have little concern for elegant 
programming techniques but expect systems to meet their needs. Management also has little interest in 
programming details but is concerned with economic issues, adherence to a schedule, satisfaction of higher 
management and a wide range of personnel problems. Success is difficult to measure because of the multiplicity 
of conflicting demands. The programmer/analyst is caught in the middle; trying to do a proper technical 
Job while satisfying the wishes and personal quirks of users and management. Finerman (1975) strongly 
supports the development of skills other than ~he purely academic ones and McFarlan and Nolan (197B) 
 stress that: "Our research has increasingly led us to believe that the effectiveness of using the computer 
in organizations Is often influenced more by under- standing and resolution of the management issues 
... than by a detailed insight into the underlying issues of technology." Entwined in these conflicts 
is the question of social and professional conscience. Programmer/Analysts often make decisions about 
details which critically influence the new system's impact. They must deal with the desires of those 
directly con- cerned with a new system while adhering to professional standards and considering the impact 
of their work on society. The ACM report on "Guidelines for Humanizing Computerized Information Systems" 
(Sterling, 1974) should be required reading for all professional programmers and analysts. Motivation 
for the Internship in information Systems The lay population and informed pro- fessionals derive their 
impressions of computers, computer programmers and compu- ter scientists mainly from interaction with 
the products of computer practitioners. These impressions have not always been positive, partially due 
to the ineptness of some practitioners. To produce a more positive impression, practitioners must be 
taught to be not only intellectually able, but sensitive to their product's impact and their own behavior 
in a professional environment. Keeping these concerns in mind we developed the internship in Information 
Systems with the following goals: 80 l) to teach students the academic knowledge relevant to designing 
and implementing rea- listic medium scale information processing projects (1 to l0 person-years of 
effort), 2) to develop communication skills necessary for interviewing users and making presen- tations 
to management, 3) to give students experience in writing complete feasibility studies, design specifications, 
systems manuals and users manuals and 4) to expose students to the complexity of interacting with 
others on a project development team. Two further goals above the level of direct concern to our students 
were: 5) to serve the university and civic com- munity by providing a free systems analysis and programming 
ability to organizations which could not afford it or were unsure of making an investment for such services 
 (some of our projects were pilot projects which were intended to lead to full scale applications later). 
 6) to gain favorable recognition for the Computer Science Department and for computer science in general. 
 Detailed Course Specifications Before entering the Information Systems sequence the students must have 
had a mini- mum of 2 semesters of heavy programming coursework using at least 2 high level languages. 
They have had exposure to basic machine structures, symbolic coding and assembly systems, data analysis, 
sorting, searching, and string and text manipulation. An additional prerequisite is a course on Data 
Structures covering the structure and use of storage media, methods of repre- senting data, and techniques 
for operating on data structures (typically includes Knuth Vol. I, Chapter 2, The Art of Computer Programming, 
Addison-Wesley, 1968). The initial semester of our sequence is titled Information Systems Design. Its 
customary enrollment is about 40 students. There are three lectures a week with additional required homework 
and a project assignment. The course begins with a three week dis- cussion of file indexing techniques, 
indexed sequential files, randomization, data base concepts, and related topics. As a text we have used 
Data Management for On-Line Systems (Hayden Boon, 1974) by David Lefkovitz. While the book is well done 
and extensive in its coverage we use only a portion of the text. The students are required to develop 
a program for the maintenance of a large scale file for credit reference and balance purposes, as would 
be maintained by a retail business, using the techniques discussed. This may be done in any language 
on whatever equip- ment they choose. A CDC 6600, a DEC-10 and an IBM 370-158, as well as a number of 
mini computers, are available for student use. The remainder of the course centers around the methods 
of Systems Analysis as used in business for the development of computer related systems. At this point 
sample projects are presented and students are encouraged to select one from the list given or create 
one of their own. The majority of these projects are tasks which have practical application and have 
been solicited from the University and local community. Simultaneously students form teams of 2 to 5 
members and accept the pro- Ject responsibility Jointly. The student teams get real exposure to the problems 
of personal relationship and system develop- ment which go beyond the basic computer problem. Examples 
of projects undertaken in the past appear in the Appendix. The text we have used for this portion of 
the course is Information Systems Analysis (SRA,1974) by M. J. Alexander. It provides not only a good 
discussion of the various techniques employed, reports required, and criteria of performance but also 
a selected group of systems are described which allow the student to see these techniques in application 
to realistic problems. A new text which looks like a good alternate is Systems Analysis: Definitions 
Process~ and ~a~ (SRA,1976) by Philip C. Semprevivo. a clear presentation of the material necessary 
and an orientation towards Data Base Systems. During this segment of the course we place great emphasis 
on the human relationship problems encountered when doing a system study. The importance of interview 
tech- niques and presentations i~ stressed. Flowcharts, Decision Tables, Gantt Charts, Simulation and 
other methods of system modeling are discussed as well as the documentation required, in normal practice, 
to design and define a system. Cost analysis is introduced in the preparation of a preliminary survey 
which the "customer" must sign off on before the student may continue. System design, complete with input 
and output specification and the design of the forms associated with those functions, is the next phase 
of the work. At the conclusion of this period the stu- dent teams have developed a complete system with 
full documentation, so that it can be handed to a programming team for implemen- tation. The project 
teams do a live pre- sentation to the class and to the "customer" for whom the system is being done. 
As stated earlier, each of these projects are done, as much as possible, with an actual user thereby 
maximizing the practicality of the experience for the student. After presentation of the final design 
and acceptance by the user, the students are ready to proceed to the second semester when theytake on 
the role of programmers. closely parallels the experiences that they Of course, the progress of the students 
and were now finding themselves in. Many attri- their design is monitored by the faculty, and suitable 
performance by the students is assured. In 1:he second semester, Information Systems Dew~lopment, hardware 
organization and sof~;ware constructs such as sequential access, direct access, hash coding, index- ing 
strategies, inverted files, rings, trees, and multilinked structures are dis- cussed in depth. These 
concepts are applied by the students in programming their projects. Detailed mathematical com- parisons 
of storage structures and retrieval algorithms are presented to assist students in making implementation 
decisions for their projects. Informal discussions about the practical problems of implementing large 
systems are held occasionally to deal with problems raised by particular projects. In a form of "group 
therapy" students are asked to reveal the difficulties they are having with their projects and to frankly 
discuss the unexpected problems that they have encountered. During the second half of the term a thorough 
overview of contemporary database concepts is presented. Codd's relational model of data and numerous 
query languages developed for it are discussed. The hierarchic organization of IBM's Information Management 
System (IMS) or MRI's System 2000 is shown as a second conceptual framework. Finally, the network structure 
provided by the CODASYL Data Base Task Group (DBTG) Report is surveyed. Texts used in the second semester 
are The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. III (Addison-Wesley, 1973) by Knuth and Intro- duction to 
Data Base Systems (Addison- Wesley, 1975) by C. J. Date. A good al- ternative in a single text would 
be Computer Data Base Organization (Prentice- Hall, 1975) by James Martin. Students must complete their 
project and have a running system by the end of the semester. The thrust of this sequence is to provide 
a real system development experience for the student. Delays in design decisions, problems in development 
i.e. test time on the computer, availability of equipment, etc. are all met in the course of their endeavors. 
Still the deadline approaches Just as it would in a real world situation. We are pleased by the encouraging 
feedback about our internship program. Local organi- zations are eager to use the services of our students 
and their products are now func- tioning to aid the community. Some of the projects are of such a nature 
that they may ew~ntually receive national prominence. Others are serving much needed areas of purely 
local interest. Students who have gone on to professional programming careers point to the sequence as 
the most helpful course they had while at IU since it so bute their ability to get their Job to the 
fact that they could show concrete accomp- lishments on their projects. Summary The goal of this sequence 
was to develop the pragmatic skills and professional atti- tude necessary for dealing with realistic 
problems and working environments. In addition to lectures on academic topics, students were required 
to complete substan- tial realistic projects, thereby creating a highly motivating internship atmosphere. 
 References I. Finerman, A. "Professionalism in the CompUting Field" CACM 18, i (January 1975). 2. 
M6Farlan, F.W. an---S-~TL. Nolan. "Curri- culum Recommendations for Graduate Pro- fessional Programs 
in Information Systems: Recommended Addendum on Information Systems Administration: ~ACM 16, 7 (July 
1973).  3. Shneiderman, B. "Computer Science Education and Social Relevance" SIGCSE Bulletin Vol. 3, 
No. 1 (March 1971).  4. Sterling, T.D. "Guidelines for  Humanizing Computerized Information Systems: 
A Report from Stanley House" CACM 17, ii (November 1974). 5. Wegner, P. "Three Computer Cultures - Comput@r 
Technology, Computer Mathematics and Computer Science: in Advances in Computers i0, (1970). Appendix 
 On-Line OPtometry clinic Patient Database This highly successful project, carried out by two students, 
provided the Optometry Clinic at Indiana University with an on- line information system to keep track 
of patient data. The system is in use by clerical personnel for maintaining patient addresses, appointment 
dates, appointment histories and limited clinical information for the 8,000 patients seen by the clinic 
 each year. In addition to coping with the file management issues and interactive terminal dialogues, 
the implementors had to deal with the privacy questions related to medical information. Voter Registration 
and Precinct Mapping System Making use of detailed street and address information collected by volunteers, 
two students implemented a system for main- taining block by block voter registration information 
for Monroe County, Indiana. Immediate benefits were a complete, up-to- date and accurate street guide, 
which could be updated regularly with a minimal effort. Future efforts are designed to increase the 
 accuracy of voter registration books and simplify office procedures at the Board of Voter Registration. 
and the Graduate School of Business International Trade Data Economic Report Generator A large 12 reel 
sequential tape file con- taining international trade data was made available to economic researchers 
at Indiana University. The data base contains import/export information from 22 reporting countries and 
240 partner countries cover- ing 10,000 commodities over 15 years. Querying the sequential file was a 
costly and time consuming affair requiring multi- ple scans of the entire file, when only a fraction 
of the information was necessary for a given research direction. To remedy this situation, a direct access 
file was constructed from the relevant information and a simple querying facility was developed to allow 
non-programmers to access the database. African Studies Slide Collection A four person team worked 
with the photo- librarian of the African Studies program at Indiana University to develop a com- puterized 
index to a collection of 10,000 slides of Africa. A complex indexing and cataloguing scheme was used 
to enable users to get output describing the holdings by photographer, topic, region or by a series 
of keywords which were stored in a glossary. The manager of the slide collection could add and delete 
slides, add to the glossary and receive status reports. Traffic Information System Working with an 
applied psychology pro- fessor several students wrote a program to maintain detailed information about 
street intersections in Bloomington, Indiana. The system will enable researchers to study patterns of 
signs and street condi- tions along heavily traveled routes with the hope of making suggestions for improving 
safety at intersections. The eventual plan is to correlate this information with traffic accident data 
and get support from the U.S. Department of Transportation. Wrestlers Information Management Package 
 In answer to a request from the National Amateur Athletic Union Office one of our teams developed a 
package to maintain a file of wrestlers and their records at all levels of competition. Reports could 
be obtained on all wrestlers from one state, school, coach, age group, weight class etc. Other ~programs 
facilitated selection for interna- tional team trials by tabulation of accomp- lishments in various tournaments 
and levels of competition. The package has been de- signed to make it easily adaptable to other sports. 
 developed a much more efficient BMP system than had been thought possible by either the School of Business 
or the manufacturer. Capitalizing on the specificity of the pro- duct line they were able to effectively 
reduce run time by an estimated 60%. Court Case Record History System The local court system is overloaded 
with cases and experiences great difficulty in scheduling the cases, lawyers, and court- rooms. This 
group worked with the court clerks and has designed a system to ease not only that burden but to maintain 
vigl- lance on open cases and clean up the back- log. Indiana State Geolosical Survey: Petroleum and 
Gas Well File The Geological Survey Petroleum File con- tains extensive data on 50,000 oil and gas wells 
in the state of Indiana. Two students prepared a system to aid in the preparation of statistics for 
yearly reports on drilling trends, reserves on hand etc., and provide wildcat drillers with information 
on other wells in the area of a projected drilling site. Searches can be performed by speci- fying areas 
in the state, geologic features or other critical variables. Building Permits System Working with the 
School of Business, two students constructed a system to support the collection, maintenance, analysis 
and distribution of current and past information concerning building construction activity in Indiana. 
The system provides monthly, quarterly and annual reports as well as supporting research queries on types 
of construction activity, for example residen- tial or industrial. Archaelogy Information System Complex 
descriptions of the sites and arti- facts found at particular sites are main- tained by the Glenn Black 
Laboratory of Archaelogy at Indiana University. Unfor- tunately searching for specific information 
from the handwritten forms is a prohibi- tively time consuming experience. The proposed system will 
simplify the coding techniques and allow machine searching to facilitate research. Bill of Materials 
Processor One group working with a local manufacturer 
			