
 Application and Evaluation of Large Deviation Techniques for Traffic Engineering in Broadband Networks* 
Costas Courcouhetisi Vasilios A. Siris, and George D. Starnoulist Institute of Computer Science (ICS) 
Foundation for R.esearch and Technology -Hellas (FOR,TH) P.O. Box, GR 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 
{courcou,vsiris,gstamoul}@ics.forth.gr Abstract Accurate yet simple methods for traffic engineering are 
im-portant for efficient dimensioning of broadband networks. The goal of this paper is to apply and evaluate 
large devia-tion techniques for traffic engineering. In particular, we em-ploy the recently developed 
theory of e,ffective banclwidths, where the effective bandwidth depends not only on the sta-tistical 
characteristics of the traffic stream, but also on a. link s operating point through two parameters, 
the space and time parameters, which are computed using the mung sources asymptotic. We show that this 
effective ba.ndwidth definition can accurately quantify resource usage. Further-more, we estimate and 
interpret values of t,he space and time parameters for various mixes of real traffic demon-strating how 
these values can be used to clarify the effects on the link performance of the time scales of burstiness 
of the traffic input, of the link parameters (capacity and buffer), and of traffic control mechanisms, 
such as traffic sha.ping. Our a.pproach relies on off-line analysis of tmffic traces, the granularity 
of which is det,ermined by t,he time parameter of the link, and our experiments involve a. large set 
of MPEG-1 compressed video and Internet Wide Area. Network (WAN) traces, as well as modeled voice traffic. 
Keywords: Traffic engineering, broadband networks, ATM, effective bandwidths, large deviations. 1 introduction 
The rapid progress and successful penetration of broadband communications in recent years has led to 
important new problems in traffic modeling and engineering. Among ot,l-ers, call admission control and 
network dimensioning for cases of guaranteed QoS (which is one of the most impor-tant features supported 
by the ATM technology) have at-tracted the attention of resea.rchers. Successful a.pproaches are closely 
related to the ability of quantifying the usa.ge This work was supported in part by the European Commission 
under ACTS project CASHMAN (AC-039). +AI.so with the Dept. of Computer Scienrr, LJnivcrsity of ( IF1~. 
Permission to make digital or hsrd copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advan-tags 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the tint page To copy otherwise. to republish. 
lo post on se~wv or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission end/or a fee. SIGMETRICS 
98 Madison. WI. USA 0 1996 ACM 0-69791~962-3/96/0006...$5.00 of resources, on the basis of traffic modeling 
and measure- ments. For example, statistical analysis of traffic measurements [ll, 14, 71 has shown a 
self-similar or fractal behavior; such t,raffic exhibits long range dependence or slowly decaying a.utocorrelation. 
Although the implications of such long range dependence is still an open issue (e.g., see [6, 81 and 
the references therein), recent work [16, 81 has shown that t,hese implications can be of secondary importance 
to the buffer overflow probability when the buffer size is small, which applies to the case where real 
time communication is supported. This example motivates the need for a method- ology to understand the 
impact of the various time scales of the burstiness of real broadband traffic on the performance of the 
network and on its resource sharing capabilities. In particular, some basic questions for which the network 
en-gineer must provide answers are the following: How much does the cell loss probability decrease when 
the link capac-ity or buffer size increases: How does traffic shaping affect t,lte multiplexing capability 
of a link and the amount of re-sources used by a bursty source ? What is the necessary granularity of 
traces in order to capture the information that is important for performance analysis and network di-mensioning? 
What are the effects of the composition of the traffic mix on the multiplexing capability of a link? 
Traditional queueing theory, which requires elaborate traf-fic models, ca.nnot be applied to answer such 
questions in the context of large multi-service networks; for such cases asymptotic methods are more 
appropriate. In this paper we answer such questions by applying and evaluating the many sources asymptotic 
and the effective bandwidth based on this asymptotic, for real broadband traffic. This traffic consists 
of MPEG-1 compressed video, Internet Wide Area Network (WAN) traffic, and traffic resulting from modeled 
voice. Problems related to resource sharing have often been analyzed using the notion of e&#38;hue bandwidth, 
which is a scalar summarizing resource usage depending on the statis-t,ical properties a.nd Quality of 
Service (QoS) requirements of a source. Effective bandwidths are usually derived by mea.ns of a.symptotic 
analysis, which is concerned with how t,he buffer overflow probability decays as some quantity in-creases. 
If this quantity is the size of the buffer, we have the large 6usfr asymptotic [5, lo]. If the buffer 
per source and capacity per source are kept consta.nt, and we are interested Kelatrd work 011 how traflic 
smoothing affects the multiplexing capability of a link can be found in [la] and the references therein. 
 in how the overflow probability decays as the size of the system (the broadband link and the multiplexed 
sources) increases, then we have the many sources nsynaptotic; this asymptotic regime has been investigated 
in [4, 1, 171. Effective bandwidth definitions based on the la.rge buffer asymptotic were found, in some 
cases, to be overly conser-vative or too optimistic [2]. This occurs because the large buffer asymptotic 
does not take into account the gain when many independent sources are statistically multiplexed to-gether. 
On the other hand, the effective bandwidth defined according to the many sources asymptotic [9, 31 depends 
not only on the statistical properties and Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of a source, but also 
on the statistical properties of the other traffic it is multiplexed with a.ntl the parameters (capacity 
and buffer) of the multiplexing link. Only recently [9, 31 has it been understood how t,o incorporate 
such information into the definition of t,he ef-fectivo ba.ndwidth. This work has shown that t,hc effective 
handwidth of a source depends on the link s operating point through two paramet,ers, called the space 
and time pa.ra.me-ters, which in turn depend on the link parameters (capacity and buffer) and the statistical 
properties of the multiplexed traffic. These parameters can be computed using the many sources asymptotic 
and, a.s we will demonstmtc with real broadband traffic, have important applications for traffic engineering. 
Since the effective bandwidth gives the amount, of resources that must be reserved for that source in 
order to satisfy its QoS requirements, it helps simplify problems in traffic engineering and network 
dimensioning. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Sec-tion 2 we review basic results 
from the theory of effective bandwidths, as developed in [9], and the theory of many sources asymptotics 
[4, 1, 171. In Section 2.2 we discuss t,hc application of this framework to traffic engineering, giv-ing 
emphasis on the interpretation of the space a.nd time parameters. In Section 3 we present a detailed 
series of es-periments which aim to evaluate the accuracy of the above framework for link capacities 
and buffer sizes anticipa.ted for broadband networks and for real broadband traffic which consists of 
MPEG-1 compressed video and Internet WAN traces, in addition to modeled voice traffic. Finally, Sec-tion 
4 summarizes the results of the paper and identifies areas for future research. 2 The Many Sources Asymptotic 
and its Implications In this section we summarize the key results of the ma.ng sources asymptotic and 
their implications for traffic ollgi-neering. 2.1 Effective Bandwidths Suppose the arrival process at 
a broadband link is the super-position of independent sources of J types. Let N, = ivlc, be the number 
of sources of type j, and let n = (ni , , n ,I) (note that the n,s are not necessarily integers). This 
system can be viewed as having N sources of the same type, where a single source consists of a proportion 
of the J source types and can be characterized by the vrct,or II. The broadband link has a shared buffer 
of size B = Nb and link capa.cit,y C = NC. Parameter N is the scaling paramct,cr (size of t,hr system), 
and parameters 6, c a.re the buffer and ca.parit,I per source, respectively. We suppose tha.t a.fter 
taking into account all economic factors (such a.s demand and com-petition) the proportions of traffic 
of each of the .I t,yprs remains close to that given by the vector n, and we seek to understand the relative 
usage of network resources that should be attributed to each traffic type. Furthermore, let XJ[O, t] 
be t,he t,otal load produced by a source of type j in the t,ime interval (0, t], which feeds the above 
link. We a.ssume that -Y, [0, t] has stationary incre-ments. Then, the eflective Land~idth of a source 
of type j is defined as [9] where s, t a.re system parameters which are defined by the context, of the 
source, i.e., the characteristics of the mul-t,iplrxed traffic, t,heir QoS requirements, and the link 
re-sources (capacity and buffer). Specifically, the time pa-ramet,er I (measured in, e.g., milliseconds) 
corresponds to the most probable duration of the busy period of the buffer prior t,o overflow [4]. The 
Jpace parameter s (measured in, e.g., kb- ) corresponds to the degree of multiplexing and depends, a.mong 
others, on the size of the peak rate of the multiplexed sources rela.tive to the link capacity. In particular, 
for link capacities much larger than the peak rate of the multiplexed sonrces, s tends t,o zero and cr,(s, 
t) approaches t,llc mean rate of the source, while for link ca-pacit,ies not mncl~ larger than the peak 
rate of the sources, s is large and cr3(s, t) approaches the maximum value that t,he random variable 
XJ [0, t]/t can attain. Let, Q(Nc, Nh,Nn) = P(overflow) be the probability that in an infinite buffer 
which multiplexes Nn = (Nnl, . . , NUJ) sources and is served at rate C = NC, the queue length is above 
the threshold H = Nb. The following holds for Q( NC, Nb, Nn) [4]: ,$m, $ log Q(Nc, Nb, Nn) = -, ste n303(s, 
t) -s(ct + b) = -I, (2) J=1 1 where I is called the asymptotic rate junction. The last equation is referred 
to as the many sources asymptotic, and has been proved for continuous time in [l] and for a special case 
in [17]. A similar asymptotic holds for the proportion of workload lost through the overflow of a finite 
bufl er of size Nb. Due to equation (2), the overflow probability can be written as P(overflow) = esN1+ 
cN), which leads to the following approximation when N is large: P(overflow) Z cmNr. (3) The a.ccuracy 
of t,he a.bove a.pproximation and, more in-portantly, the a.chieva.ble link utilization for MPEG-1 com-pressed 
video a.nd Internet WAN t,raffic is investigated in Se&#38;on 3.1. Consider the QoS constraint on the 
overflow probabil-it,y to be P(overflow) < e--Y, and assume y = Nra. Let n(Nys, NC, Nb) be a.subset of 
Zi such that (Nni,. . . , N~J) E A(N-yo, NC, Nb) implies logP(overflow) 5 -Nyo (and vice versa), i.e., 
the QoS constraint on the overflow proba-bility is met. Due t,o t,his property, A(N-yo, NC, Nb) is called 
t,he clcceptance region. The region A(Nro, NC, Nb) is hard to compute. However, for the scaled acceptance 
region, the following holds [9]: liIIl A(Nro, NC, Nb) = A N-CC N where A= n A~, (4) o<t<m At = n : inf 
s&#38;7ZJ(YJ(S, t) -s(ct + b) i s 3=1 a.nd 72 = (731 , 7~5). Hence, the scaled acceptance region A(Ny,, 
NC, Nb)/N, for large N, can be approxima.ted 1~) A. If (121,. , ,n~) is on the boundary of the region 
11 and the boundary is differentiable at that point, then the tan-gent plane determines the half-space 
[9] -$$z~a&#38;,t) 5 c+ + (b - s) = c*, (5) 3=1 where (3, t) is an extremizing pair in equation (2) and 
c* is the effective capacity per source. The case for two source types (J = 2) is shown in Figure 1. 
Approximation A of the scaled acreptancc regron 112 Figure 1: Approximation A of the scaled acceptance 
region A(N?o, NC, Nb)/N for three values oft in (4). To the extent that A( Nyo, NC, Nb) can be approximated 
by NA, it follows from (5) that a point (N,, , NJ) = (Nnl,... , Nn3) E A(Ny,, NC, Nb) can be taken to 
satisfy NJaJ(s, t) < C+ f (6) .7=1 where, as in (5), (s, t) is an extremizing pair in equat,ion (2), 
and C is t,he effective capacity of the system a.t t,hc operating point (s, t). The effective bandwidth 
oJ (s, t) provides a relative mea-sure of resource usage for a particular operatingpoint of the link, 
expressed through parameters s,t. For example, if a source of type j, has twice as much effective bandwidth 
a.s a source of type j,, then, for this particular operating point of the link, one source of the first 
type can be substit,utcd by two sources of the second type, while still satisfying the QoS constraint. 
The above measure of resource usage dif-fers from the ordinary measure that is usually reported (i.e., 
the mean rate), which corresponds to s = 0. Note that the QoS guarantees are encoded in the effective 
bandwidth def-inition through the value of y, which appears on the right, hand side of (6) and influences 
the form of the acceptance region. The asymptotics behind the above results a.ssume only stationarity 
of sources. Illustrative examples discussed in [9] and [16] include periodic sources, fractional Brownian 
input, policed and shaped sources, and deterministic mul-tiplexing. Unlikr the above definition of the 
effective bandwidth which ta.kes into a.ccount, t,he effects of statistical multi- plexing, t,he effective 
bandwidt,h based on the large buffer asymptot,ic depends solely on the source s characteristics and the 
QoS constraint. Specifically [5, lo], consider the QoS constraint P(overflow) < e--OB, where B is the 
total buffer. Then, the effective bandwidth based on the large buffer asymptotic of a source of type 
,j, a.nd the correspond-ing constraint is 1 LYE = -s t limo. + log E [PJ[OJl] , ~N,M4 I C. Observe that, 
(7) is a special case of (1) for t -+ 0~). Indeed, rquation (7) becomes accurate when the buffer of the 
sys-t,em is large, in which case the time parameter t becomes large. However, for finite buffer sizes, 
equation (7) can lead to significant underutilization or even overutilization of link capacity [2]. The 
experiments in Section 3 include results which compare the performance of the large buffer asymp-totic 
with that of the many sources asymptotic. Using the Bahadur-Rao theorem, the authors of [12] ex-t)cnded 
the proof of the many sources asymptotic in [4] to show that as N + cy), the following holds: P(overflow) 
= J&#38;ePN (I++)) > (8) where (s, 1) is an extremizing pair of (2) and u2 is given by A!f (S) r2 = &#38;log 
E [/W] = I -(ct + bj2 , where M(s) = E [esX [oatl ] is the moment generating func-tion. Based on (B), 
we have the following approximation: -NI--glog(2?rN~??) f (overflow) Z d&#38;ePN1 = e (9) We will refer 
to the above equation as the many sources a.symptotic approximation with the Bahadur-Rao improve-ment. 
The term $log(2xNa s ) can be approximated by ilog(4aNI) [13]. H ence, equation (9) does not require 
any additional computations compared to (3). It can be seen with some algebra that the many sources asymptotic 
with the Bahadur-Rao improvement (equation (9)) gives the following effective bandwidth constraint in 
t,he neighborhood of the extremizing pair (s, t) of (2) N,n,(s,t)<(:++ (10) .I=, where y = y -i log(4xy)/(l+ 
&#38;). It is important to note that the same formula for the effective bandwidth, given by oqua.tion 
(l), is used in both (6) a.nd (10). The Bahadur-Rao improvement only affects (increases) the amount of 
ef- fective capacity C;I.R > C , while the parameters s, t are computed using the same formula (2). 
3 Experiments with Real Traffic 2.2 Implications to Traffic Engineering In this subsection we discuss 
the interpretation of the space s and time t parameters, and how they can be used for traffic engineering. 
For any traffic stream, the cffectivc bandwidth (Y~(s. I) in (1) is a template that must be filled with 
the syst,cm op erating point parameters s, 1 in order to provide the correct, measure of effective usage 
by the stream for that, pa.rtic-ular operating point. Although the operat,ing point, also depends on 
the individual stream, for a lat.ge syst,em, tlue to heavy multiplexing, this dependence is ignored. 
Such an engineering a.pproach simplifies considerably the analysis because there is no circle in the 
definitions of the effective bandwidth and the operating point,. Furthermore, as we will see in Section 
3.3, the values of s,t are, to a large ex-tent, insensitive to small variations of the traffic mis. It, 
1la.s been observed that in networks serving a. large number of sources, the tra.ffic mix exhibit,s a 
strong cyclic beha~ ior. Hence, WC ca.n assign particu1a.r pairs (,Y, t) t,o periotls of the day during 
which the traffic mix remains relatively constant. The values of s, t corresponding to a part,icular 
period of the day can be computed off-line using the supinf formula (2) and the effective bandwidth formula 
(l), where the expectation in (1) is replaced by the empirical n1ea.n; the latter can be computed from 
traffic traces taken during that period of the day. Recall that the time parameter t corresponds to the 
most probable duration of the busy period prior to buffer overflow. As we will discuss now, this parameter 
also iden tifies the time scales that are important for buffer over-flow. Assume that a link is operating 
at a part,icular op erating point, expressed through parameters s, 1. In t,hc effective bandwidth formula 
(1) the statistical properties of the source appear in X, [0, t], which is the amount of work-load produced 
by the source in an interval of length t. If t,wo sources have the same distribution of X, [0, t] for 
this value oft, then they will both have the same effective ba.ndwidt,h. A case of practical interest 
where t,his result can be applied is traffic smoothing: To have an effect on the amount, of resources 
used by a source, traffic smoothing must, be per-formed on a time scale larger than t, since only then 
does it aff ect the distribution of X, [0, t]. We will investigat,e this with real broadband traffic 
in Section 3.3. The time parameter t also indicates the granularity t,lla.t traffc traces must. have 
, since given a value for 1 it, would be sufficient t,o choose t,he granula.rity t,o be a few times smaller 
t,han this value. Traditionally, t,he granularity of traces was chosen in a rather ad-hoc manner. By 
setting y = -log P(overflow) equal to t,he right ha.ntl side of (2) and taking the derivative with respect, 
to R and c , we get the following expression for the space parameter s and the product sl [3]: s = ay 
and st = !Ji aB . K Thus, the space paramctcr s equals the rate at which t,hc logarithm of the overflow 
probability decreases wit,11 the buffer size, for fixed capacity C, whereas the product ~1 equals the 
rate at, which the logarithm of t,he overflow proh-ability decreases with the link capacity, for fixed 
buffer fI. In t,his section we apply and evaluate the traffic engineer- ing framework discussed in the 
preceding sections for real broadband t,raffic. The specific issues we address are the following: Compare 
t,he overflow probability and link utilization using the many sources a.symptotic and its Bahadur- Rao 
improvement to the actual cell loss probability s.nd t,he maximum ut,ilization estimated using simula- 
tion. (Section 3.1) Compare the values of parameters s, t computed by theory to the values estimated 
using simulation. (Sec- tion 3.2) Estimat,e and interpret t,ypical values of parameters .s, 1 for real 
broadband traffic. (Section 3.2) Investigate how the values of s, 1, and subsequently the rfl ectivr 
bandwidth, depend on the traffic mix. (SectCon 3.3) Our experiments involve MPEG-1 compressed video 
and Internet WAN traces, as well as modeled voice traffic. The MPEG-1 sequences, made availa.blc by 0. 
Rose [15], have been encoded using t,he UC Berkeley MPEG-1 software en-coder with the frame pattern IBBPBBPBBPBB. 
Each se-quence consisted of 40,000 frames (approximately 30 min- utes). For Int,ernet Wide Area. Network 
(WAN) traffic we used the Bellcorc Ethernet trace BC-Oct89Ext which has been made available* by W. Leland 
and D. Wilson [ll]. The t,ra.ce had durat,ion 122797.83 seconds. For voice traffic we use an on-off Markov 
modulated fluid model with peak ra.te 64 Kbps and average time spent in the OIL" a.nd off st,ates 352 
msec and 650 msec, respectively. Finally, we con-sider link capacities 34 Mbps, 155 Mbps, and 622 Mbps, 
and buffers introducing delay of up to 50 msec for MPEG-1 traffic, and up to 150 msec for Internet WAN 
traffic. 3.1 Overflow Probability and Link Utilization In this section we compare the overflow probability 
and link utilization using the many sources asymptotic and its Bahadur-Rao improvement, with the a.ctual 
cell loss proba-bility and the maximum utilization estimated using simu-lation. We also derive a simple 
heuristic for computing the actual cell loss probability from the overflow probability. 3.1.1 Overflow 
probability Figure 2 compares, for a fixed number of sources, the over-flow probability e&#38;mated using 
t,he many sources asymp-totic a.nd its Bahadur-Rao improvement, with the cell loss prohability and frame 
overflow probability estimated using simulation; the latter is the probability that at least one cell 
of a frame is lost,. Both the cell loss probability and t,he frame overflow probability are measured 
using a discrete time simulation model with an epoch equal to one frame t,ime (= 40 msec). In these and 
subsequent simulations, we report t,hc a.vcrage from a tot,al of 80 independent sim-ulation runs, each 
with a random selection of the starting frame for every source (we a.ssume t,hat frame boundaries arc 
aligned). Ea.&#38; simulation run had duration 5 times the size of the trace. Both the number of runs 
and the duration of ea.ch run were chosen empirically. For each method, the base-10 logarithm of the 
overflow probability is plotted against the buffer size (measurctl in milliseconds), while the link utilization 
remains the same. In Figure 2, first observe that for small buffer sizes there is a relatively fast decrease 
of the overflow proba.bilit,y as the buffer size increases. However, this stops to occur after some buffer 
size (e.g., 5 - 8 msec for a 155 Mbps link). Fur-ther increase of the buffer has a smaller effect on 
t,hc ov( r- flow probability. Furthermore, the loga.rithm of the overflow probability in both of these 
regimes is almost linear wit,11 the buffer size. Second, observe that alt,hough the ma.ny sources a.symp 
totic overestimates the Cell Loss Probability (CLP) by aI)-proximately 2-3 orders of magnitude, it qualitatively 
t,racks its shape very well. The Bahadur-Rao improvement overes-timates the CLP by 1-2 orders of magnitude. 
On the other hand, the large buffer asympt,otic, in addition t,o over?&#38; mating the CLP by many orders 
of ma.gnitude, also fails t,o track its shape. The actual cell loss probability differs from the overflow 
probability estimated using the many sources asymptotic and its Bahadur-Rao improvement because the latter 
is not, a measure of the CLP, but a measure of the proba.bility that in an infinite buffer the queue 
length becomes greater than B. This probability is closer in spirit to the frame overflow probability, 
i.e., the probability that a.t least, one cell of a frame is lost. Indeed, as Figure 2 shows, the overflow 
probability estimated using the many sources asymptotic with the Bahadur-Rao improvement is very close 
to the frame overflow probability.5 To further explain the above, we derive a simple ex-pression for 
the cell loss probability in terms of the frame overflow probability Lf. If one observes a large number 
of frames, say M, the average number of frames in which we have at least one lost cell is ddLf. Let z 
be t,he average number of cells that are lost when a frame overflow occurs. Then the average number of 
cells that are lost in ,li( frames is M&#38;x. Since there is a total of MF cells in these frames, where 
F is the average number of cells in a frame, we ~a.11 approximate the cell loss probability with the 
percentage of lost cells, namely M Lfx CLP Z -= ;L[. (12) MF From the last equation WC see that t,he 
cell loss proha.-bility differs from the frame overflow probability by a cor-rection term L, = x/F. We 
assume that when an overflow occurs only a few cells are lost. This is expected for small loss probabilities, 
since the probability of loosing cells in a buffer of size B + F is exponentially ha.rder than loosing 
cells in a buffer of size B. In particular, we will assume that, only one cell is lost, hence L, Z l/E 
, and since the average num-ber of cells in one frame is 25 we get L, zz l/25 = 10-l 4. This heuristic 
agrees with the difference between the frame overflow probability and the cell loss probability shown 
in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the cell loss probability estimated using (12), where L, = 10- 4. Observe 
t,ha.t the cell loss proba.- bility using this heuristic matches the cell loss probability estimated 
using simulation extremely well. This is the case only when the simulation epoch equals the frame time. 
  3.1.2 Link utilization Let, Q = Nm/C bc the link utilization, where N is the number of sources, m 
is the mean rate, and C is the link capacity. Figure 4 compares, for a range of buffer sizes a.nd for 
overflow probability lo- , the link utilization using t,he many sources asymptotic and its Bahadur-Rao 
improve-ment, with the maximum achievable utilization (estimated losing simulation). The utilization 
is computed by increas-ing the number of multiplexed sources in order to find the maximum number such 
that the overflow probability (3), computed using (1) and (2), is less than the target overflow prob3,bility 
lo- . < Similar to our observations regarding the overflow prob-abilitg, t,here are significant ga.ins 
in increasing the size of the buffer up t,o a certain value. Increasing the buffer size above t,his value 
has a very small effect on the link utiliza-tion. Recall that the many sources asymptotic overestimated 
the CLP by 2-3 orders of magnitude. However, as Table 1 shows, it performs much better in estimating 
the maxi-mum utilization. In particular, for C = 34 Mbps and B = 1 msec, the many sources asymptotic 
achieves a utilization which is approximately 79% of the maximum utilization. The Bahadur-Rao improvement 
increases this percentage t,o 88 %,. Furthermore, this percentage increases for larger link capacities; 
e.g., for C = 155 Mbps and B = 1 msec, the many sources a.symptotic achieves a utilization which is 90% 
of the maximum (Table l(b)). Of course, as Fig-ure 5 shows, using the heuristic based on (12), we achieve 
a utilizat,ion which almost coincides with the maximum uti-lization. Buffer Utilizatioll Q msec (cells 
) Sinlulation MSA MSA + B-R 1 (80) 0.57 0.46 (79 %) 0.52 (88 %) 8 (641) 0.70 0.59 (84 %) 0.64 (91 %) 
IG (1282) 0.81 0.71 (88 %) 0.77 (96 %) (a) C = 34 Mbps Huffer Utilization Q ll,SeC cells) Snnulatmn MSA 
MSA t B-R I (351) 0.82 0.74 (90 %) 0.76 (94 %) 8 (2811) 0.92 0.88 (96 %) 0.89 (97 %) 16 (5622) 0.02 039 
(96 %) 0.90 (98 %) (h) C = 155 Mbps Table 1: Link utilization: theory vs. simulation for Star Wars traffic. 
The parenthesis contain the percentage of the maximum utilization (second column). MSA: Many Sources 
Asympt,otic, B-R: Bahadur-Rao. [ P(overflow) 5 lo- ] Finally, Figure G shows the link utilization in 
the case of Int,ernet WAN traffic. Observe that while for Star Wars traffic the gains of increa.sing 
the buffer decrease abruptly, for Internet, WAN t)raffic the gains of increasing the buffer decrease 
smoother as the buffer size increases. This in-dica.tes that there a.re more time scales in Internet 
traffic which, for different buffer sizes, become important for buffer overflow.  3.2 Space and Time 
Parameters The spa.ce s and time t pa.rameters characterize a link s operating point and depend OIL the 
characteristics of the multiplexed traffic. In this section we compare the values of these parameters 
computed using the supinf formula (2) to the corresponding values estimated using simulat,ion. Furthermore, 
we compute and interpret typical values of these parameters, demonstrating how they can be used for traffic 
engineering. 3.2.1 Space and time parameters: theory vs. simulation Recall from our discussion in Section 
2.2 that the xpa.ce parameter s equals the rate at, which the logarithm of the overflow probability decreases 
with the buffer size, equa.tion (11). Motivated by t,his equation, we ca.n estimate s using the following 
ratio of differences: (13) where 7 = log(CLP,l,n), and CLPsirn is the cell loss prob ability estimated 
using simulation. Figure 7(a) shows t1ia.t the value of parameter s computed using the supinf for-mula 
(2) is in good agreement with the value computed us-ing (13). Note that the steps in the value computed 
using the supinf formula are expected since the many sources asymptotic (and large deviations theory 
in general) cap-tures only the most likely way overflow can occur. On t,hc other hand, the curve la.beled 
simulation in Figure i(a.) represents an average over all the eveuts that contribut,e t,o overflow. Recall 
from our discussion in Section 2.1 that the time parameter t can be interpreted as the most, probable 
dn-ration of the busy period prior to buffer overflow. Fig-ure 7(b) compa.res the value of parameter 
t computed using the supinf formula to the average value of the busy period prior to buffer overflow. 
As was the case for parameter s, the agreement between the two curves is good. 3.2.2 Typical values and 
interpretation of the space and time parameters Next we investigate how parameters s, t and the product 
st depend on the link capacity and buffer size. The values of s, t a.re computed using the supinf formula 
for a t,arget, overflow probability 10s7. Figure 8 shows the values of parameter s as a function of the 
buffer size, for various link capacities (Figure 8(a)) a.nd for various video contents (Figure 8(b)). 
In Figure 8(a), the explanation of the steep decrease of the value of s is simi1a.r to the explanation 
of the knee of the curves in Figures 2 and 4. Specifically, according to equat,ion (ll), s equals the 
rate at which the logarithm of the cell loss probability decreases (i.e., the quality of service improves), 
when the buffer size increases. Up to some value, the buffer is used to smooth the fast time scales of 
the multiplexed tra.fhc. Thus, increasing the buffer has a large a.ffect on the over-flow probability, 
and the value of s is high. Once t,he fa.st, time scales have been smoothed, the slow time scales govern 
the buffer overflow. Thus, iucreasing the buffer 1la.s a. very small effect on the overflow probability, 
and t e value of s is small. Also, observe in Figure 8(a) t*hat the s e 1 decrea.se L of the value of 
s occurs for smaller buffer sizes (measured in milliseconds) as the link capacit,y increases. Finally, 
see Figure 8(b), similar behavior is observed for MPEG-1 traffic with various contents. This indicates 
that the dependence of s on the link capacity and buffer size is related t,o the MPEG-1 frame structure. 
The dependence of parameter t on the buffer size is sllown in Figure J(a). Observe that t,he steep increase 
of its value occurs for the same buffer size for which t,he increase of t,lte value of s occurs (Figure 
8(a)). The small values of I correspond to the regime where the fast, time scales are import,aut for 
buffer overflow, wherea.s t,he large values of I correspond t,o the regime where the slow time scales 
are import,ant for buffer overflow. The product, st, for different buffer sizes, is shown in Figure 9(b). 
Once again we observe a steep increase of its va.lue, occurring a.t the same buffer sizes where the changes 
in the values of s and t occur. However, the explanation for the increase of the value of .st is more 
subtle than the explanation for the behavior of s, t. Recall from our discus-sion iu Section 2.2 that 
the product st equals the rate at which the loga.rithm of the overflow probability decreases with the 
link capacit,y, while the buffer size remains the E~IIIC; see equation (11). Comparing Figure 9(a) with 
Fig-ure P(b), we observe that the larger values of st correspond t,o la.rger values of t. Larger values 
of t result in an averag-ing effect in the amount of load X,[O, t] that appears in the effective bandwidth 
formula (1). Hence, for the overflow phenomenon, the t,raffic appears smoother. But for a link which 
multiplexes smooth traffic and is operating with a cell loss probability greater than zero, a. change 
of the link capa.cit,y has a greater effect on the overflow probability compared to a. link which multiplexes 
more bursty traffic. This gives the intuition of why the value of st increases. Figure 10 compares the 
values of s, t for Star WCIJY and voice traffic. Fieure 10(a) shows that as the buffer size in-creases, 
the valie of s for voice traffic decreases smoothly. Furthermore, the rate of decrea.se is smaller for 
larger buffer sizes. Comparing the value of s for MPEG-1 a.nd voice traf-fic, we conclude that, for buffer 
sizes up to 2 msec and above 10 msec, increasing the buffer has a larger effect for a net-work carrying 
voice t,raffic compared to a network carrying MPEG-1 traffic. This provides an example of how the space 
para.meter s can be used for buffer dimensioning. Figure 10(b) shows that for voice t,raffic the time 
param-et,er t increases almost linearly with the buffer size. This cau be explained since for a high 
degree of multiplexing, voice sources (which are modeled as on-off Markov fluids) behave as Gaussian 
sources. For such sources, it can be shown [4] that t,he time parameter t increases linearly with t,he 
buffer size. Figure ll(a.) compares the value of parameter s for Star r/l/cr/,s a.nd Internet WAN traffic. 
For MPEG-1 traffic. the va.lues of s form two distinct reeimes. where s is almost constant, corresponding 
to t,he two distinct time scales that are important for buffer overflow. On the other hand, for Internet 
t,raffic, t,he values of s form more than two regimes, indicating that for such traffic there are more 
time scales which, for different buffer sizes, become important for buffer overflow. Recall that this 
is also the reason behind the smoother tlepeudence of the link utilization on the buffer size for Internet 
WAN traffic compared to Star Wars traf-fic (Figure 6). Finally, Figure 11(b) shows that parame-t.er s 
can t,ake different values for different Internet traffic segments, illustrating that clifferent segments 
have different st,a.tistical properties  3.3 Effects of the Traffic Mix As discussed in Section 2.1, 
periods of the day during which the traffic mix remains relatively constant can be charac-t,erized by 
correspouding pairs of (s, t). In this section we investigate the dependence of these parameters, hence 
of the effective bandwidth, on the traffic mix. The traffic mix WC consider consists of traffic of different 
types (MPEG-1 compressed video and voice), traffic with the same structure but diRerent contents (MPEG-1 
compressed video with dif-ferent contents), and smoothed/unsmoothed traffic of the same type and content. 
3.3.1 Traffic mix containing Star Wars and voice traffic We first consider the traffic mix containing 
Star Wars and voice traffic. The horizontal axis in Figures 12(a) and 12(b) depicts the percentage of 
voice connections, each containing 30 individual voice channels. The vertical axis of the above figures 
depicts the effective bandwidth of the Star LVur,s traffic stream. Observe that (1) the effective bandwidth, 
to a large extent, changes slowly with the traffic mix, (2) the dependence of the effective bandwidth 
on the traffic mix is smaller for larger capacities and larger buffer sizes, and (3) there are cases 
where increasing the percentage of voice connections leads to a sharp decrease of the value of the effective 
bandwidth. The first observation supports the argument that pairs of (s, t) can be assigned to periods 
of the day during which the traffic mix remains relatively constant. However, the third observation says 
that there are percentages of the traffic mix where the effective bandwidth exhibits sharp changes. If 
the link s operating point is close to such a percentage, then we can estimate the average amount of 
resources used by a source as a linear combination of the effective bandwidth to the left and to the 
right of the sharp change. The coefficients of the linear combination would be determined by the percentage 
of the time the network was operating on the left and on the right of the change. The sharp decrease 
in the value of the effective band-width identified above is due to the change of the time scale that 
is important for buffer overflow. In particular, as in-dicated above the curve for capacity 155 Mbps 
and buffer size 4 msec in Figure 12(a), the time parameter t increases (1 frame, 4 frames, and finally 
7 frames) for the same per-centage of voice connection at which the sharp decrease in the value of the 
effective bandwidth occurs. The increase of t produces an averaging effect (also discussed in Sec-tion 
3.2.2) in the amount of workload X,[O, t] that appears in the effective bandwidth formula (1); this averaging 
effect results in a smaller effective bandwidth. 3.3.2 TrafFic mix containing MPEG-1 traffic with differ- 
ent contents Up to now we investigated the case where the traffic mix contains traffic of different 
nature. Next we investigate the case where the traffic mix contains MPEG-1 video traffic with the same 
encoding parameters but with different con-tents. Figures 13(a) and 13(b) sh ow the effective bandwidth 
of the Star Wars stream as a function of the percentage of news and talk show streams, respectively. 
These figures show that the content has a very small effect on the effec-tive bandwidth; this also implies 
that parameters s, t are affected very little. 3.3.3 Traffic mix containing smoothed and unsmoothed Star 
Wars traffic Our final investigation deals with another important ques-tion in traffic engineering: 
How does traffic smoothing affect the network s operating point and the amount of resources used by a 
source? We will see that parameter t shows the minimum time scale at which smoothing must be performed 
in order for it to affect resource usage. Figure 14 shows the effective bandwidth of the Star Wars stream 
for dif-ferent percentages of a traffic mix which consists of un-smoothed and smoothed Star Wars traffic; 
the latter is created by evenly spacing the cells belonging to tzuo con-secutive frames. First, observe 
that the effects of the traffic mix on the effective bandwidth decreases when the link ca-pacity and 
buffer size increases. Second, observe that there are cases where increasing the buffer size has a very 
small effect on the effective bandwidth, e.g., at C = 622 Mbps the curves for B = 8 msec and B = 16 msec 
practically co-incide. Third, observe that for some buffer sizes, smoothing has no effect on the effective 
bandwidth (and on the net- work s operating point), e.g., in Figure 14(a) the curve for C = 155 Mbps 
and B = 8 msec, and in Figure 14(b) the curves for C = 622 Mbps and B = 4,8, and 16 msec are flat. We 
explain this behavior next. Figure 15 shows the effective bandwidth for both the smoothed and the unsmoothed 
Star Wars stream. When the percentage of smoothed traffic is small, the time pa-rameter t (= 40 msec) 
is smaller than the time interval over which smoothing was performed (80 msec). For this reason, the 
amount of workload XJ [0, t] that appears in the effective bandwidth formula (1) is smaller for the smoothed 
stream than it is for the unsmoothed stream. Hence, the effective bandwidth of the smoothed stream is 
smaller than the effective bandwidth of the unsmoothed stream. For some percentage of smoothed traffic 
(Z SO%), the time pa-rameter t (= 80 msec) is no longer smaller than the time interval over which smoothing 
is performed (80 msec). Be-cause of this, the amount of workload XJ [0, t] is the same for both the smoothed 
and the unsmoothed stream. Hence, the effective bandwidth of both streams is the same. 4 Conclusions 
In this paper we employ the recently developed theory of effective bandwidths, and in particular the 
one based on the many sources asymptotic, whereby the effective bandwidth depends not only on the statistical 
characteristics of the traffic stream, but also on a link s operating point. The latter is summarized 
in two parameters: the space and time parameters. We have investigated the accuracy of the above frame- 
work, and how it can provide important insight to the com- plex phenomena that occur at a broadband link 
with a high degree of multiplexing. In particular, we estimate and in- terpret values of the space and 
time parameters for various mixes of real traffic, demonstrating how these can be used to clarify the 
effects on the link performance of the time scales of burstiness of the traffic input, of the link parameters 
(ca- pacity and buffer), and of traffic control mechanisms, such as traffic smoothing. Our approach is 
based on the off-line analysis of traffic traces, the granularity of which can be determined by the time 
parameter of the system. For the traffic mixes consid- ered, the space and time parameters are, to a 
large extent, insensitive to small variations of the traffic mix. This in- dicates that particular pairs 
of these parameters can char- acterize periods of the day during which the traffic mix remains relatively 
constant. The above result has impor- t,a.nt implications to charging, since simple charging schemes 
which are linear in time and volume and have important in-centive properties can be created from tangents 
to bounds of the effective bandwidth [3]. Furthermore, the above re-sult opens up some new possibilities 
for traffic modeling Rather than developing general models that try to emulate real traffic in any operating 
environment, a new approach would be to develop models that emulate real traffic accord-ing to the particular 
operating point of the network. Such models would be parameterized with the pair (s, t), would be simple 
and efficient to implement, and can be the basis for fast and flexible traffic generators. The application 
of our approach for traffic engineering and network dimensioning in a real multi-service network environment 
that involves a large number of different source types constitutes a promising area for further research. 
A specific question is to investigate whether the number of d&#38;continuities of the time parameter, 
that we have identi-fied for a traffic mix containing two source types, increases with the number of 
source types. A second area for further work is to extend our investigations to links with priorities; 
some results in this area are presented in [9]. Acknowledgements The authors are particularly grateful 
to Frank P. Kelly for his helpful discussions and insights, and thank the anony-mous reviewers for their 
constructive comments. References PI D. D. Botvich and N. G. Duffield. Large deviations, the shape of 
the loss curve, and economies of scale in large mul-tiplexers. Qzeueing Systems, 20:293-320, 1995. PI 
G. L. Choudhury, D. M. Lucantoni, and W. Whitt. On the effectiveness of effective bandwidths for admission 
control in ATM networks. In PTOC. of the 14th International Tele-trafic Congress (ITC -14), pages 411-420, 
North Holland, 1994. Elsevier Science B. V. C. Courcoubetis, F. P. Kelly, and R. Weber. Measurement-based 
charging in communications networks. Technical Re-port 1997-19, Statistical Laboratory, University of 
Cam-bridge, 1997. 131 C. Courcoubetis and R. Weber. Buffer overflow asymptotics for a switch handling 
many traffic sources. J. Appl. Prob., 33:886-903, 1996. [41 A. I. Elwalid and D. Mitra. Effective bandwidth 
of gen-eral Markovian traffic sources and admission control of high speed networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. on 
Networking, 1(3):329-343, October 1993. 161 A. Erramilli, 0. Narayan, and W. Willinger. Experimental 
queueing analysis with long-range dependent packet traf-fic. IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, 4(2):209-223, 
April 1996. VI M. W. Garrett and W. Willinger. Analysis, modeling, and generation of self-similar VBR 
video traffic. In Proc. o,f ACM SIGCOMM 94, pages 269-280, August 1994. [81 M. Grossglauser and J-C. 
B&#38;t. On the relevance of long-range dependence in network traffic. In Proc. of A CM SIG-COMM SG, 
pages 15-24, August 1996. PI F. P. Kelly. Notes on effective bandwidths. In F. P. Kelly, [51 S. Zachary, 
and I. Zeidins, editors, Stochastic Networks: l heory and Applications, pages 141-168. Oxford University 
Press, 1996. 1101 G. Kesidis, J. Walrand, and C.-S. Chang. Effective band- widths for multiclass Markov 
fluids and other ATM sources. IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, 1(3):424-428, August 1993. illI W. E. Leland, 
M. S. Taqqu, W. Willinger, and D. V. Wilson. On the self-similar nature of ethernet traffic. In Proc. 
oj ACM SIGCOMM SS, pages 183-193, September 1993. [I21 N. Likhanov and R. R. Mazumdar. Cell loss asymptotics 
for buffers fed with a large number of independent stationary sources. To appear in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM 
98, April 1998. M. Montgomery and G. de Veciana. On the relevance of time scales in performance oriented 
traffic characterizations. In PTOC. of IEEE INFOCOM 96, pages 513-520, April 1996. [I31 V. Paxson and 
S. Floyd. Wide-area traffic: The failure of Poisson modeling, IEEE/ACM Trans. on Netwo,orking, 3(3):226-244, 
June 1995. [I41 0. Rose. Statistical properties of MPEG video traflic and their impact on traffic modeling 
in ATM systems. Technical Report 101, University of Wuerzburg, February 1995. [161 B. K. Ryu and A. 
Elwalid. The importance of the long-range dependence of VBR video traffic in ATM traffic engineering: 
Myths and realities. In Proc. oj ACM SIGCOMM SG, pages 3-14, August 1996. [I71 A. Simonian and J. Guibert. 
Large deviations approxima-tions for fluid queues fed by a large number of on/off sources. IEEE J. Select. 
Areas Commun., 13(7):1017-1027, August 1995. P31Z. Zhang, J. Kurose, J. Salehi, and D. Towsley. Smoothing, 
statistical multiplexing and call admission control for stored video. IEEE J. Select. Areas CommzLn., 
15(6):1148-1166, August 1997. 1151 I / i I1 (a) C = 34 Mbps, e = 0.83 (b) C = 155 Mbps, e = 0.93 
Figure 2: Overflow probability: theory vs. simulation for Star Wars traffic. The many sources asymptotic 
tracks the cell loss probability very well, overestimating it by 2-3 orders of mag- nitude. The Bahadur-Rao 
improvement overestimates the CLP by l-2 orders of magnitude. On the other hand, the large buffer asymptotic, 
in addition to overestimating the CLP by many or-ders of magnitude, also fails to track its shape. Figure 
3: Overflow probability using the many sources asymptotic with the Bahadur-Rae improvement and CLP heuristic 
(Star Wars traffic). The many sources asymptotic with the Bahadur-Raoimprovement and CLP heuris-tic matches 
the CLP estimated using simulation extremely well. [ C = 155 Mbps, e = 0.931 (a) C = 34 Mbps (b) C = 
155 Mbps (a) Parameter S (b) Parameter t Figure 7: Parameters s, t: theory vs. simulation for Figure 
4: Link utilization: theory vs. simulation for Star Star Wars traffic. The values of parameters s, t 
computed by Wars traffic. The many sources asymptotic and its Bahadur-the many sources asymptotic using 
the supinf formula (2) are Rao improvement performs better in utilizing a link than it does in good agreement 
with the values estimated using simulation. in estimating the cell loss probability (Figure 2). On the 
other [ C = 155 Mbps, Q = 0.931 hand, the large buffer asymptotic achieves a very low link uti- lization. 
[ P(overflow) 5 10m6 ] Figure 5: Link utilization using the many sources asymp-totic with the Bahadur-Rao 
improvement and CLP heuristic (Star Wars traffic). The many sources asymptotic with the Bahadur-Rao improvement 
and CLP heuristic achieves practically the same utilization as the maximum utilization (esti-mated using 
simulation). [ C = 155 Mbps, P(overflow) 2 10e6 ] Figure 6: Link utilization for Internet WAN and Star 
Wars traffic. As was the case for MPEG-1 traffic, for Internet WAN traffic the many sources asymptotic 
achieves a high link utilization. However, while for Star Wars traffic the gains of increasing the buffer 
decrease abruptly, for Internet WAN traffic the gains of increasing the buffer decrease smoother as the 
buffer size increases. This indicates that there are more time scales in Internet traffic which, for 
different buffer sizes, becomeimportant for buffer overflow. [ C = 34 Mbps, P(overflow) 5 10e4 ] (a) 
star Wars traffic (b) MPEG-1 traffic with various content Figure 8: Parameter s for MPEG-1 traffic. The 
space parameter s decreases abruptly at some buffer size; this occurs because the buffer has absorbed 
the fast time scales and only the remaining slow time scales contribute to buffer overflow. The buffer 
size (measured in msec) for which this occurs decreases as the link capacity increases (left curve). 
Similar behavior is observed for MPEG-1 traffic with various contents (right figure). [ P(overflow) 5 
lo- ] (a) Parameter t . (b) Product st Figure 9: Parameters t and st for Star Wars traffic. The time 
parameter t increases as the buffer size increases, indicat-ing that slow time scales become important 
for buffer overflow (left figure). The product st abruptly increases for some buffer size (right figure); 
this coincides with slow time scales becoming important for buffer overflow. [ P(overflow) 5 low7 ] 
(a) Parameter S (b) Parameter t Figure 10: Parameters s, t for Star Wars and voice traf-fic. Whereas 
for MPEG-1 traffic the space parameters abruptly decreases for some buffer size (indicating that slow 
time scales become important for buffer overflow), for voice traffic it gradu-ally decreases, with a 
rate that also decreases as the buffer size increases (left figure). This indicates a smoother change 
of the the scales for voice traffic. The time parameter t for voice traffic increases linearly with the 
buffer size, unlike the case of MPEG-1 traihc where it exhibits abrupt jumps. [ P(overflow) 5 10e7 ] 
(a) Parameter s for Internet (b) Parameter s for different In-WAN and Star Wars traffic ternet WAN segments 
Figure 11: Parameters s for Internet WAN and Star Wars traffic. Whereas for MPEG-1 tr&#38;c the values 
of the space parameter s form two distinct regimes, corresponding to the two distinct time scales that 
arc important for buffer over-flow, for Internet WAN traffic the value of parameter s form more than 
two regimes, indicating that for such traffic there are more than two time scales which, for different 
buffer size, be-come important for buffer overflow (left figure). Also, different segments of Internet 
traffic give different values for parameter s (right figure). [ C = 34 Mbps, P(overflow) 5 10e4 ] I I 
I 0.2 PaLage ,%. ,.fL.s ,.zl Wllh m%. chsnn:ll) PeLlage a%.. c0, zc,.,x ,a:;: Wllh ,o ,f, shann:k, (a) 
C = 155 Mbps (b) C = 622 Mbps Figure 12: Dependence of the effective bandwidth on the traffic mix containing 
Star Wars and voice traffic. The effective bandwidth of the Star Wars stream changes slowly for certain 
percentages of the traffic mix. Furthermore, the sensitiv-ity of the effective bandwidth on the traffic 
mix decreases as the buffer size and link capacity increases. [ P(overflow) 5 low7 ] Figure 13: Dependence 
of the effective bandwidth on the traffic mix containing Star Wars + news/talk show traffic. The figures 
show that the content of MPEG-1 traffic has a small effect on the effective bandwidth. It is the MPEG-1 
frame structure that has an important impact. [ C = 155 Mbps, P(overflow) 5 10e7 ] (a) C = 155 Mbps 
(b) C = 622 Mbps Figure 14: Dependence of the effective bandwidth on the traffic mix containing Star 
Wars and smoothed Star Wars traffic. Observe that (1) the effects of the traffic mix on the effective 
bandwidth decreases when the link capacity and buffer size increases, (2) there are situations where 
increasing the buffer size has a very small effect on the effective band-width, e.g., at C = 622 Mbps 
the curves for B = 8 msec and I3 = 16 msec practically coincide, and (3) for some buffer sizes, smoothing 
has no effect on the effective bandwidth, e.g., C = 155 Mbps, B = 8 msec (left graph) and C = 622 Mbps 
and B = 4,8, and 16 msec (right graph). [ P(overflow) < 10m7 ] Figure 15: Effective bandwidth for Star 
Wars and smoothed Star Wars traffic. When the percentage of smoothed traffic is small, the time parameter 
t is small and the amount of workload X, [0, t] that appears in the effective band-width formula (1) 
is smaller for smoothed traffic. Hence the effective bandwidth of the smoothed stream is smaller than 
the effective bandwidth of the unsmoothed stream. When the per-centage of smoothed traffic becomes larger 
than about SO%, pa-rameter t becomes equal to the time interval over which smooth-ing was performed. 
Hence, smoothing has no effect and both streams have the same effective bandwidth. [ C = 155 Mbps, B 
= 4 msec, P(overflow) 5 10-T ]  
			