
 Are We Working On The Right Problems ? Plenary Panel Michael Stonebraker lnformix Corporation mike 621 
postgres.Berkeley.EDU 1. Abstract There appears to be a discrepancy between the research topics being 
pursued by the database research community and the key problems facing information systems decisions 
makers such as Chief Information Officers (CIOs). Panelists will present their view of the key problems 
that would benefit from a research focus in the database research community and will discuss perceived 
discrepancies. Based on personal experience, the most commonly discussed information systems problems 
facing CIOs today include: 2. Packaged Applications Everybody is doing buy , not build . That completely 
insulates users from the DBMS. Hence, they don t care what DBMS gets used. All packaged applications 
are agnostic , i.e. run on everybody s DBMS. Will this make our research area irrelevant? 3. Legacy Systems 
The smokestack systems from 20 years ago are the Achilles heel of everybody. They seem to drive everything. 
There seem to be very few good ideas of what to do in this area. So what are we doing here? 4. Middleware 
Should it be messaging, application server, or DBMS? How can one choose between CORBA, DCOM, and RMI 
given the rift between Microsoft and the rest of the world on these issues? So what are we doing about 
this?  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advsn- tage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,. 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists. requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. SIGMOD 98 Seattle, WA, USA 8 1998 ACM 0-69791s995.5/96/006...$6.00 5. Enterprise Data Integration 
Enterprise data integration is the top item on every CIOs wish list. So what are we doing about it? 
 6. NO Knobs DBMSs (especially one of the popular ones) are way too hard to install, setup, tune, and 
maintain. When are we going to learn something from the vendors of children s games and get real here? 
 7. User Interfaces The DBMS research community is out to lunch here. They have contributed nearly nothing 
to this important area. Program committee after program committee routinely bows to this alter and then 
rejects the submitted papers. Are we simply abdicating this space?  8. Software Productivity Hardware 
productivity goes up by a factor of two every two years. Software productivity has gone up less than 
a factor of two in the last 20 years. What can be done about this?  9. IT Project Failure It is estimated 
that 70-80% of all IT projects fail. If civil engineers built bridges like we build software, modem society 
would fire them. What right do we have to call ourselves professionals? What can be done here?   496 
 
			