
 Assessing the Benefit of In-House Work Experience for University Students  Karen Shackleford Dept. 
of Management Studies University of the West Indies, Mona, Kingston 7, Jamaica Tel: (876) 977-3775/3808 
Fax: (876) 977-3829 E-mail:kshackle@uwimona.edu.jm  ABSTRACT The Department of Management Studies, (DOMS) 
has had a Computer Laboratory for a decade. DOMS IT environment has become increasingly complex. From 
having less than 20 standalone PCs and workstations in 1991, the Lab evolved to have responsibility for 
a departmental network of roughly 100 computers by 1999. This network is a subnet on the Campus WAN. 
Further, the Lab staff of 1996, undertook to network the entire Faculty of Social Sciences. Grossly understaffed, 
with only a Computer Lab Manager and one full-time Computer Lab Technician to serve a minimum of 3,000 
students, 50 academic and administrative staff members; student computer lab technicians (LTs) have been 
relied on over the years, to research, install, configure, design, build, repair and maintain computers 
and network infrastructure. The increasing dependence of staff and students on computer technology has 
increased the demands made on LTs. LTs have benefited by effectively serving as apprentices for a range 
of IT positions. This brief paper reflects on LTs experience discussing: 1) Whether LTs felt they had 
an advantage in the job market because of this work experience. 2) A bid to award LTs academic recognition 
for their work. 3) LT recruitment to ensure that those most likely to thrive in the environment are selected. 
4) The relationship between academic performance and performance as a LT.  Keywords Student apprentices, 
computer labs, academic recognition. 1. AIM To demonstrate the value of the paid work experience to undergraduates 
in terms of what they learned by means of the study case of Department of Management Studies (DOMS) student 
computer lab technicians (LTs) at the University of the West Indies (UWI). Copyright is held by the author/owner. 
SIGUCCS 00, Oct. 29-Nov. 1, 2000, Richmond, VA. ACM 1-58113-229-8/00/0010.  2. METHOD I have collated 
the views and opinions of over 30 past University students who served as computer LTs over the period 
that I myself have been Computer Lab Manager between 1991 and 2000. The questionnaire solicits the views 
and opinions of ex-LTs who held this position, typically while reading for a degree, for an average period 
of 2 years. However, the significant number of returns and the spread over time help to ensure the relative 
robustness of the collated data. Whilst there are some in-built subjectivity, I believe that the data 
is sufficiently reliable to provide a picture of general trends. Further, as the supervisor and project 
instigator I am reasonably well acquainted with the scope of their acquired technical abilities and related 
skills during the time they worked in the Lab. This brief paper focuses on what LTs felt they learned 
while working in the Lab. Rather than attempting to tackle all the issues this study explored as listed 
in the abstract, this short article drew upon one sub-set of questions in the questionnaire. Namely, 
consideration of what ex-LTs believe they learnt from their Lab work experience coupled with their own 
assessment of the effect that has had on their careers since. This summarily addresses the first question 
as to whether LTs may have acquired useful skills suited for positions in the information technology 
(IT) job market, and secondly, if so, what benefit can be derived from official recognition by the University 
of in-house student apprenticeships. Emphasis has been put on the technical strand of questioning because 
it less given to the subjective views of the respondents, i.e. the estimation of technical skill development 
is likely to be more accurate than personal assessment of interpersonal skills. Through analysis of other 
sets of questions within the questionnaire I shall test the hypothesis that academic performance alone 
does not reliably identify the students who thrive as apprentices. In this context, the word thrive is 
intended to convey the notion of a student who is primarily self-motivated to acquire knowledge relating 
to their work and who seeks to creatively apply that knowledge to serving clients. However, space limitations 
prevent further discourse on this matter here. This paper and the set of questions and data on which 
it relies, provide one of the building blocks for constructing a view on the value of formalizing an 
existing practice of employing students to work on campus in professional areas of interest typically 
related to their academic area(s) of study.  3. CONCLUSION The evidence adduced by means of the data 
accounted within tends to show that students who acted as LTs felt that this experience in nearly all 
cases greatly enhanced not only their technical/applied computing skills, but also their knowledge of 
IT and its application, generally. As a consequence of these gains, they felt they were better equipped 
for entry into the job market even if they weren t necessarily seeking high-tech positions [1]. 4. INTRODUCTION 
One of a tertiary institutions most valuable and under-utilized resources, is its large body of undergraduate 
students. Harnessing the intellect and industry of select members of this pool on an on­going basis, 
generation after generation, to serve as apprentices on campus, in professional vocations such as library 
studies, accountancy, human resource management, and IT, etc., can be a mutually beneficial practice. 
Especially where there may be a deficit in skilled support of this kind in departments and units who 
can ill afford the market rate of professionals in these areas. This practice of giving students meaningful 
and useful work experience can be designed to pay out big dividends to both the specific, University 
employer and the student employees. 5. CONTENTS Tabulated below in Table I., are some of the advantages 
to be derived and considerations to be taken into account, when exploring the possibility of engaging 
so-called student apprentices to work for their University (or College) in specialist areas. Support 
for instituting such a programme at UWI and other similar tertiary institutions comes from the findings 
of a study to be discussed shortly. This study sought to have graduates, who as undergraduates worked 
in DOMS Computer Laboratory as Computer Lab Technicians (LTs), evaluate their experience in this capacity 
and its impact on their careers. The terminology commonly applied by Universities to their programmes 
which give students work experience include: - Internships - Work-study programmes  Undoubtedly, each 
institution will interpret and implement these terms somewhat differently. However, both mechanisms typically 
involve the student working for an external organization. While internships may tend to entail work done 
by the student in addition to a full course load, work-study schemes may be designed to substitute for 
particular courses and count towards a University qualification such as a degree. Work-study programmes 
are often implemented in such a way that they tend to be of a shorter duration than an internship. Either 
way the University generally confers official academic recognition on the successfully completed practical 
exercise usually to the student s advantage in the job market. Either of these approaches can be used 
where the student works for his or her own University. The main point being however, that UWI, and probably 
other tertiary institutions in similar circumstances, should set out to formally develop its major Computer 
Laboratories as employers of student apprentices. Here the concept of an apprentice may incorporate features 
of either, or of both, internships and work-study programmes. Academic recognition of a so-called apprenticeship 
is feasible where the Labs can provide a sufficiently stimulating, rigorous and engaging learning environment 
for students to work in on a part-time basis. The brief description of the evolution of the DOMS Computer 
Lab followed by its IT concerns/projects as tabulated below in Table II., demonstrate why I believe the 
DOMS Lab can classified as one such. Many LTs were required to attain high levels of competence in order 
to execute the projects specified which depended almost entirely on their input. DOMS, UWI, has had a 
Computer Laboratory for a decade. DOMS IT environment has become increasingly complex. From having less 
than 20 standalone PCs and workstations in 1991, the Lab evolved to have responsibility for a departmental 
network of roughly 100 computers by 1999. Grossly understaffed, (with only a Computer Lab Manager and 
one full-time Computer Lab Technician (as of 1996) to serve a minimum of 3,000 students, 50 academic 
and administrative staff members), student LTs have always been relied on to maintain computers and network 
infrastructure. The increasing dependence of staff and students on computer technology has increased 
the demands made on LTs. From the information concerning the nature of the work done by LTs and the summation 
of findings regarding the knowledge students derived from their work experience as tabulated in Tables 
III., it would appear that the experience did benefit many LTs. What is particularly striking here is 
the broad scope of technical knowledge as well as problem-solving skills most LTs believed they attained. 
This suggests that the Computer Lab could offer select students opportunities to gain work experience 
for which academic recognition could reasonably be accorded based on the student s adherence specific 
criteria to be established. It is also worth noting that related interpersonal skills developed through 
the management of, and coordination with colleagues to achieve a specific end, is just another aspect 
of what LTs learnt. Other sections of the questionnaire explore this and problem-solving skills gained 
[2]. Emphasis on the importance of being customer oriented in service delivery is also indicated by the 
finding that 93% of the respondents consciously aimed to provide good service to clients. Organizations 
preparing to take graduates on staff may welcome indications of this kind that confirm that technically 
proficient operators are also able to communicate effectively and positively with clients and work in 
team. Hence, instituting academically recognized mechanisms that encourage students to creditably develop 
their skills in the practical application of their discipline(s) should benefit employers both on and 
off campus as well as the students themselves. The views of many ex-LTs listed in Table IV., attest to 
this claim. More information on findings in these areas will be on display at the poster presentation 
at the SIGUCCS Conference 2000. Alternatively, direct comments or inquiries may be directed to the author 
s e-mail address.  6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My thanks to: Kiesha Sherman, who worked tirelessly to locate 
ex-LTs, dispense and retrieve questionnaires and do painstaking data entry; Tom Black, mentor; Garvin 
Gordon, for furnishing academic data; ex-LTs for their loyalty, time and kind regard demonstrated in 
many ways including their active participation in this study; and the varied support of many DOMS and 
UWI staff. Table I: A quadrant summarizing the pros and cons of apprenticeships to both students and 
the University Benefits Constraints/Handicaps Student Relevant practical experience: The opportunity 
to engage in practical Unmanageable distraction: Some apprentices work, especially in subject areas where 
one is in the process of building a theoretical foundation, can be very illuminating. The basis for some 
theoretical aspects of a discipline, their interpretation and their real world application, may be much 
clearer in practice and further the student s understanding. Cash in hand: However little the monetary 
rewards may be, most students welcome them. Promise of greater rewards after graduation: Most prospective 
employers of graduates welcome those with work experience whose learning curve is liable to be shorter 
and therefore less costly to them. Hence, graduating apprentices can expect to get the best pick of the 
jobs on offer in their areas of specialization and experience and should make faster progress in the 
organization that hires them. Convenient location: Working for the University often simplifies potentially 
awkward issues concerning transportation to and from the work-place, time off for classes, labs and exams, 
proximity to classes and other student services, etc. students may have difficulty managing their time 
to give the job its due, while remaining on top of their academic studies. Unfavourable typecasting: 
The student may be typecast for a particular type of job on graduating based on the kind of work experience 
they have had. This could be undesirable or limiting for those students whose apprenticeship served to 
demonstrate the kind of work they would now want to avoid rather than base a career on. No academic recognition: 
In the situation where the University fails to credit work done by a student apprentice, the student 
may feel resentful and that their time could have been spent. University $avings: Otherwise costly expertise 
can be engaged for far less than market rates. Even if some professional expertise is required, the quantity 
of professional man-hours can be reduced, by supplementing them with specialist student apprentice-hours 
. Hence, the overall cost of project design, implementation and maintenance can be minimized. Affordable 
readily-accessible help: In spite of seasonal fluctuations in student apprentices availability, their 
overall commitment to a project and pride in being among the elite entrusted with important work for 
the University can compare with, or even exceed that of external professional consultants. Resulting 
in more readily available and relatively inexpensive maintenance and troubleshooting personnel. Familiar 
terrain: Apprentices may have the advantage of being both creators and users of the service they are 
working to provide or enhance. Even if they are not, or won t be users themselves, it is likely that 
they may be closer to understanding and appreciating the needs of the on campus user population than 
external consultants or professionals. Industrial/commercial recognition: By monitoring the apprentice 
programme and giving official recognition to high achievers in a particular domain, external employers 
may be greatly appreciative and supportive of efforts by the institution to provide students with practical, 
on-the-job know-how and skills. This effort should go some way to quell complaints by the business sector 
that graduates are inadequately prepared for the jobs they have on offer, by a standard University education. 
Effective monitoring of the academic rigor and quality of work done: A University may have a problem 
with work-study programmes or internships implemented in partnership with external organizations, namely, 
ensuring that tasks assigned to students are sufficiently rigorous to warrant academic recognition by 
the University. It should be much easier to insure this, when the work is being done within and for the 
University. Internal management input required: Ensuring consistency in the quality of the work and continuity 
throughout the complete life cycle of a project is likely to be a challenge. Especially where a lot depends 
on the fluctuating availability of a number of student apprentices who may not all be equally proficient 
in all the desired areas of competence. Typically, at least one full-time University staff member will 
need to have a management role and ultimate responsibility for the project. Policy support framework 
necessary: Satisfactory policy and practice needs to be devised to curtail or minimize the possibility 
of security breaches, ethical misdemeanors, and threats to systems integrity. In addition, workable regulations 
need to be formulated and monitored to ensure students are not exploited to the detriment of their academic 
programmes. Academic recognition: Some way must be devised to officially recognize the work of student 
apprentices who perform creditably within the parameters set to assess and measure student performance. 
This is important to help sustain and nurture the most productive levels of enthusiasm and motivation 
throughout the life cycle of the project. Benefits Constraints/Handicaps Better student vs. University 
staff relations: Students may perceive the University as failing to serve student interests for selfish 
reasons. But, when students have an opportunity to work for the University and see things from the perspective 
of an employee, a better understanding of the why s and wherefore s of University operations may result, 
with mutual benefit. Easily led: Student apprentices would typically be less experienced than consultants 
and would be invested with less authority. Thus they may be more susceptible to influences that may lead 
to poor project related decisions being taken. Table II: A sample of the tasks and responsibilities 
LTs are required to undertake on the job IT Project LT Range of Responsibilities - Networking and completely 
re-networking the Lab, 4 times in all, with new Ethernet technology - Networking DOMS, twice with new 
Ethernet technology - Networking the Faculty of Social Sciences The preliminary network cabling design, 
making cables, cabling, installation &#38; configuration of various network devices, server set up &#38; 
configuration, setting up network services - Developing new customized on-line computer reservations 
system for student Lab users twice Systems analysis and design, programming in a number of languages, 
implementation, testing, documentation, training - Building and repairing personal computers Identifying 
and sourcing hardware components, preparing requests for quotation, justifying proposals to the manager 
 Table III: Feedback on the issue Do ex-LTs think that they learnt a lot more about IT from being a LT 
than they would have otherwise? Table IV: Feedback on the issue Did ex-LTs believe that they had more 
to offer their employers as a direct consequence of having worked in the Lab, than they would have otherwise? 
Topic Perceived Competence Level Attained Hardware Developed a general understanding of the purpose and 
operation of personal computer components. 86% Attained a fairly advanced/intermediate level of competence 
in troubleshooting hardware microcomputer related problems. 83% Software Developed a general understanding 
of the operation and functions of at least one microcomputer operating system (O/S). 100% Attained a 
fairly advanced/intermediate level of competence in installing, configuring, manipulating and troubleshooting 
at least one microcomputer operating system. ADV.=76% INT.= 93% Further developed computer programming 
skills and/or skills that supported programs that were built in-house. (E.g. database maintenance). 79% 
Gained or enhanced knowledge and competence regarding the use of productivity tools application software, 
e.g. spreadsheets, word processors, etc. 79% Local Computer Networking Developed ability to design a 
LAN. 72% Developed ability to install physical hardware components to create a LAN. 86% Developed ability 
to configure servers in at least one O/S to deliver one or more advanced network services. 83% Familiarity 
acquired to understand and relate to practical computer networking concepts and acronyms. 69% Demonstrated 
a fairly advanced/intermediate level of competence performing relatively complex installations, configurations, 
and troubleshooting in at least one technical area in the Lab. 62% The Lab was an environment where I 
consciously tried to provide our clientele with good service. 93% Topic Perceived Competence Level Attained 
The technical knowledge I gained while working at the Lab was invaluable and was put to very good use 
in the job I got when I left the Lab. 97% Because of my work experience in the Lab I was more confident 
about my abilities and worth to a prospective employer, than I would otherwise have been. 97% I believe 
that the work experience I got as a LT gave me a head start in my chosen career relative to others who 
graduated/left UWI around the same time as me with similar qualifications but NO LT experience. 93% I 
think I am essentially still ahead career-wise, of where I might otherwise have been without LT experience. 
86% After working in the Lab I found that the Lab experience effectively prepared me for work in the 
real world. 93%  7. REFERENCES [1] Schaffer, W. A., High Tech Careers for Low-Tech People, 2nd ed., 
Ten Speed Press, Berkeley, CA, p. 18-80 (1999) [2] Bransford, J. D., and Stein, B. S., The Ideal Problem 
Solver, 2nd ed., Freeman, New York, p. 19-41 (1993).  
			