
 ASSIMILATING A NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: A STRATEGY AND ITS ASSESSMENT Ritu Agarwal Department of 
MIS and Decision Sciences, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH 45469-2130 Mohan Tanniru School of Management 
Syracuse University, S~racuse, NY 13244-2130 ABSTRACT Organizations constantly seek new information 
technologies in a quest for wmpetitive advantage. The rapid pace at which new information technologies 
are becoming commercially viable necessitates the deployment of effective strategies to adopt and diffime 
those technologies that show significant promise into the mainstream of an organization s business operations. 
This paper deals with the organizational assimilation of expert systems technology. Although the process 
of technology adoption and diffusion has been studied extensively, reported work in the efficacy of 
specific strategies that facilitate technology assimilation is limited. Expert systems are viewed as 
an innovation for systems developers, and building upon prior work in innovation management, a framework 
for examining different modes of technology adoption anddiffusion is developed. Thestrategy used by one 
manufacturing firm for diffusing expert systems technology among systems developers is presented and 
an approach to its assessment is suggested. The strategy is currently being evaluated for its effectiveness. 
INTRODUCTION Increasing competition in the market place is compelling organizations to continuously search 
for new and better methods for reducing cost and increasing productivity. Information technology (IT) 
has become one accepted vehicle for enabling key business process changes that can give an organization 
an edge over its competition (Drucker, 1988). Thus, there is significant interest among both academic 
and practitioner communities in examining new information technologies and assessing their value k organizational 
operations. Indeed, environmental scanning to search for improved and innovative technologies has not 
only been a recurring theme in surveys of practitioners, it has been addressed in a large body of academic 
research as well, underscoring its critical importance. New information technologies constitute an innovation 
for both technology providers (e.g., MIS units) and technology users (e.g., users). Writers who have 
examined the process of innovation conceptualize it as comprising three phases: initiation, adoption, 
and implementation (Thompson, 1965; Pierce and Delebecq, Permission to copy without fee all or part of 
this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, 
the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy other­wise, or to republish, 
requires a fee and/or specific permission. 1977). Identifying a new information technology that is commercially 
viable is only the first step in utilizing it to help support and enhance an organization s operations 
(the initiation phase). Key next steps include adopting the technology to serve a particular business 
need, and subsequently, diffusing the technology to other parts of the organization which may benefit 
from its utilization (the implementation phase). Here adoption comotes the development of the first successful 
system using a new information processing technology, while diffusion is concerned with a transfer of 
this success to other relevant applications. We use the term assimilation to collectively refer to all 
three phases of innovation. A substantial body of prior research has examined the social, organizational, 
task, technology, and environmental factors underlying technology adoption and diffusion (Zmud, 1982, 
1983, 1984; Huff and Munro, 1985; Lind and Zmud, 1990; Kwon and Zmud, 1987, Cooper and Zmud, 199Q Lucas, 
1975; Brancheau and Wetherbe, 1990; Robey, 1979; Davis et al., 1989; Fuerst and Cheney, 1982). While 
understanding the process of adoption and diffusion is no doubt critical to create organizational climates 
conducive to innovation, there is limited work done in the area of examining specific strategies that 
can create this organizational climate and in assessing their effectiveness. As assimilating a new IT 
typically requires a large investment of resources, such research is clearly needed in order for management 
to a priori assess the worth of interventions and initiatives it may undertake to facilitate technology 
assimilation; and to proactively affect and control both technology adoption and its subsequent diffusion. 
The research repxted in this paper builds upon and extends prior work in the organizational adoption 
and diffusion of new information technology. Specifically, we present a framework for examining adoption 
and diffusion which differentiates between two units of analysis responsible for either process --an 
individual or the organization. The framework suggests that there are four different modes of technology 
assimilation. Depending on where an organization is currently situated in this framework and where it 
would like to finally be, strategies for affecting this change can be identified. We then describe a 
strategy that was formulated for a large manufacturing organization for managing the assimilation of 
a specific new IT --expert systems --and discuss the theoretical underpinnings of the strategy. Next 
we identify some measures that may be used to assess the extent to which the strategy met organizational 
goals. The strategy has been implemented and its effectiveness is in the process of being evaluated. 
The final version of this paper will present the results of the evaluation exercise. @1992 ACM 089791-501-1/92/0004/0196 
$1.50 ASSIMILATION OF A NEW IT Prior Work in New Technology Assimilation Researchers from several diverse 
disciplines such as marketing, research and developmen~ and management science have examined the processes 
underlying the initiation, adoption, and diffusion of new technologies. Whale our specific interest is 
in new information technologies --not information processing hmdware per se, but rather software applications 
--we review literature from other areas as appropriate. The literature on IT innovation can be examined 
along two major dimensions. One dimension is the unh of amdysk, Le., whether the research focuses on 
the individual as the innovator or the organization as the innovating entity. The other dimension relates 
to the specific factors examined as determinant of successful innovation; several contingencies have 
been empirically shown to affect success or failure in the assimilation of a new IT. Kwon and Zmud (1987) 
review the literature on innovation and implementation in IT and identify five major forces examined 
in the research literature: individual factors, structural factors, technological factors, task-related 
factors, and environmental factors. Rather than repeat their analysis here, we simply note that their 
classification provides a conceptually eeonomic yet comprehensive basis for situat@g existing research 
along the latter dimension. Since the publication of their work, other writers have also examined organizational 
innovation. Gatignon and Robertaon (1989) investigate the adoption of lap-top computers by srdes people. 
Even though the unit of adoption for them was an individual salesperson, they chose to focus their analysis 
on the adoption decision at the organizational level. Their study included four sets of factors: the 
supply side competitive environmen~ the adopter industry competitive environment< organization and task 
chameteristics, and decision maker information processing characteristics. Brancheau and Wetherbe (1990) 
test Roger s (1983) theory of the diffusion of imovations in the context of a specific information technology 
--spreadsheet software --with a foeus on the individual as the unit of adoption. Again, the factors they 
examine can be classfled into individual and organizational categories. Davis et al. (1989) attempt to 
explain the determinants of computer aeceptmm across a wide range of technologies and user populations. 
They postulate that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are the two key determinants of a 
behavioral intention to use computer technology. These determinants are, in turn, affected by a variety 
of external variables such as system features and user characteristics, Other significant research in 
technology innovation includes work that is examining assimilation processes from a @iticrd perspective. 
Cooper and Zmud (1990), in their study of the implementation of MRP systems, suggest that the inability 
to explain certain key aspects of assimilation could potentially be caused by the political nature of 
this process. Tomatzky and Klein (1982) performed a meta-analysis of seventy five articles coneemed with 
innovation characteristics and their relationship to innovation adoption and implementation. They concluded 
that innovation characteristics research suffers from a number of conceptual and methodological limitations. 
Noteworthy suggestions made by them for conducting scientific research in innovation include the fact 
that studies should be capable of predicting innovation behavior rather than providing ~st hoc explanations, 
and that studies ought to focus on both adoption and implementation decisions. Two conclusions can be 
drawn after examining existing research in the organizational assimilation of new information technologies. 
FirsL despite the large number of empirical studies conducted, few have examined strategies that can 
facilitate innovation in an organization. While innovation attributes research does provide broad guidelines 
and insights into what would wnstitute good organizational climates for innovation, it is not clear how 
these climates might evolve, or, more importantly, how management might proactively affect and control 
their evolution. Seconcl, although there are similarities across studies in some of the attributes examined, 
due to the large number of organizationrd and technology contingencies underlying each study, it is difficult 
to extract a unifying framework. It is important to reeognize that there are several different paths 
to successful technology assimilation. The extent to which one path works for an organization depends 
on a number of factors, not the least of which being the characteristics of the technology and where 
the organization is currently situated. In order to provide a basis for looking at the different paths 
to technology assimilation, we have formulated a two dimensional framework. The framework together with 
its implications for management action, is described subsequently. A Framework for Examining Assimilation 
While the key objective of an MIS organization s underlying interest in technology assimilation is to 
develop strategies and tactics that would facilitate the organization-wide adoption and diffusion of 
a new IT, there is another equally impwtan~ related objective. The strategy and tactics should provide 
a mechsnklm whereby transferring the learning gained h adopting and diffusing one technology to benefit 
the introduction of other technologks beeomes feasible. By viewing the adoption and diffusion processes 
on individual and organizational dimensions, one can derive four broad paths to technology assimilation 
(Figure 1). Here individurd refers to a single identifiable entity (person, departmen~ etc.) that is 
involved with technology, while organization refers to the management that supervises all such entities 
who can potentirdly benefit from technology utilization. Individual Adoption and Individual Diffusion 
(Cell 1): In this scenario, an individual entity adopts a new technology because it meets a local objective 
. The technology may remain at this local level if there is no corporate-wide interest in its use. Any 
diffusion to other interested parties is likely to be made Iby the initial adopter. Some examples of 
this are the end user technologies that are initiated by users to meet a specific need and an organization 
never adopts or diffuses them as it does not perceive a corporate wide benefit. Our experience with two 
firms (a manufacturing organization and a utility company) has indicated that expert systems applications 
developed by the Research and Development departments within these fmms never progressed beyond these 
units as they were unable to generate sufficient corporate wide interest. However, within the adopting 
units, the systems are wnsidered an operational success and are widely used. FIgwe 1, Modss of Technology 
Asimllntbn 1 1 2 : m z E c end­ aasr computing Offlm aurxslmtkm >5 tuchnolcgbs technologies : : 0s 2. 
~ 4 ~ z MIS data ~lng g technologms technolqi~ Indlvldual Organizational OIFFUSION Individual Adoption 
and Organizational Diffusion (Cell 2): If the benefit re~eived by an i~dividual entity upon adoption 
of a new IT exhibits wqmrate-wide relevance, then the organization clearly stands to gain from actively 
diffusing it to others. Strategies to achieve such diffusion may necessitate an alteration of existing 
policies and procedures, the creation of incentives to promote technology use, etc. The diffusion of 
office automation technologies such as electronic mail and (faciIity) resource scheduling have generally 
followed such a path. One expert system developed by a manufacturing organization to wnfigure products 
exhibited such wide ranging benefits that the firm diffused this technology to all other applications 
of a similar nature (confignrators) by establishing appropriate procedures for wide-spread use. Organizational 
Adoption and Iudividurd Diffusion (Cell 3): In this scenario an organization subscribes to the wncept 
underlying the new technology based on perceptions of potential benefits attainable from its use. This 
type of assessment (referred to as proof of concept ) may be the result of some preliminary internal 
testing, information regarding the successes of similar firms, a close correspondence between task and 
technology, etc. Although the organization passively supports the new IT, its widespread diffusion is 
largely left up to the initiative, commitment, and willingness of individual adopters. The early implementations 
of management information systems were in prwt the outcome of such an organizational adoption strategy, 
the extent to which system utilization diffused to individuals (users/managers) was often a function 
of the care taken in addressing user needs and wncerns. One insurance company has adopted expert systems 
technology because of its potential in providing the i%m with a competitive advantage, and has made available 
a significant amount of resource for ensuring project success and diffusing the expert system to underwriters 
who are its primary users. However, this adoption/diffusion strategy has not penetrated into other seas 
within the organization because of a lack of similar wmmitment. Organizational Adoption and Organizational 
Diffusion (Cell 4): In Cell 4 the organization clearly rewgnizes the benefits of the new technology and 
can, through policy, job and procedural changes, diffuse it to a wider audience.. This final scenario 
exemplifies early efforts at applying data processing technologies to business transaction processing. 
Very few emerging technologies today receive such corporate wide acceptance to make this strategy feasible, 
even though some technologies may bewme mature over time and become an integral part of business. Some 
of the office automation technologies such as electronic mail, and end user technologies such as spreadsheet 
modeling may reach this level of maturity as they prove themselves to be indispensable to an organization 
s survival. Technologies, depending on their impact on organizational operations, may move from one cell 
to the other, and the path they take will depend on the strategy an organization employs. For example, 
an organization might allow an individual to adopt and diffuse a technology in an exploratory manner 
until it proves its relevance. Once the benefits are shown to be tangible, it might adopt and offer it 
as a mechanism for others to adopt/diffnse among themselves. This passive strategy of moving an organization 
from cell 1 to cell 3 is appropriate if the tangible benefits are realized only when the users accept 
the role of technology in performing a particular task. One example of this passive strategy is the diffusion 
of spreadsheet modeling for decision support by some organizations: they decided to adopt the technology 
in principle through product standardization, haxdware/software support and training, and let the individual 
users learn, adop~ and diffuse it among themselves without any external interference. On the other hand, 
an organization may take an active role in diffusing technology by wnvincing individuals to adopt it. 
The strategy here is to move from cell 1 to cell 2 directly. This obviously requires an extensive communication 
effort geared towards reducing an individual s uncertainty and ambivalence towards the use of the new 
technology. In some organizations, spreadsheet modeling has reached such a level of acceptance that all 
department personnel are asked to submit their budgets using this technology so that wrprate wide budgets 
can be formulated quickly. Here the organization has taken an active role in diffusing the technology 
to the users by integrating the technology into their task. Ultimately, some technologies may reach cell 
4 if they are able to sustain a high level of acceptance across many units in the organization. Otherwise, 
they may remain active within one or the other cells for some time until they are replaced with new technologies, 
or become tools with limited potential. The next section will discuss the strategy used by one manufacturing 
organization as it diffuses ES technology within the firm. ADOPTION AND DIFFUSION: A STRATEGY FOR ASSIMILATING 
EXPERT SYSTEMS The case presented here describes the strategies used by a large (1990 sales over 4 billion 
dollars) manufacturing organization to adopt and diffuse expert systems (ES) technology. In the initial 
stages, an individual entity (order handling department) adopted expert systems technology for a specific 
application (configuration of an air-handling unit). Once this initial adoption was shown to be beneficial, 
the manufacturing unit within the organization has actively championed ES technology and tried to propagate 
it to other similar applications, i.e., configuring other products. In terms of the framework descrihd 
previously, one unit of the organization was operating in cell 2 (individual adoption and organization 
diffusion with limited scope). However, this technology has not penetrated to other functional areas 
such as engineering, marketing, sales and service, finance, etc. The objective of the MIS organization 
is to institute a strategy to diffuse ES to other units. It cannot do this by forcing adoption on other 
units as the technology cannot be imposed on the user group without their active involvement. As developing 
ES applications requires the cooperation of multiple individuals within each functioned area experts, 
users and knowledge engineers, each with differing agendas and skills, the technology must be accepted 
by all in order to be successfully deployed. Indeed, the literature draws attention to the potential 
negative consequences of forced adoptions and actions that could be perceived by individuals as coercive 
(Ram and Jung, 1991). One possible strategy for MIS would be to provide support for the technology and 
let the individuals areas adopt it as they see fit. However, this passive mode of operation, with its 
potentially long gestation period, was considered unacceptable since the technology is viewed as critical 
for the organization to be competitive --timing is of major importance. Thus, the strategy formulated 
was to let the organization adopt the technology and provide support for individuals to adopt and diffuse 
it (and accelerate movement from cell 3 to cell 1), and to facilitate function wide diffusion once an 
application is chosen to be relevant (accelerated movement from cell 1 to cell 2). The MIS organization, 
needing to play an active role in implementing the above strategy, viewed its systems developers as key 
catalysts in this change process. It has allowed a few systems developers to develop the fust application 
and once it has shown promise, it is being diffused across that application area (see Table 1 for some 
detailed tactics). In order to make other developers also play a role in this strategy, it has adopted 
the concept of ES in principle, committed resource and initiated a procedure to make individuals explore, 
adopt and diffuse this technology among themselves. A complicating factor in ES technology (as opposed 
to more entrenched technologies such as spreadsheets and databases) is that there often is no clear correspondence 
between task and technology, i.e., identifying whether a particular organizational activity would benefit 
from an ES application remains a poorly understood task. The rationrde behind focusing on systems developers 
as the early adopters was that it would allow them to examine potential uroblems and determine how appropriate 
they are for an ES solu~on. Given that there are three different players (experts, users, and Table 1. 
Tactics Used for Technology Diffnsion within Functional Areas  Identi&#38; similar applications and 
assess the role of ES technology for these applications . The success of the configurator suggests many 
other potential configurators that can utilize ES Identify boundary spanning activities and extend the 
role of ES technologies to include these areas . Once configuration is explored, examine its interfaces 
with other related activities such as, scheduling, ordering, contract bidding, etc. for the use of ES 
technology within these areas; thereby encouraging breadth of application Develop modular and flexible 
systems to enable speedier diffusion within the functional area A substantial portion of the knowledge 
required is stored in data bases and interfaces are standardized so that they can be reused in newer 
configuratmw and maintained easily Encourage, to the extent pssible, the active involvement of the user 
or expert in the diffusion process so that potential ideas can be explored quickly Make an area representative 
responsible for the interface between experts/users/knowledge engineers and have him/her direct the project 
when needed. This can, if properly managed, reduce time lost in gathering information and place responsibility 
for development in the hands of the functional area. developers) involved in adoptingldiffusing ES technology, 
one can let the demand pull (for the use of this technology) originate from the experts/users, or alternatively, 
let the appropriateness of the problem make the technology push by develo~rs feasible. In this case, 
both these approaches are being utilized in concert with each other. The initial push is being provided 
by the developers with the full participation of experts and users; the successful exploration will then 
create the pull needed for deeper penetration of the technology into the application area. In other words, 
MIS creates the push to speed up the movement from cell 3 to cell 1, while expertJuser groups create 
the pull needed to move from cell 1 to cell 2. With proper management of both the technology push and 
demand pull, a technology can be diffused into an organization relatively faster. In summary, the strategy 
adopted by the firm was to frost enable and encourage ES adoption by systems developers so that they 
may be able to create the push required for the technology to penetrate application areas. Prior to the 
developers adopting ES, however, MIS management has to adopt ES technology and provide support so that 
the technology can be diffused to systems developers. Once this is complete, system developers can act 
as catalysts to accelerate the speed of diffusion. The overall strategy has three major tactical thrusts 
that are discussed below. Note that the organization is in the early stages of this diffusion process 
and the final impact of these procedures will not be known for some time. The rest of this paper will 
discuss the progress that has been made in the adoption process and the specific mechanisms that have 
been instituted for ES diffusion to individuals. The Strategy and Its Thrusts The three major thrusts 
comprising the diffusion strategy are grounded upon the results and insights provided by prior reseimch 
in new technology adoption and diffusion. Thrust 1 A key prerequisite to adopting a technology and entrenching 
it as part of regular work behaviors is for the adopting unit to have knowledge about it and to be able 
to experiment with it. Experimentation requires the creation of an organic environment (Burns and Stalker, 
1961) characterized by informality and loose control structures. While organic environments do not necessarily 
trigger innovations, nonetheless, the climate itself recognizes the desirability of innovation and provides 
opportunities and incentives for its exploration (Zmud, 1982). Experimentation also requires that the 
target population be adequately equipped with the skills required for successful trird and error learning. 
This rationale underlies the fust thrust of the strategy. Make the technology available for exploration: 
Provide access to ES development tools so that system developers can explore its potential through prototyping. 
Technology exploration requires a significant amount of training and this has to be managed effectively, 
i.e., the training, to some exten~ must match management s expectations of the trainee. It is strongly 
recommended that the training be followed up with an assignment that uses the technology to maximize 
learning. Table 2 provides some guidelines followed in this case. As of this repor~ over 20 MIS professionals 
have completed the fust phase of this training. Thrust 2 Prior research has underscored the importance 
of top management support in encouraging the adoption of new ITs (Robey, 1979; Lucas, 1975). This support 
is viewed as instrumental in developing positive attitudes towards technology use among adopters (Davis 
et al., 1989). Zmud (1983) in a study of the effectiveness of information channels in facilitating innovation 
in software development groups, suggests that the focal concerns for such groups tend to be efficiency 
oriented, geared towards the exploitation of known technologies with tangible benefits. The desire and 
motivation of such groups to take risks and be innovative would be limited, unless the organization s 
formal hierarchy takes the appropriate initiatives by making resources available. A strong commitment 
from management to the use of ES technology when appropriate constitutes the second thrust of the strategy. 
Provide management support for exploration: Management support is to be communicated and reinforced by 
establishing a mechanism so that any new problem that is under review for development is assessed to 
determine if expert systems technology (along with others) is appropriate as a software platform for 
solving the entire problem or a part of it (as an Table 2. Training Guidelines for Introducing ES Technology 
 . OBJECTIVE: Expose trainees to the nature of the technology A one day training program was designed 
to teach the basics of the technology -its fundamental features (science involved), when will it work 
and to what degree, the risks of choosing problems that are too large in scope and the application of 
modularity for managing risks, the role of prototyping and the user in making the system adaptive, and 
the nature of delivery of the final system to the user (testing, implementation, maintenance, etc.). 
. OBJECTIVE: assist trainees in understanding the components of the new technology and its relationship 
to current technologies Allow developers to use the technology to design simple applications so they 
can understand components such as inference mechanisms, declarative and procedural knowledge, and explanation 
facilities. . OBJECTIVE: allow trainees to examine the integration of this technology with the application 
environment and other technologies Allow developxs to see the interface between the expert systems platform 
with other software platforms such as COBOL, DB2, IMS etc. so that different technologies can be embedded 
within each other. OBJECTIVE: allow trainees to develop and implement applications using the new technologies 
Provide full training in the use of the ES package for production bound applications, as suitable business 
problems are identtiled. embedded system). The system developers become critical agents for performing 
such an assessmen~ even if they are not all necessarily involved in the development of an application 
using ES technology. Other types of support include general communication to all concerned about the 
value MIS management places on the exploration use of ES technology and its commitment to support any 
efforts of individuals or groups to enhance ES exploration. Table 3 lists a few steps the organization 
has taken to make this exploration feasible. Thrust 3 The role of communication and its influence on 
adoption and diffusion decisions is well documented in the literature. Roger s (1983) theory of the diffusion 
of innovations which has provided the theoretical basis for much research in this area postulates that 
individuals will be more receptive to adopting new technology if they are able to view the benefits of 
adoption with greater certainty. To this end, they seek information from their social system (peers, 
co-workers, organization, etc.) and the environment (e.g. media). These external and internal channels 
of Table 3. Tactics to Demonstrate Management Commitment OBJECTIVE: demonstrate a commitment to and 
an understanding of the development process. Each application manager gets involved in the technology 
diffusion process by becoming familiar with the technology and its integration into other software platforms. 
 OBJECTIVE: develop a systematic procedure for evaluating @ential projects for development using ES technology 
(technology push) as well as evaluate its role when current applications come up for reengineering purposes. 
Ensure that developers are required to assess the role of ES technology along with others as a part of 
the business systems analysis phase. Also, have them seek potential applications within the appropriate 
social context that can make the use of ES technology most effective. . OBJECTIVE: Set up procedures 
to evaluate each application for its impact on the organization and the user. Prioritize candidate ES 
application into three broad categories: 1) prototype for eventual production; 2) prototype to assess 
potentia~ and 3) explore further as research ideas for possible investment at a later time. OBJECTIVE 
Keep the technology in the limelight to sustain developer interest. Communicate the status of the ES 
technology and its importance for gaining competitive advantage at multiple forums. Discuss both the 
successes as well as its limitations. . OBJECTIVE: Motivate developers to learn about the technology 
and its relevance through self-learning and other activities. Encourage education through exploration 
and allow those interested to attend seminars, tutorials etc. that will provide additional knowledge 
about ES technology. communication have varying degrees of effectiveness in facilitating adoption and 
diffusion. Effective communication not only reduces the uncertainty about potential technology benefits 
that may accrue to adopters, it also serves to rationalize the decisions of adopters as they are now 
made with a greater amount of information. This point is critical from the broader perspective of the 
organization where a key concern is that the technology be deployed for its business value, as opposed 
to its novel or fad value. Effective communication is the major notion underlying the final tactical 
thrust of the strategy. Allow developers to share information/experiences with other developem: To this 
end, a core group of individuals have been trained in the use of ES technology and are available to train 
others as the need arises. In some sense, the core group may contain a few that are very enthusiastic 
about the technology and its potential and they may, in turn, train others (referred to as technology 
intermediaries ) who become conduits for communicating the rudimentaries of the technology. These intermediaries, 
while not necessarily becoming experts in the use of the technology, acquire sufficient experience with 
it to provide advice on its relevance to solve a particular application problem. If the technology is 
found to be suitable, the intermediaries wcmk with both the core group and the project team in charge 
of the application to develop the system. In time, these intermediaries may become experts at using the 
technology and training others within their application group, thus allowing for the eventual diffusion 
of the technology to all levels of the MIS development staff. The specific responsibilities and role 
of the core AI group are outlined in Table 4. Table 4. Information Exchange through Core Group s Activities 
 . Establish a CORE group to provide a common source for information, both about ES and other advanced 
technologies. Have this group continually evaluate shell enhancements and communicate new features through 
training, etc. .Have the CORE group work with training coordinators to develop training materials or 
obtain training literature for distribution as and when appropriate. Have the application designees from 
each application area discuss, in some forum, both technical issues and development/ methodological issues 
with the CORE group as a way of disseminating experiences and providing feedback. As the designees in 
an application area get involved in the development of a projec~ have additional members from that application 
area get involved in the assessment/prototype development process so that the technology gets diffused 
gradually to a larger pool of individuals in the application group. Use external sources such as academic 
settings, conferences, etc. to provide across-the-board training and to disseminate concepts at a rapid 
pace when appropriate. EVALUATION OF THE STRATEGY Several analytical models for measuring diffusion are 
discussed by Blackman (1986) and Brown (1981); these models assume that the extent to which diffusion 
has occurred can be measured. This measurement is possible only if we can define the unit of innovation, 
the target population of innovators, and determine if the target population has adopted the technology. 
However, problems arise when these models are applied to complex, advanced technologies that are perceived 
differently by different people, use many communication channels that are hard to define, and have no 
identifiable stages for rewgnizing the actual adoption (Eveland and Tornatzky, 1990). ES technology can 
be categorized as wmplex and advanced since it typically contains many components (inference engine, 
user interfaces, knowledge bases, integration with other application environments, etc.) and uses development 
methodologies that are significantly different from traditional technologies that use procedural software 
platforms. It also involves multiple individuals (knowledge engineers, experts, users) in the development 
process. Measuring diffusion here is further complicated by the fact that we are diffusing the technology 
to those that view it as a process innovation. ES technology is viewed as a product innovation (i.e., 
one that provides access to a new product -expertise) by users, but as a process innovation by systems 
developers (i.e., one that can be used to meet a specific need -satisfy some defined user requirements 
in a different way). Identifying process criteria is, in general, more complicated as the individuals 
involved in adopting the technology may become a part of the process itself. For example, the prototyping 
strategy used for ES development requires continual interaction among experts, knowledge engineers and 
users, and forces management to monitor ES projects differently. Also, the criteria used change with 
time as an individual s understanding and learning about the technology changes. A significant process 
criterion is the utility an innovation provides to an individual or an organization -an effectiveness 
measure. However, effectiveness is difficult to measure if multiple individuals perceive it differently 
and is complicated further if one doesn t understand the innovation. An adopter needs to understand both 
the technical content (knowledge about the technology) and the embedding content (the cultural and social 
settings within which it will be applied) (Palz and Munson, 1980). Effective diffusion is said to occur 
if the systems developer has sufficient knowledge (technical and embedded) to understand the relevance 
of ES technology as a potential software platform to solve a given problem (user requirement). A context 
based approach (Eveland and Tornatzky, 1990) is recommended here to operationalize this evaluation process. 
Five factors are identified to broadly capture one s understanding of a technological innovatiorx nature 
of the technology; user and deployer characteristics that will make technology deployment feasible; the 
role of the developer/user in deploying the technology; and the nature of communication and type of transactions 
that are necessary to implement the technology (development and implementation procedures). Several of 
these factors were embedded in the diffusion strategy described in the previous section, and an evaluation 
of the strategy requires an assessment of how well these factors have been understood and are being practiced 
by the developers. Future reports will provide our assessment of the diffusion process. Organizations 
constantly seek ways to retain an advantage in a growingly competitive global market environment information 
technology is likely to provide this advantage if it can be effectively assimilated into the organization 
s operations. Newer technologies, just like any other innovation, must be adopted if they show promise, 
and diffused among all concerned to realize their full potential. Prior research in innovation management 
is used to develop a framework that views the adoptionldiffusion processes along two dimensions: individual 
and organization. This framework is then used to develop a specific diffusion strategy for a large manufacturing 
organization -a combination of technology push and demand pull , ixrth facilitated by an aggressive diffusion 
of technology among systems developers and active involvement of the expert/user community. The three 
major thrusts underlying the diffusion strategy that are currently being implemented by the MIS organization 
are described. The research, when completed, will report on the impact of the diffusion strategy on the 
agents (systems developers) ability to assimilate ES technology into the organization s software repertoire. 
 REFERENCES Blackman. A. W. Jr., The Use of Innovation Diffusion Models in New Venture Planning and Evaluation, 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 29, 1986, 173-181. Brancheau, J.C. and J.C. Wetherbe, The 
Adoption of Spreadsheet Software: Testing Innovation Diffusion Theoly in the Context of End-User Computing 
, Information Sw.tems Research, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1990,41-64. Brown, L. A., Imovation Diffusion: A New Perspective, 
New York Methuen &#38; Co., 1981. Bums, T. and G. Stalker, The Management of Innovation, London: Tavistok. 
1961. cooper, R.B. and R.W. Zmud, Information Technology Implementation Research: A Technological Diffusion 
Approach , Management Science, Vol. 36, No. 2, 1990, 123-139. Davis, F.D., R.P. Bagozzi, and P.R. Warshaw, 
User Acceptance of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models , ~ Vol. 35, No. 8, 1989, 
982-1003. Dmcker, P.J., The Coming of the New Organization , Harvard Business Review, Vol. 66, No. 1, 
1988, 45-53. Eveland J.D. and L.G. Tomatzky, The Deployment of Technology , in The Process of Technological 
Innovation, edited by: L.G. Tomatzky and M, Fleischer, Lexington, MA Heath &#38; co., 1990. Fuers~ W.L. 
and P.H. Cheney, Factors Affecting The Perceived Utilization of Computer-Based Decision Support Systems 
in the Gil Industry , Decision Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 4, 1982, 554-569. Gatignon, H. and T.S. Robertson, 
Technology Diffusion: An Empirical Test of Competitive Effects , Journal of Marketing, Vol. 52, bU~ 1989, 
35-49. Ginzberg, M. J., Key Recurrent Issues in the MIS Implementation Process , MIS QuarterlU Vol. 5, 
No. 2, 1981, 47-60. Huff, S.L and M.C. Munro, Information Technology Assessment and Adoption: A Field 
Study , MIS Quarterly, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1985, 327-340. Kwon, T.H. and R.W. Zmud, Unifying the Fragmented 
Models of Information Systems Implementation , in R.J. Boland and R.A. Hirscheirn, eds., Critical Issues 
in Information Systems Research, New York Wiley, 1987, 227-251. Llnd, M.R. and R.W. Zmud, The Influence 
of a Convergence. in Understanding Between Technology Providers and Users on Information Technology Innovativeness 
, Organization Science, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1991, 195-217. Lucas, H. C., Performance and Use of an Information 
System , Management Science, Vol. 21, 1975,908-919. Lucas, H. C., Implementation: The Key to Successful 
Information _ New York Columbia University press! 1981. Pelz, D.C. and D. Munson, The Innovative Process: 
A Conceptual Framework, Working Paper, Center for Research on Utilization of Scientific Knowledge, Ann 
Arbor, MI University of Michigan, 1980. Pierce, J.L. and A.L. Delbecq, Organization Structure, Individual 
Attitudes and Innovation , Academy of Management Review, Vol. 2, 1977, 27-37. Ram, S. and H-S. Jung, 
 Forced Adoption of Innovations in Organizations: Consequences and Implications , Journal of . . Production 
and Innovation Management, Vol. 8, 1991., 117-126. Thompson, V. A., Bureaucracy and Innovation , Administrative 
..- . Science Quarterly, Vol. 10, 1965, 1-20. Tornatzky, L.G. and K.J. Klein, Innovation Characteristics 
and Innovation Adoption-Implementation: A Mets Analysis of Findings , IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Marla~e~, Vol. EM-29, No. 1, 1982, 28-45. Robey, D., User Attitudes and Management Information System 
Use , Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 22, 1979, 527-538. Rogers, E.M., Diffusion of Innovations, 
3rd Edition, The Free Press, New York, 1988. Zmud, R.W., Diffusion of Modem Software Practices: Influence 
of Centralization and Formalization , Management Science, Vol. 28, No. 12, 1982, 1421-1431. Zmud, R, 
W., The Effectiveness of External Information Channels in Facilitating Innovativeness Within Software 
Groups , Nl IS @!@Y, June198343-58 Zmud, R.W., An Examination of the Push-Pull Theory Applied to Process 
Innovation in Knowledge Work , Mana~ement Science, Vol. 30, No. 6, 1984, 727-738. 
			