
 ATLAS SUPPLEMENT TO THE 1972 COUNTY AND CITY DATA BOOK Lucky M. Tedrow Demographic Research Laboratory* 
Western Washington University and Eugene A. Hoerauf Department of Geography** Western Washington University 
 Abstract  A series of maps presenting the spatial dis- tribution of the tabular data from the 1972 
County and City Data Book is discussed. Using an auto- mated mapping procedure developed on a minicomput- 
er by two non-computer scientists, 196 choropleth maps of county-level data for the State of Washing- 
ton were prepared. The maps provide governmental decision-makers and planners a means to quickly comprehend 
patterns in the data that are not readi- ly noticeable in the tabular presentation of the data. Key 
Words and Phrases: - interactive computer graphics -geographic displays - proportional shading 
- spatial information -computer cartography CR categories: 8.2, 3.37, 3.53 *Mailing address: Demographic 
Research Laboratory Department of Sociology Western Washington University Bellingham, Washington 98225 
 **Mailing address: Department of Geography and Regional Planning Western Washington University Bellingham, 
Washington 98225 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that 
the copies ere not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the A~I copyright notice and 
the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of 
the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific 
permission. 01980 ACM 0-89791-021-4/80/0700-0058 $00.75 Introduct ion Vast quantities of tabulated 
statistical data are made available annually by federal, state, and local government agencies. The U.S. 
Bureau of the Census alone produces a wide array of data in tab- ular form on an annual basis in addition 
to vol- umes of data from censuses taken at regular inter- vals. Much of the data are not used to their 
po- tential due to the inability of users to quickly interpret the data. This paper describes a com- 
puter-produced Atlas Supplement to the 1972 County and City Data BooR4). The project was~d~- ta~.en 
wi-----t~-~e spe-----cific intention of making the county-level data of the 1972 ~ and City Data Book 
(6) more readily inte~etable to-~sers. As Schmid and Schmid (3) have noted, "Neither columns and rows 
of statistics in their tabular arrangement nor the seemingly endless listings of figures in textual form 
can possess the clarity, appeal, or meaningfulness of a well-designed chart." The large amounts of money 
spent on gathering and analyzing data may often be wasted if the potential market of users is unable 
to translate those data into information, that is, if the user cannot reduce the data to comprehensible 
form, either for purposes of simple description or as a basis for decision-making and planning. ~xcellent 
examples of the Census Bureau's response to the need for graphic display of data to aid user interpretation 
are the Urban Atlas (8) and the Domestic Information Display System pro- ject by NASA/Goddard Space Flight 
Center and the U.S. Bureau of the Census (I). These two projects involved not only the technical personnel 
of the Census Bureau, but included the technical exper- tise and hardware resources of the Lawrence Berke- 
ley Laboratory and the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. Such opportunities seldom exist at the state 
or local planning level. The enormity of these projects are simply beyond the resources of a small academic 
department, research laboratory or planning agency. The 1972 Co~and City Data Book (CCDB) presents ~nety 
oi-~-cio~mo~p~-statistical information for cities, counties, standard metro- politan statistical areas, 
urbanized areas snd un- incorporated areas. The Atlas Supplement t_o_the CCDB makes available a choropleth 
map of Washing- ton counties for each of the 196 county-level statistical items in Table 2 of the CCDB. 
Most of the statistical items were derived from the latest censuses of population, housing, governments, 
man- ufactures, business, mineral industries, and agri- culture. The general headings from the 1972 CCDB 
 58 (see Appendix A) describe the statistical data for Washington counties found on pages 510-521 of 
that publication. The Atlas Supplement to the Co~ and City Data Bookp~ents'a compu~r~oduced map for each 
of the 196 statistical items. Equipment The automated mapping procedure, developed in BASIC, uses the 
equipment shown in Figure I. Some of the equipment was purchased by a grant from the National Science 
Foundation (HES75-12384) to the Sociology Department, Western Washington Univer- sity (WWU). Additional 
equipment, including graphic terminals, remote incremental plotters and a digitizor, have been purchased 
by a combination of departmental and university funds. The auto- mated mapping routines were developed 
on ~M Ter- minal System (~S), which combines computer- assisted instruction (CAI), remote programming, 
scientific programming, text editing and data pro- cessing functions. WTS was developed at WWU and has 
been in operation since 1974. Figure 1 is one of six independent, but similarly configured mini- computer 
systems at ~U. These systems provide both academic and administrative computing at the University. The 
other minicomputer systems do not have the graphic peripherals displayed in Figure i. These other systems, 
each capable of support- ing approximately 25 terminals, are used primarily for CAI and interactive progra~ing. 
 Mapping Procedure and Discussion Figures 2:A and 2:B are maps showing the spa-  tial distribution 
in Washington of Items No. 46 and No. 87 from the 1972 CCDB. The outline of the counties was prepared 
using the 30" by 40" Tektronix graphics tablet digitizor shown in Fig- ure i. The "x,y" coordinates 
were stored and a "points dictionary" was used to permit the plot- ting of county boundaries in the 
form of polygons using identical coordinates along contiguous bor- ders. This technique prevents the 
appearance of gaps between county borders; a problem which oc- curs when each county is digitized independently. 
 The original "points" file included approximately 1,000 "x,y" coordinates; and the "points diction- 
 ary" linked together nearly 1,600 "x,y" coordinate pairs to produce the county outlines in these maps. 
 Each of the choropleth maps requires approxi-  mately an hour of connect time on the Interdata 7/32 
minicomputer syst~a shown in Figure i. The time necessary to initiate a plot is minimal and requires 
only a few interactive commands. The user starts the mapping process by telling the first program, 
FLAG, which of the 196 CCDB items is to be mapped, and the plotter to which the out- put is to be directed. 
FLAG reads the CCDB data file, selects the appropriate thirty-nine county values, and determines the 
shading pattern for each county based on its position in the value range. FLAG also stores the county 
values in the lettering file for later plotting within the county areas. FLAG chains into the plotting 
pro- grams which proceed through line, polygon and let- tering files to produce the finished plot. 
Before shading a polygon, a routine adds additional points to the polygon to provide a clear window 
 for the later inclusion of the county value. The shading routine shades each polygon separately; the 
polygon is rotated to make the shading lines horizontal, X-intercepts are calculated and then rotated 
back to the original angle before being sent to the plot routine. After drawing and shad- ing all the 
counties, the lettering and gray scale legend are added to complete the map. The series of programs are 
executed in a 16 K byte partition; this partition holds the plotter driving routines, the character-plot 
definition files, and the map- ping programs. This has required a series of mod- ules with automatic 
chaining (with or without keep- ing variables and values) the segments together. Thus, several of the 
modules may be entered direct- ly to complete an interrupted plot. A unique feature of these maps is 
the use of proportional shading instead of class intervals. This technique was advocated by Tobler (5) 
but has not been readily accepted or used by all carto- graphers. This method of presentation considera- 
bly reduces the time needed to manually determine special class intervals for each map. Some devel- opment 
in automated class interval selection by Jenks and Caspall (2) has made progress in further reducing 
this time-consuming step in map prepara- tion. Theoretically, using the proportional shading  technique 
employed here, one has available an in- finite number of class intervals for graphic display on a choropleth 
map. In actuality, one is limited by the resolution of the plotter (.01" in our case) and the plot 
size of the smallest geo- graphic unit on the map. By plotting these maps at the same size required 
for printing, we have eliminated a costly reduction step, but conse- quently are limited to 22 class 
intervals ranging from .01" to .22". The use of proportional shad- ing presents no problem in determining 
the rela- tive values for different counties on the maps be- cause the actual values are placed in 
windows within each county. The gray scale legend is in- cluded to indicate the maximum and minimum 
of the data and the approximate pattern for intermediate values. ~difications and Extensions The 
recent availability of the 1977 County  and Ci~Data Book (7) in machine readable form an~the ac~si~n 
of a Tektronix 4662 plotter have prompted changes in our automated mapping routines to more efficiently 
produce an atlas sup- plement to the 1977 CCDB. Two modifications to the graphics system that are already 
implemented both speedup the mapping and improve the quality of the maps for the 1977 atlas supplement. 
The graphics system used to prepare the 1972 atlas supplement was restricted toplotting one map at 
a time. The plotter was idle during the time that one map was completed and the next map was initi- 
 ated. ~difications to the mapping routines now allow the production of up to six maps in succes- sion 
with a few interactive co,ands at the start. The other improvement was made possible by  the acquisition 
of the Tektronix plotter. The quality of the lettering fonts on the Tektronix plotter are superior 
to those currently available on the Zeta plotter. ~difications to the graph- ics system now permit 
the county outlines and shading patterns to be produced on the Zeta plot- ters and the lettering to 
be completed on the Tek- tronix plotter. Because of the particular equip- ment available, separating 
the lettering and line drawing functions onto different plotters enhances 59 the lettering quality 
and decreases the time re- quired to complete a map. In producing lines for the outlines and shading, 
the Tektronix is some- what faster than the Zeta, requiring about two- thirds the time for the same 
plot. The fact that the Zeta requires software character generation makes it very slow at lettering 
compared to the Tektronix plotter with its built-in character generator. Using two Zeta plotters to 
plot the line images and the Tektronix to do all the let- tering will be using the available resources 
to best advantage. Register marks plotted outside the map area permit alignment on the Tektronix plotter 
for lettering after the shaded portion of the map has been completed on the Zeta plotter. The ~ and 
City Data Book provides coun- ty-level~--Eo~-all co~{ies-i~the United States. A county-level ailas supplement 
could be prepared for any state using this data source and similar mapping procedures employed in preparing 
the Washington atlas supplement. Polygon shading routines are quite conmnonly used at universities and 
laboratories elsewhere. By incorporating pro- portional shade routines - thus eliminating the time consuming 
manual class-interval selection process -maps could be produced for other states. This would permit the 
statistical data from the Co~and Ci~Data Book to be more readily in- terpreta-~e by de--ion-makers, planners 
and other users of this valuable reference source. References i. Dalton, J., Billingsley, J., Quann, 
J., and Bracken, P. "Interactive Color ~p Displays of Domestic Information." SIGRAPH-AO4 Com- puter Graphics, 
13(2), (1979), pp. 226-233. 2. Jenks, G. F. and Caspall, F. C. "Error on Choropleth Maps: Definition, 
Measurement, Reduction." Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 61, (1971), pp. 217-44. 
 3. Schmid, Calvin F. and Schmid, S. E. Handbook of Graphic Presentation (Second Edition~, Ronald Press 
Company, New York, (1979).  4. Tedrow, Lucky M. and Hoerauf, E. ~ashington County Atlas Supplement to 
the County and City Data Book, 1972. In press, Western Washington University, (1980).  5. Tobler, W. 
R. "Choropleth Haps Without Class Intervals?", Geographical Analysis, 5, (1973), pp. 262-5.  6. United 
States Bureau of the Census. County and City Data Book, 1972. (A Statistical Abstract Supplement). Washington, 
D. C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office, (1973).  7. United States Bureau of the Census. County and 
City Data Book, 1977. (A Statistical Abstract Supplement). Washington, D. C.:  U.S. Government Printing 
Office, (1978).  8. United States Bureau of the Census and Man- power Administration. Urban Atlas. ~Vashing-ton, 
D. C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,  (1974). Appendix A Presented below are the general headings 
which appear in the Co~andCi~Data Book, 1972 (6). These headings de~ribe the Sta~tical aa~ available 
for Washington counties in Table 2 of that publication (pages 510-521). The Atlas Supplement to the ~ 
and Ci~Data Book pre- sents a com~t~pro~d-~p for each ~ these 196 items. Items 1-15 AREA, POPULATION 
Items 16-32 POPULATION, BIRTH AND DEATH RATES, EDUCATION Items 33-49 LABOR FORCE Items 50-67 FAMILIES, 
INCOME Items 68-84 SOCIAL SECURITY, PUBLIC ASSISTANCE, HOUSING Items 85d01 HOUSING Itemsl02-117 PRESIDENTIAL 
VOTE, GOVF~ENT Item~l18431 BANKIng, ~iANUFACTURES Items132q48 RETAIL TRADE Items149q63 SELECTED SERVICES, 
WHOLESALE TRADE Items164479 MINERAL IFDUSTRIES, FARM POPULATION, AGRICULTURE Items180496 AGRICULTURE 
 FIGURE l INTERDATA TELEFILE 7/32 -DCI6C DISK -- MINCOMPUTER CONTROLLER C ___~TEKTRONIX ~ [TEKTRONIX 
 ~----~4954 \4010 CRT / [DIGITIZER OTHER SYSTEM  USERS  60 ILl []  _1 R E Z U H E LL [] E °, Lfl 
Ln N E DU Z ELjLJ F~ E LdLj  _J EL Z Ld o. [.~ ft. bd rfi r,- LA-444+t~tNIIm [] p-DR HLO ._H dl EL HU 
ZiI L~EE ZLO HZ LHZ [] RW LAW H~ ZB U [] 62 
			