
 Authenticating Public Access Networking Joseph W. Graham II University of Pittsburgh 717 Cathedral of 
Learning, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260 +1 (412) 624-5244 jwg@pitt.edu ABSTRACT The University of Pittsburgh 
began offering network connections to residence hall students in 1998. Initially, students were assigned 
static IP addresses and manual processes were implemented to record the each computer s network card 
MAC address. This quickly became unwieldy as service was expanded to all of the nearly 6,000 residence 
hall rooms. In 2000, DHCP was used to provide student IP addresses in conjunction with registration software 
to record the necessary machine information. Tracing activity in response to security issues was still 
time-consuming because of the time needed to research activity logs. The adaptation of the Point-to-Point 
Protocol (PPP) for broadband use by commercial Internet Services Providers (ISP s) provided a much simpler 
solution for registering users, and providing IP addresses. Direct user authentication to the network 
is accomplished by requiring the entry of a username and password each time the user establishes a connection. 
Tracing specific activity is simplified because it is not necessary to research different sets of logs 
to determine the IP address and username. Management of the system is entirely dynamic. The system can 
be used just as easily for ports located in public areas, classrooms, and in conjunction with wireless 
network services. The need for authenticated access to the network from these locations is even more 
important than from the residence halls. Although PPPoE has been used for authenticated access in the 
residence halls during the past academic year, this service will be converted to the IEEE 802.1x standard, 
which eliminates the requirement for client authentication software in the coming year. Our experience 
with PPPoE is that support requirements are very low and are primarily limited to client software installation 
assistance. Further reduction of support requirements is expected with the introduction of 802.1x authentication 
for residence hall, public access, classroom, and wireless network connections. Categories and Subject 
Descriptors C.2.1 [Network Architecture and Design]: Wireless Communications General Terms: Management, 
Documentation, Performance, Design Keywords: Wireless, Authentication, Networking, PPPoE, Directory, 
LDAP, Kerberos, NDS, Active Directory, DHCP 1. INTRODUCTION The University of Pittsburgh began providing 
Ethernet ports in its Pittsburgh Campus residence halls in 1996. All residence hall rooms were wired 
with one port per pillow in 1998. The connection rate at that time was approximately 40%. Since that 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGUCCS 02, November 20-23, 2002, Providence, Rhode Island, 
USA. ACM 1-58113-564-5/02/0011. time, the number of residence hall beds has increased to 6,000 and the 
connection rate has continued to increase to the current 74%. Several methods for authenticating users 
to the residence hall wired network have been evaluated and implemented over time, each successively 
leading to simplified configuration of user devices and reductions in support overhead. Problems persisted, 
however, that required a much more effective solution than had been available previously. At approximately 
the same time, a pilot effort was introduced to offer wireless network service to University students 
using a program in which laptop computers equipped for wireless access were available for student checkout 
in the main campus library. This program continued until 1999 at which time it was abandoned due to the 
high cost of equipment maintenance and because of user complaints regarding slow performance and other 
issues. The library has maintained a wireless service since that time, but the service is available only 
to library staff. Pressure to offer wireless service throughout the University community has been increasing 
substantially in recent years. In the past academic year, a pilot program designed to implement wireless 
service in public areas, offices, and classrooms was conducted and yielded highly positive results due 
to the improvements in technology and in the ability to secure access to the wireless network using PPPoE 
technology. This paper will explore in more detail the PPPoE solution that has been most recently used 
with a high degree of success to authenticate residence hall users and the wireless gateway solution 
that is being implemented to authenticate users to various wireless network implementations across campus. 
Both of these methods take full advantage of the University s central directory and authentication services 
that have been implemented over the past two years. 2. EVALUATION OF TECHNOLOGIES 2.1 Residence Hall 
Network Authentication During the first two years in which residence hall network access was provided, 
users were assigned static IP addresses upon registration of their Ethernet card MAC addresses. The drawback 
of this method was that a tremendous amount of effort was needed to record user information and to research 
records when tracking down a problem. In September 1999, Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) service 
was introduced to assign IP addresses to users without the need to manually record and research user 
information. Lucent Technologies QIP software was selected for this purpose because in addition to IP 
address assignment, the software offered an automated means of registering user Ethernet card addresses 
via a web page. This software was used throughout the 1999 academic year, but serious problems occurred 
with the registration management component as participation in the ResNet program grew and the demand 
for service outstripped the ability of the software to keep pace. As a result, QIP was implemented without 
the registration management component. An evaluation of available DHCP solutions resulted in the identification 
of Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE) as a viable alternative to the previous solutions. The 
PPPoE protocol is a standard Internet protocol as defined by RFC 2516. This protocol requires a user 
to authenticate to a RADIUS server in order to obtain and use an IP address to connect to the Internet 
over a standard Ethernet network. In this way, PPPoE is similar to the PPP protocol used on the University 
s remote access dialup modem pool. Early in the project planning process for the implementation of PPPoE 
user authentication, the need to deploy a single vendor, cross-platform client software solution was 
identified in order to simplify documentation and user support. It was also determined that the process 
in which users obtain, install, and configure the client software was critical to success given the need 
to quickly deliver the solution to a potential 6,000 residence hall users within a few days of the start 
of the fall term. In order to simplify this process for users, a special Web site was set up that is 
accessible only to these users providing the ability to download preconfigured Figure 2: PPPoE Architecture 
 2.2 Wireless User Authentication Security was a paramount concern during the wireless networking pilot 
program. It was quickly decided that both Wire Equivalent Privacy (WEP) and individual user authentication 
would both be employed in conjunction with wireless networking to encrypt data and to identify users 
if needed in connection with security incidents. PPPoE was implemented during the wireless pilot in part 
because of the successful implementation of this protocol for residence hall user authentication. Feedback 
received during the pilot implementation indicated that users were dissatisfied with the lengthy process 
of installing and configuring a wireless radio card, WEP key, and PPPoE client software and that some 
users experienced incompatibility problems that made it difficult for them to participate in the program. 
The pilot program experience made it clear that an alternative solution of for user authentication was 
needed that did not involve the installation of client-side software. The IEEE 802.1x protocol was initially 
evaluated to provide this alternative in light of the fact that current operating systems include 802.1x 
functionality. In addition, all of the wireless radio cards under consideration support the authentication 
protocol. Implementation of 802.1x has been delayed, however, because the implemented version of RADIUS 
software is not capable of native communication with the University s LDAP, NDS, Active Directory, or 
Kerberos authentication systems. This problem required the identification of an interim solution until 
a compatible 802.1x solution has been developed and deployed. Demands for immediate deployment of wireless 
network service in public areas, classrooms, and office areas led to the consideration of wireless gateway 
solutions from several different vendors. The requirements for consideration included the ability to 
authenticate users against one of the University s central authentication systems, the ability to employ 
roles-based access, the ability to restrict access to specific applications and services over the wireless 
network. Based upon these criteria, a product selection has been made and wireless network service is 
being deployed in various campus locations. Figure 1: Wireless Gateway Architecture 2.3 Unified Authentication 
to the Network At this time, the University has implemented two distinctly different mechanisms for authenticating 
users to the network: PPPoE for residence hall students and wireless gateways for wireless network users. 
One obvious potential problem is the need for the same student to install and configure a PPPoE client 
in order to access the wired network from a residence hall room and then authenticate to the network 
using the wireless gateway from a classroom. As the deployment of wireless service increases, we anticipate 
the need to implement a single mechanism for user authentication to the network regardless of whether 
a user accesses the network from a wired port or wireless service anywhere at the University. The extension 
of the requirement for users to authenticate to the University s wired network to all wired ports, irrespective 
of the location or purpose of the port is underway using the 802.1x protocol.  3. LESSONS LEARNED The 
primary lesson that we learned is that it is both practical and possible to implement effective systems 
for user authentication to wired and wireless networks. While PPPoE requires the distribution of client 
software and does have user support requirements, we have demonstrated that the protocol offers improved 
security and can actually reduce the need to provide extensive individual support for student users. 
Fears that this deployment would dramatically increase student support calls at the start of the previous 
Fall term were quickly dispelled. The Web-based user authentication interface provided by wireless gateway 
solutions offers a client software-free method that is readily understandable by a variety of users. 
Further, the Web interface is readily usable in conjunction with a wide range of end user devices, from 
laptops to handheld devices, offering a much more flexible solution for wireless deployment than is available 
with PPPoE. Ultimately, a single system that offers ease of configuration and use for all users, regardless 
of whether the network is accessed from wireless or traditional wired ports must be implemented in order 
to avoid confusion and to offer users flexibility in roaming from classroom to public area to residence 
hall or office without needing to re-authenticate or switch to a different authentication mechanism. 
We believe that the 802.1x coupled with RADIUS provides this functionality.  
			