
 Autonomous Replication Across Wide-Area Internetworks James S. Gwertzman Margo Seltzer gwert zma~das,harvard 
.edu margoQdas, harvard. edu Division of .4pplied Sciences Division of .4pplied Sciences Harvard University 
Harvard L:niversity Cambridge, M.4 02138 Cambridge, M.k 02138 The number of users connected to the Internet 
has been growing at an exponential rate, resulting in similar increases in network traffic and Internet 
server load. Advances in microprocessors and net­work technologies have kept up with growth so far, but 
we are reaching the limits of hardware solutions. In order for the Internet s growth to continue, we 
must efficiently distribute server load and reduce the network traffic generated by its various services. 
Tk-aditional wide-area caching schemes are client inittated. Decisions on where and when to cache information 
are made without the benefit of the server s global knowledge of the situation. We in­troduce a technique 
push-cachin~that is server initiated; it leaves caching decisions to the server. The server uses its 
knowledge of network topology, geography, and access patterns to minimize network traffic and server 
load. The World Wide Web is an example of a large­scale distributed information system that will ben­efit 
from this geographical distribution, and we present an architecture that allows a Web server to autonomously 
replicate Web files. We use a trace­driven simulation of the Internet to evaluate several competing caching 
strategies. Our results show that while simple client caching reduces server load and network bandwidth 
demands by up to 30 70, adding server-initiated caching reduces server load by an additional 20 % and 
network bandwidth demands by an additional 10 %. Furthermore, push-caching is more efficient than client-caching, 
using an or­der of magnitude less cache space for comparable bandwidth and load savings. To determine 
the optimal cache consistency pro­ tocol we used a generic server simulator to evalu­ate several cache-consistency 
protocols, and found that weak consistency protocols are sufficient for the Viorld Wide Web since they 
use the same band­ width as an atomic protocol, impose less server load, and return stale data less than 
lYc of the time. Permission to make digital/hard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that oopies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given 
that copying is by permission of ACM, Inc. To IXpy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission end/or a fee. SIGOPS 95 12/95 CO, USA Q 1995 
ACM 0-89791-71 5-4/95/0012...$3.50 234 
			