
 1 2 Figure 2: The system architecture. in Fig. 2a, the color projector provides visible content to the 
view­ers, while the IR projector delivers content that is invisible to human eyes but can be captured 
by IR cameras. Two IR cameras are in­stalled under the table to detect .nger touches directly on the 
table­top surface. In addition, IR cameras are embedded in objects that need to be localized above the 
tabletop surface. The programmable IR projector is used for two purposes. First, it projects a uniform 
white screen for multi-touch detection and recognizing tangible objects placed on the surface, similar 
to other direct-illuminated (DI) tabletop systems. Second, it projects special marker patterns to enable 
IR cameras to estimate their 3D positions relative to the tabletop. In order to simultaneously perform 
2D detection and 3D localiza­tion, we propose an adaptive IR projection framework, based on input from 
the IR cameras under and above the table (Fig. 2b). By default, the IR projection only projects marker 
patterns, allowing for 3D localization. When the IR cameras under the table detect objects on the surface, 
the IR projector will project a white region enclosing the foregrounds. This enables IR cameras to accurately 
detect .nger touches and tangible objects. In addition, when the IR cameras above the table detects the 
marker patterns, they report the quality of the patterns perceived. The IR marker patterns adaptively 
change in size based on the reported quality and distance of the cameras. 3 Interaction Metaphors We 
propose three interaction metaphors (Fig. 1). iView is com­posed of a tablet computer with an attached 
IR camera, which is an intuitive tool to see 3D content from different perspective. iL­amp is composed 
of a projector with an IR camera that projects high-resolution content on the surface, mimicking the 
use of a desk lamp. Similarly, iFlashlight is a mobile version of iLamp, facilitat­ing information explorations 
and cooperative tasks. References SONG, H., GROSSMAN, T., FITZMAURICE, G., GUIMBRETIERE, F., KHAN, A., 
ATTAR, R., AND KURTENBACH, G. 2009. Pen­light: combining a mobile projector and a digital pen for dy­namic 
visual overlay. In CHI 09, ACM, 143 152. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2010, Los 
Angeles, California, July 25 29, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4503-0210-4/10/0007 
			