
       for n-sided Varady patches, and energy computation technique for Varady surfaces. Advantages 
of the new method include: (1) a unified solution to three important problems in geometric modeling; 
(2) carrying good features of Varady patches (such as no need in domain decompo­sition in the hole filling 
process and having an additional degree of freedom in adjusting the shape of an n-sided patch); (3) overall 
smoothness and more even distribution of curvature because of the global energy minimization process; 
(4) presenting new, effective way for solving modeling problems using Varady patches. These advantages 
make Varady patch a useful tool for geometric model,­ing. A possible shortcoming of our approach is the 
computation time required in the energy minimization process which consists and  for n-sided patches 
(see Section 5.3), and the time used to solve a system of linear equations. Since and are the same for 
all n-sided patches with the same n and they need to be computed only once at the outset, the time required 
for this part can actually be regarded as preprocessing time. In practice, we have precomputed those 
values for certain number of  and stored them in a file. Note that the time required for the domain 
map ping process is included in this part. The time needed to optimize a system of linear equations by 
the NAG subroutine is the dominat­ing factor of the entire process. For a system of 1,000*1000 linear 
equations, it takes NAG about 38 seconds to carry out the task. For a system of 2,900*2900 linear equations, 
it takes NAG about six minutes to finish the work. A linear system solver from CLinpack gives similar 
results. Although tolerable, it will be a major goal for us to reduce the time needed for this part in 
the future.  Several new technologies related to Varady patch representation are currently being investigated. 
These include linearization of do­main mapping process, non-uniform Varady patch representation, efficient 
surface/surface intersection technique for Varady patches. We also intend to use the energy form introduced 
by Moreton and Séquin [42] in our energy minimization process in the future. This approach, though expensive, 
should produce a more uniform dis­tribution of curvature since it is based on minimizing the curvature 
variation. Acknowledgments We wish to express our gratitude to Dr. Yong Zhou for providing us with the 
rendering package. We thank all the anonymous review­ers for their comments. This work was supported 
in part by NSF DMI-9400823( New Computation Techniques for Shape Model­ing and Design ). Travel support 
for the first author was provided by Softimage Co.  
			