
 Blue Mars Chronicles: Building for Millions  AndreiSherstyuk * SallyOlle JimSink AvatarRealityInc EstelleParnallDesigns 
AvatarRealityInc Abstract Developers are the .rst people who come to an empty world and make it habitable. 
In online virtual worlds, developers are 3D artists, architects, cloth designers and other talented and 
enthusias­tic individualswithapassionfor3D modeling.Theirjoint creative efforts make virtual worldspossible. 
In this report, we share our experience on close collaboration with a largecommunityofdevelopers in Blue 
Mars [2009]online virtual world,which was launchedbyAvatarRealityInc(ARI),and now is experiencing explosive 
growth. From forum discussions, in-game meetings,question-and-answer sessions andfrompersonal commu­nications, 
we distilled and summarized some guidelines on how to keep thedevelopersmotivated and enthusiasticcontributors. 
CR Categories: K.6.1 [ Management of computing and infor­mation systems ]: Project and people management 
 Systems development 1 Introduction: What and Where is Blue Mars Blue Mars is the next-generation platform 
for building on­line 3D virtual worlds, featuring photo-realistic rendering with CryENGINE-2byCryTek[2010], 
motion-captured avataranima­tions and quality control over user created content. Blue Mars openeditsdoorstoplayersanddevelopersinSeptember2009,with 
only three locations initially. In less than a year, the number of completely terraformedCities,VillagesandMetropolises(theba­sicreal-estatecategoriesonBlueMars),increased 
tenfoldand new sites are being registered every week. The number of user-created items, such as interior 
elements, customized avatar bodies, faces, cloth,personal accessories,nowapproaches twothousand.Allthat 
content was created mostly by individual developers and indepen­dentgamedesigners,workingintheirspare 
time.Forsome,build­ing contentfor3D worlds isahobby.Formany, it isalsobusiness, with real monetary returns. 
For all developers, Blue Mars is the placewhere they express themselvescreativelyandprofessionally. Their 
strive to make high quality models can only be matched by thelevel of expectations(and,therefore,demands) 
tothequalityof 3D tools,providedbyARI. Although the developers and ARI have similar goals and inspira­tionsaboutthefutureofBlueMars,working 
towardsthesegoalsin one team may be quite challenging. Below, we offer some obser­vations from the recent 
history of colonization of Blue Mars, as thejointeffortofAvatar-Reality(Honolulu,Hawaii,USA) and the 
teamof3D talentsfromallovertheworld. 2 Creating and Managing User Content On Blue Mars, the virtual 
real estate elements range from small Outposts to Metropolises (one is shown in Figure 1), capable to 
accommodate thousand of concurrentplayers.Each element isfur­ther subdivided into blocks and shops, that 
can be leased to indi­vidual developers. Thus, the whole community of colonists can * e-mail: andrei@avatar-reality.com 
e-mail: estelleparnall@gmail.com e-mail:jim@avatar-reality.com be roughly categorized as city,block and 
shop owners. This simple hierarchy allows content creators to choose a role which suits their skills 
and interests best. City owners typically spend most of their efforts terraforming the land, before passing 
it to block develop­ers, who createbuildings, roads,bridges, etc. Shop owners operate on even smaller 
scale. Their job is arrange items for sale inside a shop and decorate its interior, to make it attractive 
for players. For these tasks, ARI provides a set of 3D Content Editors, based on CryTek[2010]SandboxTool. 
 Figure 1: Residential district, Beach City, Blue Mars. 3 Developers Challenges and Concerns Besides 
mastering 3D content creation tools, developers also need to understand and operate certain elements 
ofBlueMars real-estate infrastructure,especially if they ownaCityoraBlock.Sometimes, these tasksarenot 
trivial.Thewholeprocessof creating and man­aging content is somewhat complicated by the fact that Blue 
Mars is continuously evolving, as new types of user-generated content become available. For example, 
at launch time, only very basic customizationof avatarswassupported.Now,theClothEditor tool allows to 
create a variety of wearable attachments, including cloth, shoes, gloves, hairstyles, jewelry, eye-ware 
and even more exotic things,asunderwaterbreathing equipment.(There isplentyof wa­ter on terraformed areas 
of Blue Mars.) Six months ago, a Body Editor was published, which allowed to create customized avatar 
bodiesandfaces.AnimationEditor is the latestaddition to theBlue MarsDevelopersKit,releasedatthe timeofthiswriting.Therefore, 
developersmust remainonalertforcontinuouslyevolving tools. Also, developers must watch for changes in 
content-management policies and practices, imposed by ARI. In order to maintain ade­quateoperating conditions 
in-gameforallplayers(especially,for those with low-end computers), ARI implemented and enforced certain 
restrictions on user-generated content. For example, cloth itemsmust nothavemore than .ve thousandpolygonseach,other­wiserendering 
of crowded sceneswilldropbelowacceptable level. For same reasons, some of computationally-intensive shaders 
had to be disabled for general use, for example, fur shader. These re­strictions often raise questions 
and sometimes even protests in the community. When that happens, close communication becomes crucial 
for maintaining productive and healthy environment, for both sides: global development of Blue Mars as 
a platform, and local needs of content creators. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 
Asia 2010, Seoul, South Korea, December 15 18, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4503-0439-9/10/0012 How to Attract 
and Retain Developers Given that the success of a virtual world relies on excellent user generated content, 
how does ARI attract and retain good develop­ers? Documentation. Good documentation on how the tools 
work is very helpful as a developer maybe inclined to give up in the initial stages not because the learning 
curve is steep, but because of the time investment and frustration in seeking good and current information. 
Prompt and friendly help online. Developers also value a prompt response to forum queries or help desk 
matters, and often seek and appreciateconstructivefeedback.It isveryimportant tobe as patient and polite 
as possible as developers may be timid about askingquestionsorbesensitive tofeelingpatronized whenthereis 
a simple solution involved. Developers are often very passionate abouttheircreationsand may worktirelesslytoperfectthem.They 
maybeshort tempered onforums ifforexample they.nd abugim­pedingtheirprogressorreadanannouncement changingthenature 
of theplatform.Calmand encouraging responsesgoalong way to soothingfrustrations. Open communications. 
Open communication is essential with developers community. Technical staff should be very upfront about 
saying they don t know certain answers and be honest about the timeliness of new releases. This forms 
trust and credibility in theeyesof thedeveloper.Mostdevelopersunderstand thatdif.cult decisions sometimes 
have to be made, and that it is not appropri­ate for them to be consulted on every decision, but advice 
about what is under review for example is often helpful and again builds apositive and trusting relationship. 
Sharing success stories and future plans. Developers also liketoseeandknowthattheplatformisevolving.They 
liketosee growthinpopulationandsalesandthatARIisworking topromote the platform in the media and external 
sources to build a commu­nity. Developers also like to see regular news and announcements on growth and 
platform developments to feel some security in the sustainability and the longevity of the environment. 
Knowing the visionthatARI seesforthefutureisimportant todevelopersinthat they canadjusttheirexpectationanddirectiontobein 
linewiththe platform as it matures. Promotions. Promotion of the higher end developers is impor­tant 
to encourage quality content. Good content sets a benchmark forotherdevelopers, thusARIannouncedthat 
itwillprovide incen­tives to thebestdevelopers.Statementsofthat natureare incredibly motivating. As our 
merchandising and marketing services mature, there is increased focus on promoting developers and content 
that bringvalue to the world. Rankings, reviews, tagging, co-marketing, bundling, paid promotions are 
all in the works. Throughout the marketplacedevelopmentprocess,ARI isplanning to testnewop­tions and 
revise its policies to foster a healthy economy while of­fering sensible options for not-for-pro.t and 
educational content creators,thatdonotputthecommercial market todisadvantage. Practices That Should be 
Avoided. ARI strives toberespon­sive tonewrequestsorsuggestionsfromthecommunity.However, it is very important 
to consider each request in terms of the impact on othergroups(i.e.,Citydevelopers vsContent creators 
vs users). Sometimes, developers have polarized views on what priority ARI should give to bug correction 
or new functionality release. In this Figure 2: Virtual Fashion is the fastest growing part of Blue 
Mars economy. Image courtesy Estelle Parnall Designs, http://estelleparnall.com regard, ARI is careful 
not to forgo common interests while trying to satisfy oneparticulargroup. If functionality is to be removed 
from tools, reasonable notice and reasonsfordoing soshouldbegiven.Newbugs incurredfrom .xes ornewfunctionalityshouldbe 
.xedpromptlyand withpriority. Staff shouldbecareful notgo in-worldunless they areprepared to engage with 
the users and developers or they will be perceived as aloof and unresponsive. Friendliness and a sense 
of team spirit go along way toinspireand encouragedevelopers. 5 Conclusions While theevolutionofBlueMarscontinues, 
there isadif.cult tight rope towalkbetweenwanting tohavecontent toshowcaseandpro­motetheplatform(and 
tobringinmoredevelopersand users),and having thepatience tomotivateand supportthedevelopersthatare already 
in place. This had to be done in tandem with the develop­ment of newfunctionalityand trying toattract 
and retainnewusers to theplatform. Formingapositiveand respectful working relationshipbetween the developer 
community and technical staff was integral to the start up phase of Blue Mars. Encouraging and sustaining 
developers through newfunctionalityreleasesbecameacrucial role innot only retaining anddevelopingthe3D 
creators,but in improving theper­formanceof theplatform. As Blue Mars evolves and matures into a .nal 
product, develop­ersunderstand thatthelevel of supportprovidedbyARI cannotbe sustained. But with a good 
developer base, and an established fo­rumand wiki resource,and areasonable initial userpopulation, the 
developer community willbecome much more self-reliant.  References BLUEMARS. 2009. Blue Mars Online. 
http://www.bluemars.com/. CRYTEK. 2010. Crytek GmbH. http://www.crytek.com/.  
			