
 Bridging the communication gap in the workplace with usability engineering Desir6e Sy Information Design 
Solutions dsy@psych.toronto. edu 11 Forfardale Road, CANADA phone: (416) fax: (905) How can we make 
products, including documenta­tion, more usable? The first and most difficult step in the process is 
to make a commitment to improve the usability of the product through the whole &#38;velopment cyckz usability 
is not a surface quality, but a holistic one, and must be considered at all stages of development. The 
major barrier to implementing usability is the chasm that exists between designers and the users for 
whom they design. Usability engineering methodologies are tools that can bridge the communication gap 
between designers and users, and also improve communication among all mem­bers of the development team. 
Usability now but how? Designing for usability is no longer an option, but a requirement. Products must 
be usable to compete in today s marke~ or in the case of internal products, to ensure that personnel 
have tools that give them a competi­tive edge @rail 1992, Nielsen 1993, Redish and Dnmas 1993, Case 1991, 
Norman 1993, and many others). Despite the overwhelming documented evidence that sup­ports usability 
engineering, there are still many organiza­tional and political barriers for the first time usability 
tester (Ioannou 1989, Dumas 1989). It is still hard for tirst time testers to convince management and 
development staff to invest in usability. The first bridge to build is between your efforts and your 
management s understanding of them. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association of Computing Machiney. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific 
permission. DOC 94-10/94 Banff, Alberta, Canada Q 1994 ACM 0-89791 -681 -619410010...$3.50  Stouffville, 
Ontario L4A 7X3 921-3793 642-3554 Usability testing is still associated with laboratory testing. Setting 
up such a lab facility is daunting; organiza­tions could implement other less expensive methods for improving 
usability, but often delay doing this. To initiate usability engineefig inexpensively, you must understand 
the full usabilhy process and whereto  start  choose the first project carefully  determine appropriate 
measures and benchmarks  get the results of your usability investigations out to the appropriate people 
 follow through, to build usability.  While some rare groups may get approval for a full­sea.leimplementation 
of usability, informal interviews with usability practitioners and experience suggest that a grad­ual, 
grass roots movement towards usability is more praeti­cd. Let s focus on the answers to two major questions 
 HOW do I Stint?  How do I get support from my organization?  .  How do I start? Usability and development 
engineering pro­cesses In the best of all possible worlds, the full usability engineering process would 
be implemented. This process is described below in terms of its integration into an ideal development 
engineering cycle Table 1: Usability engineering process User and task analysis determine the user profile 
and task definitions uncover usability needs (methods include field stud­ies, competitive analysis, contextual 
inquiry) Preliminary design set vision of product s et usability goals d etermine severat scenarios 
for use of product c reate usability test plans  Prototype design d esign the prototype r ise heuristic 
design principles (Nielsen 1992) test the scenarios, and the product and document prototypes for usabili~, 
revise accordingly  Iterative design design the product %st the product and the scenarios for usability 
%vise and re-design until usability goals are met Longitudinal design c heck the use of the product after 
release tr ack the changes in the users after the product is introduce@ make plans for revisions accordingly 
 t his feeds into User and task analysis for the next version, or the next product  Reading the above 
utopian product design process, you may wrai-t to give up ri-@t tiow. Your &#38;ganization doesn t employ 
a development cycle, let alone support the incorporation of usability into the process you can t get 
access to users, let alone conduct field studies; you can t get the developers to change the incomprehensible 
menu itern, let alone convince them to prototype. Don t despair. Implementing all of the abcwe pro­cess 
is your ultimate goal, but you have to make the jour­ney one step at a time. How to start the usability 
movement Your best return on an investment of time and money is to focus on the early stages of both 
the usability and development cycles (Karat 1993, Rubin 1994, Nielsen Development engineering process 
 Product planning stage market analysis =needsanalysis write design documents define documentation set 
Early development determine and write functional specifications wreate high level outline for documents 
Mid-development make the first cut at basic design choices develop design prototype for documents wreate 
detailed outline for documents Late development @x.ermine surface design choices write text for documents, 
insert graphics, determine exaet layout Pre-release %lpha and beta releases of software/ documentation, 
late market testing of other products After release maintain the product 1993, Redish and Dumas 1993). 
Usability issues should be identbied as early as possible. Suggestions made before developers begin coding 
are far less costly to implement. In softwme design, changes made after the release of a product take 
anywhere from 10 to 67 times as long as the time to make the samechanges in the early stagesof devel­opment 
(Pressman 1992). Furthermore, 80% of the main­tenance of software relates not to bugs or reliability 
but to inappropriate or imdequate modelrng of user require­ments (Pressman 1992, Martin and McClure 1993). 
Cor­rect modeling of users and their tasks is exactly what usability engineering methods elicit at early 
development stages. @or discussions of early usability investigation methods, see Ramey and Rosenbaum 
1993, Rubrn 1994, Tognazzini 1992). Despite this evidence supporting early stage involvemen~ this is 
not a practical entry point for the first time usability practitioner. To be integrated into the earliest 
stagea of design requires complete organizational suppo% which is unlikely to be achieved initi.alIy. 
The most feasible way to start the usabiMy move­ment is to conduct a low-cost usability test in a later 
stage of product developmen~ (For discussions of how to design usabil@ tests, see Redish and Dumas 1993, 
Erickson 1989, and Rubin 1994.) What you will minimally need for a first time test includes: something 
to test . someone to test it knowledge of what to investigate. Another helpful element is the support 
of your immediate manager. Collect some arguments for introduc­ing usabiMy into your organization, and 
present them to your manager. To stz@ you must select what to test. Choose a product that has some visibility 
in your organization, but not one that is critical to the operation of your workplace. Also, be sure 
that the area of investigation is a manageable size. If testing the actual product is considered outside 
your jurisdiction, test tbe documentation with the product (the documents are, after all, part of the 
product). You are assuming responsibility for the quality and accuracy of the documentatio~ usability 
information about the product will be generated as an artifact of testing the document. You can test 
* a product in the middle to late stages of develop­ment an existing product before work starts on a 
new release. The advantages to testing products in these stages of development is that they exist. You 
don t have to ask some­one to create an early (but semi-stable) product version or a prototype especially 
for testing. The disadvantages will become obvious immedia­tely after testing. Usability problems found 
in products tested at this stage are very difficult to fix. Significant time, money, and the more elusive 
quality of emotional commit­ment have already been invested in development, and the problems that me 
easy to fix not the most serious prob­lems will be addressed first. Users who can test the product 
the tirst time include: (for products for internal use or for the govern­ment) someone within your organization 
who is not in the design group (for commercial products) someune outside your organization spouses 
of co-workers, people at user group meetings, people who tilled out cads at trade shows. The key to finding 
users is to 1. Identify the groups of users who interact with your product. Generally, they are gronped 
by their use of your product that is, their tasks. 2. Isolate those characteristics that define these 
user group(s). 3. Look for people who fit those essential character­istics.  A non-exhaustive list 
of factors that define user groups includes: user s primary job user sposition in organization previous 
job experience previous productftechnology experience . user s environment educational level age 
reading and language skills Once you have identified the essential characteris­tics of your user groups, 
you cau look for pple to test your products in unusual places, You may have to compro­mise on finding 
participauta who exactly fit the user profile for your product. You have to weigh the ad.minktrative 
dif­ficulty of finding an appropriate participant against the need to find a participant who is close 
enough to your user profile for your test to elicit valid and significant results. Finally, you must 
do as much user and task analysis as you can. Minimally, this means uncovering to the best of your ability 
what type of users use the pmduc~ and for what tasks. Get as close to the user as you can using infor­mal 
contact methods: phone calls, chata at coffee breaks, visiting a branch during your lunch hour, attending 
user group meetings. Carry a set of key questions about your product in your head so that the next time 
you meet a potential user informally, you can casually ask a few ques­tions. Find out what your managers 
and developers feel the goals of the product are, by reading printed materials at your compmy, or by 
asking people. Note discrepancies between the designer s perceptions and the users .  Inching your way 
into early development After the lirst tes~ you will uncover problems that are hard or impossible to 
fix. It is imperative that you fol­low up after the test. Explain that the problems you uncov­ered would 
be less expensive (or possible) to fix if you could test an earlier version even a paper mock-up of 
an earlier version (Spool 1993) conduct an investigation of user characttistics and need The next step 
is to introduce the idea of prototyping, and testing prototypes as a cost-saving measum. This is how 
you rnch your way rnto the earlier phases of the engi­neering cycle. Note that in organizations where 
a development cycle does not exis~ the very act of introducing testing ear­lier will create an iterative 
cycle, because the mid-or early­development designs will be re-designed after information comes back 
from testing; usability can shape development. How do I get support? Communicate your results Redish 
and Dntnas include m their definition of what is needed for a usability test that the results are used 
to change the product and the process (Redish et al. 1992, Redish and Dnmas 1993). You must report your 
findings to managers and developers. The test report should rnclude the goals of the test and the major 
usability problems uncovered, ordered in terms of the scope of their effec~ and how critical the usabihty 
problems are. Obviously, a usability problem that prevents the correct use of a product should be unambigu­ously 
identified. The report should be as short as possiblti use bul­le~d lists, tables, and other graphical 
devices to aid quick retrieval of information and skixmrdmg , particularly when reports are geared at 
management. Where appropri­ate, actual participant quotations (or, if you use videotape, an edited highlights 
tape) can make a strong impact on management and developers. Also, state clearly the implic­ations of 
not changing the product. If at all possible, schedule a brief (half-hour) meet­ing to walk through the 
findings with the appropriate peo­ple. Do not adopt a confrontational attitndq think of your job as trying 
to make the attendees user advocates, and get­ting more players on your team. If at all possible, try 
to end the meeting with an action list derived from co-operative discussion with all the attendees. When 
developers help to prioritize the issues to be dealt with, they will become actively involved in the 
usability movement. Make the abstract concrete The benefits of improving usabiMy are not itnmedi­ately 
obvious. As you begin to introduce usability engi­neering methods into your workplace, look for ways 
to give credit for product improvement to the usability effort. People who work on commercial products 
should concentrate on demonstrating that usability increases reve­nue (l@lish and Dumas 1991, Case 1991, 
Tognamini 1989), and decreases the cost of development (Karat 1993). Those who work on products for internal 
use, or on government projects, must show that inefficiencies in usability design can be extremely costly 
in timcy because of the lzuge number of people using the pmduc% this is measurable in dollars (Redish 
and Dumas 1991, Karat 1993). This is a brief sampler of ideas for making the invis­ible benefits of improving 
usabihty in your workplace visi­ble to rnanagementi . record the time spent (m person hours) in meet­ings 
arguing over design options that are essen­tially differences in individual designers opinions 9 if you 
must make changes late in the development phase, track the hours spent to Iix problems that could have 
been identified at an earlier stag~ include hours for documentation, training, sup­ . read the literatnnx 
collect appropriate statistics . track the cost of user error in hours, and translate this cost to dollars 
 track the average number of support calls logged for a produc~ if you have information that ties these 
calls to specific problems, get that informa­tion, too. get a benchmark for user preference of usable 
products by including a few brief questions on a user survey to include with the product registra­tion. 
. conduct surveys of product vendors to get their knowledge of purchaser preferences. Karat C. Cost-Benefit 
and Business Case Analysis of Us-TV to tie your usability goals to measurable bench­ability Engineering 
. Tutorial notes from marks: CHI 93/Weract 93. April 1993  users should be able to install the product 
in less than five minutes Martin, J,, and McClure, C. Software Maintenance the the electronic tirnesheet 
should reduce the error rate on timesheets to under 4Yo . any person should be able to write and print 
cheques using this program in five minutes Staying visible Tfumpet every success.Do not hide your light 
under a bushel. Offer to give a presentation to your organization on your implementation of usability; 
be certain to include all calculated cost savings. This can bean informal lunch pre­sentation. If your 
organization has a newsletter, write an article about usability and cost savings. Let other groups in 
your organization know about your work. Become the usability consulting service for your workplacq then 
try to encourage developers to incor­porate usability in project teams. Thk builds towards the ultimate 
goal, which is to increase the odds of expanding usability engineering through the workplace and facilitate 
(or begin) communi­cation among all members of the design team designers technical communicators marketing 
 service reps/customer supportkainers managers.  References Case, J. Customer Service: The Last Word. 
INC., April 1991. Dnmas, J.S. Stimulating Change Through Usability Test­ing. SIGCHI Bulletin, 21(1):37, 
1989. Erickson, T. User Testing Why and How. Apple Di­rec~ December 1989. Ioannou, K. A team approach 
to developing better docu­mentation and a more user-oriented sys­tem Getting on the team and making it 
work. Proceedings of Technicom 89, Toronto, out., 1989. Problem and its Solution. Prentice-HaU: 1983. 
Nielsen, J. Finding usability problems through heuristic evaluation. Proceedings of the 1992 CHI Conference, 
Monterey, CA, May 1992. Association for Computing Machinery, 1992. Nielsen, J. Usability Engineering. 
Academic Press: San Di­ego, 1993. Norman, D. The Psychology of Everyday TMngs. Basic Books: 1988. Norman, 
D. Things That Make Us Smart. Addison-Wesley: 1993. Prail, A. Why Usability Engineering is Not an Option. 
Proceedings of the Third Conference on Quality in Documentation, Waterloo, Ont., May 1992. Pressman, 
R.S. Software Engineering: A Practitioner s Approach. McGraw-Hill: 1992. Ramey, J. and Rosenbaum, S. 
Methods for Investigating Usability During Early Product Design. Proceedings of the UPA Conference, 1993. 
1993. Redish, J.C. and J.S. Dmnas. Building usability into docu­mentation. Proceedings of the First Con­ference 
on Quality in Documentation, Waterloo, out., Ott 1991. Redish, J.C. andJ.S. Dnmas. A Practical Guide 
to Usability Testing. Ablex press: 1993. Redish, J.C., J.S. Dumas and J.T. Hackos. Finding the mal problems: 
Making sense of what you see and hear in a usabiMy test. Third Confer­ence on Quality in Documentation, 
Water­100, Out., May 1992. Rubin, J. Handbook of Usability Testing. Wiley: 1994. Spool, J. Using Low-Fidelity 
Prototyping as a Usability Tool. Proceedings of tie UPA Confer­ence, Redmond, W&#38; July 1993. Tognazzini, 
B. An Extra Cool Million in 1990. Apple Di­rec~ December 1989. pg. 19. Tognazzini, B. TOG on Interface. 
Addison Wesley: 1992.  
			