
 Centralized Windows Application Deployment App2go Joanne Einsmann Virginia Commonwealth University 
Box 843008 Richmond, VA 23284 804-827-1628  jeinsman@vcu.edu ABSTRACT What do you say when a user asks 
you why your university doesn't have a license for product xxx? To address the need to make high cost 
statistical and mathematical Windows software titles available to the maximum number of researchers, 
a Citrix Presentation Server was installed and concurrent use licenses for multiple software products 
were licensed and configured. Citrix Presentation Server is an application delivery system. The applications 
are installed and managed on the server which we named "app2go". The end-users can access the applications 
from any location via clients on the Windows, Mac and Linux platforms. The target audience is researchers 
and graduate students. For Mac and Linux users, titles only available on the Windows platforms can be 
used. A group of researchers interested in obtaining access to software available on the "app2go" server 
began testing in March 2007. University wide roll out will be the summer of 2007. The expectation is 
that this Citrix Presentation Server will greatly reduce the overall cost of software for research and 
significantly increase access to a wider variety of software for researchers. Categories and Subject 
Descriptors K.6.3 [Management of Computing Information Systems]: Software Management software selection, 
software process General Terms Management, Reliability, Standardization,  Keywords Windows Active Directory, 
Citrix Presentation Server, Windows 2003 Server Terminal Services, Software,, Licensing 1. INTRODUCTION 
The goal of setting up the app2go server was to provide a cost effective method to enable researchers 
at Virginia Commonwealth Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7-10, 2007, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010 
$5.00. Mayura Patel Virginia Commonwealth University Box 843008 Richmond, VA 23284 804-827-1615 mpatel@vcu.edu 
University (VCU) easy access to Windows research software. 2. THE PROBLEM DEFINED VCU Department of 
Technology Services centrally licenses mathematical and statistical software titles such as SAS, Base 
SPSS and Mathematica which are used by multiple departments. Researchers and students regularly approach 
us inquiring if we have licenses for products not included in our central site licensing program. They 
want free, instant access to high cost research software. Some researchers and most graduate students 
have no funding to obtain the software desired for their research. Researchers and students also want 
access to software to test and compare competing products. Trial versions of software titles are frequently 
not a full version of the software and thus prevent adequate comparison testing. We also wanted to provide 
better support for our Mac and VISTA users. Some software titles, such as SAS, are not currently available 
on the Mac and VISTA platforms. For many of these products inquired about, we do not have a sufficient 
number of users interested to justify obtaining a campus wide site license. Because we have limited funding 
for central computing resources, we focus on expending our efforts where the most users will benefit. 
Obtaining funding for site licenses is always an issue.  3. THE SOLUTION Modeled after a similar server 
solution at the University of Tennessee ( https://analysis.admin.utk.edu/) we decided to set up a Citrix 
Presentation Server and obtained a small number of concurrent use licenses for software products that 
were frequently requested but not currently included in our campus wide software licensing. In addition, 
site licensed software such as SAS were also installed. The Citrix Presentation Server which we named 
app2go is an application delivery system for Windows statistical and mathematical applications. http://www.ts.vcu.edu/faq/app2go/ 
It allows users to access these applications remotely from any Internet connected Windows, MAC or Linux 
workstation. The applications are centrally installed and managed on a server. Access is via a browser 
window. Prior to accessing the app2go server the first time, the user must download and install a client 
on their workstation. A single logon provides access to multiple applications without the user needing 
to install, patch or upgrade the applications they are using. Up to 25 concurrent users may access the 
app2go server from either on or off campus enabling sharing of a limited number of licenses. On the app2go 
server, Mac users now have access to the software titles that are only available on the Windows platform. 
Because there is also a VISTA client available, applications which are not yet VISTA ready, such as SAS, 
can be run from VISTA workstations. The Application Isolation Environment feature of Citrix makes it 
possible to install and run conflicting applications on a single server. The number of concurrent instances 
for each application can be limited. This allows controlling application use which has limited licenses. 
Some of our site licensed software is licensed for on campus use only. With Citrix it is possible to 
restrict use of such applications by IP address to on campus use. Initial funding for the servers and 
software was obtained from Virginia s Higher Education Equipment Trust Fund (HEETF) http://www.controller.vcu.edu/finreporting/heetf.htm. 
VCU Technology Services will provide funding for the maintenance of the software and hardware. 3.1 App2go 
ACCOUNTS Accounts are provided to Faculty, Staff and Students of VCU.. A web based account request process 
was developed by VCU s Web Services. Users must enter the eID and eID password to initiate the account 
request process. An email is then automatically sent to the app2go system administrator who then creates 
the user account. Active Directory is required for users to logon to the Citrix Web Interface. Although 
users are provided about 100 megabytes of space on the server, users are encouraged to store their files 
on their local workstation. 3.2 SERVER The Citrix Presentation Server 4.5 has been installed on a Windows 
2003 Server platform with Windows Terminal Services. The Presentation Server allows multiple concurrent 
users to connect to and access published applications residing on two servers in the server farm. We 
have 2 Dell PowerEdge servers with 6 GB RAM and Dual Core 3.00 GHz CPU s 3.3 LICENSES Both Microsoft 
Terminal Server and Citrix Licenses are required. We currently have 25 concurrent user licenses for Citrix 
Presentation Server 4.5 and 500 Windows Terminal Server Licenses. 3.4 CLIENTS We are currently using 
the Citrix Web Interface which provides users with access to published applications through a standard 
web browser. The following web browsers can be used to log on to the Web Interface: Internet Explorer 
5.x, 6.x and 7.0  Safari 2.0  Firefox 1.x  Mozilla 1.x  Netscape 7.0 Clients are available for Windows, 
Mac, Linux, and Unix.  3.5 APPLICATIONS Table 1: Third party applications currently on the app2go server: 
 Amos DBMS/Copy LISREL JMP MATLAB MathType nQuery Advisor Mplus IDL QDA Miner Scientific Workplace 
 SAS Education Analytic Suite (EAS) SigmaPlot S-PLUS SPSS Advanced Models SigmaStat SPSS Base SPSS 
Categories SPSS Complex Samples SPSS Exact Tests SPSS Data Entry Builder SPSS Missing Value Analysis 
SPSS Tables SPSS Regression Models Stata SE SPSS Trends SUDAAN WordStat  3.6 SERVER ROLLOUT Testing 
began in March 2007 and the app2go server will go into production in the Summer 2007. Since the goal 
of setting up this server was to provide a cost effective method to enable researchers at Virginia Commonwealth 
University access to Windows research software, Citrix Resource Manager will be used to monitor and generate 
reports for Application usage and User activity. There are plans to install another server to support 
non-researchers and their special software needs.  4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks to the VCU s Higher 
Education Equipment Trust Fund Committee for providing the startup funds for the hardware and software 
needed to initiate this project. We would also like to thank Robert Muenchen and the staff at the University 
of Tennessee Office of Information Technology for their guidance in selecting and configuring the hardware 
and software on the app2go server. 5. REFERENCES [1}Windows Active Directory: http://www.microsoft.com/windowsserver2003/technologies/ 
directory/activedirectory/default.mspx [2] Citrix Presentation Server: http://www.citrix.com/English/ps2/products/product.asp?con 
tentID=186 [3] Windows 2003 server Terminal Services: http://www.microsoft.com/windowsserver2003/technologies/ 
terminalservices/default.mspx   
			