
 Centralized vs. Diversified User Services: A User's Perspective C. PURVlS UNS Computing Center University 
of Nevada, Reno Reno, Nevada 89557 PANEL SUMMARY As a group of professionals who use computers in our 
work, we see decentralization of computer user services as a possibly inevitable trend of the 1980s. 
It may be that it is simply no longer possible for a single, monolithic university or organizational 
computing center to provide adequately all relevant user services to a highly diversified population 
of users. It is important, therefore, to address the issue of how best to strike a balance between centralized 
and decentralized user services. That is, what kinds of services would be optimally provided by centralized 
user service organizations, and what kinds would best be dealt with on a departmental or college-wide 
basis? Questions Question 1: Background and training- Would you prefer user services people at the central 
site(s) to have their primary training in your discipline (or generally, to possess a scientific or academic 
background) or to have a background in computer science and/or programming? What about local or on-site 
user services people? Question 2: Degree of specialization- Should the user services people at the central 
site(s) be specialists (people having a lot of experience in one or two areas or with one or two packages) 
or be generalists (people having a wide range of experience)? Again, what about the local user service 
people? Question 3: Microcomputer acquisition and support- What kind of policy should you advocate for 
acquisition and support of microcomputers? Should there be a centralized and campus-wide policy regarding 
which microcomputers can be purchased, or should this be left to the colleges or departments? How would 
user services (consulting) support for microcomputers be arranged? Permission to copy without fee all 
or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1984 ACM 0-89791-146-6/84/011/0001 
$00.75 ACM-SIGUCCS XII, 1984, Conference Proceedings  
			