
 PANEL: Certification of Computer Personnel Fred H. Harris The University of Chicago Since the fall 
of 1972, there has been iAcreasing inter- est and debate about a proposed organization known as the Computer 
Foundation. The proposed Foundation has as its purpose the pooling of resources and interests of individual 
societies so that ultimately the full attention of the industry may be focused on the vital task of developing 
and recognizing qualified personnel. It is not intended to be another computer society, nor is it going 
to be another AFIPS. Several years ago there was an increasing hue and cry in the trade press, as well 
as in legislative bodies across the country, about the effective use and manage- ment of ADF resources 
and the possible licensing of computer personnel. At the time, AC~ was working on a more definitive code 
of ethics and beginning to consider enforcement as well (see CACM April 1973)! AFIPS was working on job 
definitions with skill requirements! and, of course, DPMA was continuing to pursue its existing certification 
programs. Most of the people involved in these activities were aware of the work being done by others, 
but there was no definitive activity linking them together. To correct this defect, at least in a small 
way, sever- al people representing DPMA and ACM (and in a sense AFIPS) gathered in Washington, D. C., 
in October 1971 to pursue possible means for improving DP~A's existing certification activities. This 
group met for just a single day, but several achievements were obvious at the end of the meeting, first, 
it was practical for ACM and DP~A to work jointly on a major problem! and second, there was general consensus 
that a new coopera- tive "umbrella" was required. Subsequently (and I think largely because of factor 
one), DPMA established a Certification and Testing Advisory Committee with representatives from AC~, 
DP~A, and ASM. The importance of this effort to DP~A and to ACM was apparent from the active participation 
of their presi- dents in the meetings held in the spring and summer of 1972. The committee considered 
a number of known issues dealing with certification in general, and existing programs in particular, 
and did an excellent job of ll5 defining the complexity facing any new effort. More- over, it reaffirmed 
the work of the ad hoc committee and refined the concept of the proposed Computer Foundation. In December 
1972, ACM and DPMA jointly established a Computer Foundation Organizing Committee to take a second look 
at the work of the Advisory Committee, to pursue, open discussion with other societies, and to dot the 
i's and cross the t's of the proposal prior to final approval. An open invitation was extended in January 
to interested societies to join the committee. As a result, there are ten participating groups on the 
Organi- zing Committee working actively toward the resolution of such issues as the name of the Foundation*, 
the future of the, CDP and the RBP exams, equal versus weighted membership in the Foundation, and Foundation 
versus member society activity. Our current schedule calls for a final report and presentation to participating 
socie- ties this summer. The ACM Council will be asked to approve ACM's participation in the Foundation 
in August at ACM in Atlanta. (For his part in the Panel, Robert Reinstedt quoted from an invited address 
presented by Carl R. Rogers at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, at Hono- 
lulu, Hawaii, September 2, 1972.) The .....challenge I wish to raise, especially for clini- cal mad 
social psychologists, is the radical possibility of sweeping away our procedures for professionalization. 
I know what heresy that is, what terror it strikes in the heart of the person who has struggled to become 
a "professional." But I have seen the moves toward certl- fication, llcensure, attempts to exclude charlatans, 
from a vantage point of many,ears, and it is considered Judgment that they fall in their aims. .... 
I am not in any way impugning the motives or the integrity and effort of those who aim toward certifica- 
tion and all that follows from it. I sympathize deeply. I wis]~ there were a way to separate the qualified 
from the unqualified, the competent worker from the opportun- ist, the exploiter, and the charlatan. 
But let us look at a few facts. * The name now being recommended is the Institute for Certification 
of Computer Professionals. As soon as we set up criteria for certification --whether for clinical psychologists, 
for NTL group trainers, for marriage counselors, for psychiatrists, for psycho- analysts, or, as I heard 
the other day, for psychic healers --the first and greatest effect is to freeze the profession in a past 
image. This is an inevitable result. What can you use for examinations? Obviously, the questions and 
tests that have been used in the past decade or two. Who is wise enough to be an examiner? Obviously, 
the person who has i0 or 20 years of experi- ence and who therefore started his training 15-25 years 
previously. I know how hard such groups try to update their criteria, but they are always several laps 
behind. So the certification procedure is always rooted in the rather distant past and defines the profession 
in those terms. The second drawback I state sorrowfully. There are as many certified charlatans and 
exploiters of people as there are uncertified. ...So, certification is not equivalent to competence. 
 The third drawback is that the urge toward profession- alism builds up a rigid bureaucracy. I am not 
personal- ly aware of such bureaucracy at the national level, but it certainly occurs frequently at 
the state level. Bureaucratic rules become a substitute for sound Judgment. A person is disqualified 
because he has 150 hours of supervised therapy, while another is approved because he has the required 
200. No attention is given to the effectiveness of either therapist, or the quality of his work, or 
even the quality of the supervision he received. Or another person is disqualified because his excellent 
psychological thesis was done £n a graduate department that is not labeled psychology .... The bureaucrat 
is beginning to dominate the scene in ways that are all too familiar, setting the profession back enormously. 
 ...It is mY considered judgment that tight professional standards do not, to more than a minimal degree, 
shut out the exploiters and the charlatans. If we concen- trated on developing and giving outstanding 
personal help, indlviduals would come to us, rather than to con men. ...I am quite aware that the position 
I am taking has disadvantages and involves risks, but so does the path to certification and licensure. 
And I have slowly come to the conclusion that if we did away with "the expert," "the certified professional," 
"the licensed psychologist," 117 we might open our profession to a breeze of fresh air, to a surge 
of creativlty,such as it has not known for years. In every area, medicine, nursing, teaching, bricklaying, 
or carpentry, certification has tended to freeze and narrow the profession, has tied it to the past, 
and has discouraged innovation. If we ask ourselves how the American physician acquired the image of 
being a dollar- seeking reactionary, a member of the tiEhtest union in the country, opposed to all progress 
and change, and especially opposed to giving health care where it is most needed, there is little doubt 
that the American Medical Association has slowly, even thouEh unintentionally, built that image in the 
public mind. Yet the primary initial purpose of the AMA was to certify and license qualified physicians 
and to protect the public against the quack. ...So, though I know it must sound horrendous, I would 
 llke to see all of the energy7 we put into certification rules, qualifications, lioensure legislation, 
and writ- ten and oral examinations rechanneled into assisting clinical psychologists, social psychologists, 
and group leaders to become so effective, so devoted to human wel- fare, that they would be chosen 
over those who are actual!~ unqualified, whether or not they possess paper credentials. As a supplement 
to guide the public, we might set up the equivalent of a consumer protective service. If one complaint 
comes in about ineffective or unethical behavi- or, it might well be explalned away. But if many com- 
 plaints come in about an individual's services to the public, then his name should be made available 
to the public, with the suggestion "Let the buyer beware." ...When our own lasting helpfulness is clearly 
evident, then we will have no need for an elaborate machinery for certifying and licensing. J. L. Hughes 
IBM Perhaps I should first explain how I came to be on this panel. Ash Stalnaker asked me to participate 
late last night when he found that one of the scheduled participants was too ill to appear. Being too 
tired to resist his persuasive efforts at such a late hour, I find myself here on the dais this afternoon, 
ready to act out the role of expert on the question of certification. Two of the previous speakers appear 
to be against certi- fication, and one in favor. My position is a compromise, I think certification 
is a good idea, but I question whether its time has come for computer personnel. Let me give you my reasons 
why. ADVANTAGE OF CERTIFICATION Bob Reinstedt quoted Carl Rogers on the desirability of abolishing 
certification for clinical psychologists. My belief is that Rogers is mistaken. I agree that certification 
will not exclude charlatans and incompetents from practicing psychotherapy. The incidence of charla- 
tans, however, is bound to be less where certification is required than if no restrictions of any sort 
are imposed and anyone who desires can practice a profession. In other words, I feel that certification 
provides a "statistical edge" in reducing --but not eliminating -- the number of incompetents practicing 
any profession. And the same should be true for computer personnel. NATURE OF COMPUTING JOBS However, 
I wonder whether computing has matured suffici- ently as a profession to make most computer people desire 
or submit to certification. In other professions, such as medicine, law, and accounting, the members 
are mostly independent practitioners who interact directly with the public. Certification is therefore 
a credential that they need, not only because it is required by law, but also because it enables the 
layman to select the appropriate professional. On the other hand, most computer personnel are employees 
of private or public organizations and do not interact with the public. Their performance is evaluated 
by management who have the opportunity to observe their performance on the job. When seeking new jobs, 
they are judged by prospective employers on the basis of their education, experience and familiarity 
with specific computing systems and software. Computer personnel there- fore have no need for a general 
certificate certifying their capabilities! their worth as employees is directly evaluated by managers 
and employers on the basis of their present and past performance. Under these present condi- tions, I 
doubt that many computing people would see the advantage of going through the ritual of attaining certi- 
fication if it had no immediate value to them. In other words, I question whether most users are ready 
to use the system. DIVERSITY OF BACKGROUND Another reason for delaying certification now is the diversity 
of education and experience of computer person- nel today. They run the entire gamut of course majors, 
including liberal arts, education, and social sciences as well as business and science. They also work 
in a number of different Job categories in all types of private and public organizations. Quite a variety 
of job skills is involved, and these can be expected to change significant- ly in the future if we can 
extrapolate from the extent of changes in the past. Thus, it would be difficult to establish education 
and experience requirements and to construct a meaningful and rigorous examination in comput- ing that 
all of these people with divergent background would consider fair. They might therefore be unwilling 
to make the effort to master computing subjects which they see as irrelevant to their present jobs and 
future vocational aspirations. WHO TAKES THE CERTIFYING EXAMINATION? A further consideration is that 
a number of people have been in computing for many years and have achieved con- siderable success, but 
they might not meet the standards adopted for certification. Thus, some form of "grand- father" clause 
--or better, a "grandparent" clause -- would probably have to be set up to permit these peeple to be 
admitted to certification solely by meeting educa- tion and experience requirements rather than having 
to take an examination. What standards to establish and what ;~oportion of people to admit as "grandparents" 
is always a controversial matter. Once again, because of the diversity of backgrounds of these people, 
it would probably be a difficult task to arrive at an equitable policy. THE CERTIFICATION EXAMINATION 
 In addition to the foregoing considerations, I should like I;o point out that constructing and maintaining 
a suitable certification examination is not a trivial task. It involves constructing the initial test, 
administering and scoring it, and revising it periodically. It requires a team of subject-matter experts 
to periodically define the areas to be tested and to draft the test questions. It also calls for testing 
experts to review and edit the questions. The examination must then be tried out on several samples 
of typical computer personnel in order to conduct an item analysis of test questions and to set scoring 
standards. When the test is completed, arrange- ments for announcing, administering, and scoring the 
exam- ination and reporting the results must be made. Finally, new versions of the examination must 
be prepared before each new administration. Thus, considerable work and expense is involved. The question 
arises whether this should be done internally by the computer societies or farmed out to a national testing 
organization, such as the Educational Testing Service or the Psychological Corporation. The latter course 
may be more expensive, but it does relieve the computer societies of many burdens of examination preparation 
and administra- tion. On the other hand, it must be remembered that computer experts will still have 
the major responsibility of defining the field and drafting the technical questions. Thus, much of the 
effort cannot be delegated. As you can Judge, my feelings on certification are mixed for the reasons 
I've expressed. Perhaps now I'd better stop and leave some time for questions and discussion. 121 See 
Chart 2 for a graphic relationship between the pay ranges reported for the State of Georgia during Spring, 
 1972, for the four steps on the career ladder considered in this study. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The 
four data processing jobs included in the study (key-punch operator, verifier operator, digital computer 
 operator ~4Pr°g rammer ) had an estimated total employ- ment of 9, for Georgia in Fall of 1971. Largest 
em- loyment was for key-punch operator with 4,595 jobs or 9% of the total. Second in importance was 
programmer with 2,334 jobs. Yearly job demand, or job openings, are estimated at 1,477 of which 56% will 
be for replace- ment of workers who retire or withdraw from data proces- sing jobs permanently. Company 
training programs are providing 295 trained workers yearly, covering 20% of total annual needs. Net 
 training requirements for the four data processing jobs in the study will average 1,182 annually which 
must be trained by the area vocational-technical schools or by other outside training organizations. 
 Computer programming technology, in an eight-quarter sequence, is provided in seven area vocational-technical 
schools in Georgia. Requirements for students to be admitted to the program are as follows, high school 
edu- cation with two years of algebra including as desirable prerequisites geometry, trigonometry, physics, 
mechani- cal drawing, typing, accounting and industrial arts. Computer programming technology in the 
area vocational- technical schools provides training in accounting, gener- al math and algebra, data 
processing math, business statistics, communication skills and technical report writing, computer programming 
in a six-quarter sequence, and job simulation. Analysis of the displacement effects of computers on 
accounting personnel shows a strong impact on the rela- tive use of accounting personnel. The ratio of 
dis- placement of accounting personnel by computer personnel is a direct function of size of business 
and also type of business. The replacement ratio by computer personnel rises from 10% for employers of 
20-99 workers to 32% for employers having 100 or over employees. By type of in- dustrythe displacement 
ratio is strongest in government, over double that for the largest firms in the private sector. By type 
of employer, the next highest ratio is for trade and services, followed by manufacturing. The Career 
Ladder for Data Processing Occupations begins with key-punch operators and ends with key-punch super- 
 adding machines and pass a six-part aptitude test. This includes office terms, numbers, perception, 
memory, dex- terity, and parts of the machine. Training in the speci- fic skills is provided in many 
high schools of the State and in most of the network of Area Vocational-Technical schools. An employee, 
however, with typewriter skills and having ability in the six-part aptitude tests can gain employment 
directly in some companies through on- the-job training under the direction of the key-punch supervisor 
through tela training at the work location. In order to advance up the career ladder from key-punch operator 
to Verifier operator, digital computer operator, and programmer, the worker must maintain a continuation 
of the intense, relevant on-the-job instruction, supple- mented ~ special training in the skills of each 
higher level job by scheduling programs of training in a special IBM school, if accessible, Area Vocational-Technical 
school, or some nearby college. The factors which identify workers in the early stages on the career 
ladder for data processing who may be expected to advance to key-punch supervisor are the ability to 
im- prove performance in technical aspects of the job and display leadership characteristics. Those employees 
in data processing having strong potentials for advance to computer operator and then on to programmer 
must demon- strate strong aptitudes for the upper level skills, demonstrate high level logical analysis 
relative to the technical characteristics of the computer, tenacity to get the job done, and reflect 
high level responsibility in all work. Pay levels for the different steps of this career ladder in the 
State of Georgia in the Spring of 1972, converted to yearly earnings rates, are as follows, Yearly Earnings 
Rates RepQrted by Georgia Employers in Spring of 1972 AverageReported Lowest Reported HighestReported 
Pay Pay Pay Key-Punch Operator $5,470 $5,16o $8,69~ Verifier Operator 5,512 4,160 7,280 Digital Computer 
Op. 7,592 4,992 12,022 Programmer 9,235 5,824 13,770 
			