
 CHALLENGES AND CHANGES: THE MIGRATION OF WESTERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY FROM AN IBM MAINFRAME ENVIRONMENT 
TO A MICROCOMPUTER, NOVELL LAN BASED NETWORK Jeffrey A. Jones Programmer/Consultant Microcomputer Services 
Western Kentucky University 1 Big Red Way Bowling Green, KY 42101 jeff.jones@wku.edu Tel: (502) 745-5214 
Fax: (502) 745-6402 ABSTRACT Western Kentucky University is in the process of migrating from an IBM 
mainframe environment to a microcomputer, LAN based network In addition to building the physical network 
and distributing 1600 microcomputers, it was discovered that the employees had to be trained to use the 
technology. Most employeesat Western were long term, stay until retirement types. They ranged in age 
from 20 to 65 and had never worked with a microcomputer. Those who had computer experience used a maniframe 
terminal. While there were some who quickly adapted to the new technology, the majority had no concept 
of computer organization and were intimidated by it. We created a small lab of about seven machines and 
announced a class schedule to the general campus. We then signed up employees and presented the class 
at a given time. Initial problems included the following: 1. The classes would fill up, and then people 
wouM not attend. 2. Classes contained mixed levels of ability. 3. Classes were not being attended because 
the users did not understand what they were.  All of these problems were addressed in different ways.- 
For example, the mixed levels of abilities problem was contained by the instructor adjusting content. 
The attendance problem was remedied by offering classes to specific departments with specific content. 
Classes were also renamed to make them more understandable for our users. Initially, word processing 
was the focus but quickly went to operating system, e-mail, and internet usage. Content was also shiftedfrom 
trying to cover all features of a product to basic, specific skills. Feedback on our efforts was returned 
by way of a campus wide survey, with 97% ranking the classes as very good to excellent. As far as improving 
our training, I would offer the following suggestions: 1. Assign adequate stag All our preparation, scheduling, 
and presentations were done by one person. It was too much.  2. Offer some type of reward to users who 
make the effort to improve themselves. 3. Establish some type of measuring tool (test) to measure the 
skill level. 4. Make sure that all levels of management are involved so that users will consider it 
important. 5. Use all possible venues, such as the Internet, to distribute the information.  Permission 
to make digital/hard copy of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without 
fee provided that copies are not made or distributedforprofit or commercial advantage, the copyright 
notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that coping is by permission 
of ACM, Inc.. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior spectfic permission antiorfee. 0 1997 ACM ISBN # O-89791 -990-4/97/001 I $3.50 Are You Ready? Changes 
and Challenges Jeff Jones  BACKGROUND INFORMATION  Western Kentucky University is a regional institution 
with a student body of 15,000 and approximately 1,600 professional faculty and staff. Computing needs 
had been traditionally met by access to two mainframe systems, an IBM 9 12 1 for administrative needs 
and a Vax 4100 server series for the student body. Western was also connected to a wide area network 
that tied it to the Universities of Kentucky and Louisville s mainframe systems, and in several labs 
there were a mix of microcomputers connected to Novell local area 1 / networks. Approximately six years 
ago, the president, as part of a planning strategy for the year 2000, initiated the policy of a microcomputer 
on all faculty desks. In addition, microcomputers were distributed to staff and large labs created for 
students. These would be tied together in a campus wide network, with the latest in fiber optic cable 
allowing the transfer of information anywhere on campus. These tasks would be accomplished by the creation 
of two new departments from the ranks of administrative and academic computing, a network services group 
and a microcomputer services center. The network services group planned and deployed the network while 
the microcomputer group distributed the machines, repaired the machines, answered questions on hardware 
and software problems, and undertook various software programming tasks. Staffing for both groups was 
limited; neither group had more than six full-time employees. The network and workstations were distributed 
in large batches over set areas in accordance with a timetable of over two years. A number of setbacks 
were experienced and the deadline was exceded . The increasing number of users created an unanticipated 
issue. The fact was that most of the employees did not know what to do with the machines when they received 
them. EMPLOYEES AT WESTERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY  The faculty and staff at Western are a divergent group, 
with the faculty and some staff having mastered -.-advanced degrees, while other staff may have no more 
than a high school education. Many had been at the university a long time,.and planned to work there 
until to 65. As such, most employees at Western had not been exposed to computers much in either their 
education or in their job activity. If they had been using the computer in their job, it was probably 
a mainframe terminal that displayed forms to be tilled out and saved, Even the faculty with all their 
advanced training, generally had little exposure to microcomputers, and little time to learn about them. 
It became a major issue for the university in its efforts to incorporate technology into the classroom. 
Of course, there were exceptions. Some faculty and staff adapted very well to the computer. These power 
users were capable of self learning and required minimal guidance from our unit. Often they would attend 
only one session and never be seen again. It seems that they were more concerned in validating their 
new found skills than in learning something new. After they had reassured themselves of their competence 
they investigated the topics of their choice, contacting us only when they ran into a particular problem. 
The only surprise for us was their lack of interest in advanced training. After offering several classes 
that were poorly attended, we decided to defer advanced training and concentrate our resources on the 
basics, where we could achieve greater numbers. Perhaps because from the beginning our power users were 
fewer in number, interested in specific topics related to their fields, and capable of reading the documentation, 
they never constituted a training group for us and are not the subject of this paper. What was left then, 
were the other users. They ranged in ability, education, and age from the very bottom to somewhere in 
the upper middle. The only thing they had in common was their lack of exposure to, microcomputer theory, 
technology, and usage. Many were older, the average age could be set at 42, They attended class with 
attitudes ranging from intrepidness to indifference, but a common emotion would be a sense of vicissitude. 
The work that they had been doing, perhaps for many years, was changing. Add to this the fact that many 
of the job skills they had developed were not easily transfered to private enterprise, and you have a 
real climate of fear. Therefore, the challenge facing the instructor was as much one of placating angst 
as it was introducing new technologies. It was also discovered that the training sessions offered an 
opportunity to explain the technical goals of management, since communications on campus were insufficient. 
they retired. Therefore, there was a large number of older employees in a group that ranged in age from 
20 : 158. ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Are You Ready? . Jeff Jones Challenges and Changes in Italics An Instructor 
is Appointed Three years ago, it was decided to appoint one of the full-time staff to be in charge of 
all of the training scheduling, development, and presentations. I was offered the challenge in addition 
to my regular duties on the help desk, application development, and software analysis. My formal education 
included degrees in the humanities and computer science as well as a teaching certificate for secondary 
education. I have worked for the university over sixteen years, starting as an application programmer 
for administrative computing and moving on to systems manager for a midframe IBM system with academic 
computing. About eight years ago, I got the opportunity to teach computer applications both on campus 
to traditional students and off campus to adult learners in industry. I quickly discovered an interest 
in working with people as opposed to working on a machine. I also came to appreciate the differences 
involved in training adults in the work place as opposed to students in the classroom, the classroom 
was much easier! Based upon my experience teaching adults in an industrial setting, I developed the following 
methodology: 1. The classes should be hands-on , with each student having his own computer. Theory is 
fine, but for computer software applications, you must do it. 2. The classes should be small, eight 
to ten for * the maximum size. 3. Take a break every hour to hour and a half. People cannot concentrate 
longer. 4. Objectives should be clear and stated at the beginning. 5. Expect all levels of ability. 
For example a word processing class might have a student who does not know Windows. 6. Speak in layman 
s terms. Adults are not impressed by a lot of terminology they don t understand.  When the microcomputing 
service center was formed, I eagerly joined what I saw as an exciting opportunity in computing. For some 
time I had been sensing the Are You Ready? demise of the mainframe environment and the emergence of it 
s successor, the networked microcomputer. Our unit started with three full-time microcomputer. Our unit 
consisted of three people, including thedirector, but was later increased to five. Initially we were 
overwhelmed by the configuration, delivery, and set up of the work stations. Later, I manned the help 
desk and assisted with software application projects. As we got to know our user group, the need\for 
training became clearer, for many of them did not understand us when we tried to help them. Finally, 
after some threats, I was placed in charge of the training program. Initial Development of Classes 
The first classes were held in a small area of my office. Seven computers were partitioned off from the 
rest of the office, and an erasable board set up. The microcomputers were Zenith Z loos, of comparable 
power as the majority of campus. The area was semi- private, as anyone coming into the area walked by 
the door. You could also hear the network group talking in their cubicles in the room. A schedule was 
drawn up and classes announced by way of a printed flyer sent to each employee s campus address. On the 
flyer was a phone number and schedule of topics and dates, the employee would call and reserve a seat. 
Maximum class size was limited to eight, with the same topic being offered on several dates and times. 
Since the flyers were all delivered on the same day, the telephone became quite busy the next few days. 
I had a role printed for each class, and would manually sign up each employee. If a class became full 
we would try to pick an alternate date, or set up a waiting list. Initially, most of our classes were 
for Word Perfect version 5.2 and 6.1. That quickly changed however, as we discovered that most employees 
lacked basic computer skills. As the network went out, the university community wanted an easy way to 
access resources on campus. An interface was written in Visual Basic to do just that. We developed a 
three hour class that taught the user to use the interface, and to use e-mail and the intemet. This became 
our most popular class, since the employee could attend one session and come out ready to use their computer. 
The growth of the internet and the advantages of e-mail made a computer user out of everyone, even the 
president of the university. As the classes continued, we identified several areas that could be improved. 
First, the lack of privacy in the training area was distracting. People talking and phones ACM SIGUCCS 
XXV 1997 . 159  Changes and Challenges ringing were not conducive to learning. The area was also too 
small. Second? our method of announcing and. I scheduling the classes was cumbersome, involving too much 
work by hand. Third, we had a big problem with absenteeism, people signed up and then did not show up. 
This was especially exasperating in classes where, we had turned people away. Fourth, the content needed 
to be simplified. There was a tendency at first to, try to teach all aspects of a product, not the basics. 
Fifth, , some of the students that could really use the training did not understand what the flyer said. 
I  IMPROVEMENTS To remedy the above mentioned problems, a number of improvements developed over time. 
The problem with the lack of privacy and size in the training area was r solved by moving the training 
site to another building in a private room. The room, complete with desks for the students and a proxima 
display device, is in the library away from the telephone. It is completely private and carpeted, with 
room for ten work stations. Plans are now being drawn to use computer: classroom space for training. 
Either way we now have a private training area. The problem of announcing and scheduling our classes 
has been solved by using a combination of e-maiI and the internet. At the beginning of the semester, 
an e-mail is sent to all users announcing training and giving the URL of our World Wide Web site. There 
a calendar displays the date and class, with a hypertext link to a class description. The employee can 
then e-mail me to schedule. a class and I e-mail a confirmation or suggest another date. The system has 
many advantages, not the least of which is that the phone does not ring. I do not have to be at my desk. 
The employee can view the schedule at anytime. Employees also liked the idea and used it as a model for 
their own departments. This biggest advantage though, is that I do not have to print, label, and mail 
1600 flyers. So far we have had no problems rescheduling classes that were full. The third problem of 
absenteeism was more difficult. We found that announcing the classes too far in advance led to people 
signing up, and then not remembering to show up. We also pushed around several ideas. One of the most 
successful has been to approach a department head about training for his unit, and then letting him contact 
his employees. This has the added advantage of allowing us to fine tune the training to fit the departmeut 
s needs. In addition, we have expanded our training venues to include demonstrations for large groups 
thar show them what is available or changed. We also offer one-on-one training for specifc projects that 
allow a faculty member to meet a specific deadline. All of this can be done because of our work in the 
past and because of some staff increases. The fourth problem was remedied over time, as we took the time 
to listen to feedback from our employees. It seemed adult learners, because of their work schedules, 
quickly,divided information into three categories; essential for their job, nice to know, and who cares. 
They do not want their time wasted with useless information and only a few were interested in the nice 
to know part. Beginnersalso need to have things repeated, particularily in operating systems basic classes, 
because they did not practice these things at their work station. We found, and still find, that while 
a user may know his application well enough, they do not understand computer file structures. This leads 
to all kinds of problems such as lost tiles and creates a mystery around the machine. In contrast, once 
the user assosiated their e-mail ,address and Internet URLs with a house address, it made sense to them. 
This is a problem for adult learners because they have never had to manage a computer, and will continue 
to be problem. Currently we have two classes on the Windows 95 operating system, a basic and an advanced, 
with the advanced one dealing with file management. The fifth problem of users not understanding the 
class description we addressed by changing the titles to something less technical. For example, instead 
of naming a class File Management , we named it Looking for tiles in all the wrong places. This seems 
to help some of them. In general it seems to help communication to use as little technical jargon as 
possible, something most computer professionals are not used to doing. But this trend is being reflected 
in all fields, your doctor now tries to explain your condition in terms you understand rather than technical 
ones. In terms of microcomputers, as they proliferate into non- traditional areas the machines must become 
easier to use or people will not accept them. Another suggestion would be to motivate users with some 
sort of reward for mastering computer skills. This would include some sort of measuring tool and should 
be done in a positive manor. What we found were faculty, who did not bother to learn because there was 
no incentive to do so. We had our best results with faculty when they competed to keep up with one another. 
For example, one would develop pages on the Internet and the others would become interested. For staff, 
some type of pay reward for computer skills seemed appropriate. 160 . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Are You Ready? 
 Jeff Jones Challenges and Changes in Italics WHAT WE WOULD CHANGE In summary then, here is a list 
of items that I would have liked to have done differently. 1. Assign adequate staff. All our preparation, 
scheduling, and presentations were done by one person. It was too much. 2. Offer some type of reward 
to users who make the effort to improve themselves. 3. Establish some type of measuring tool (test) 
to measure the skill level. 4. Make sure that all levels of management are involved so that users will 
consider it important. 5. Use all possible venues, such as the Internet, to distribute the information. 
 Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 . 161 
			