
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.&#38;#169; 
1978 ACM 0-12345-678-9 $5.00 COnfc3reIICe Record of the Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming 
Languages Clauses: Scope structures and defined functions in Lucid E.A. Ashcroft Computer Science Department 
University of Waterloo and W.W. Wadge Computer Science Department University of Warwick ABSTRACT In this 
paper we describe how Lucid can be extended to allow user defined functions and scope conventions, i.e. 
conventions for limiting the range or scope of the validity of definitions. This is done using new constructs 
called clauses which are similar in form to the blocks and procedure declarations of Algol-like languages, 
but are nevertheless strictly non imperative, because a clause is actually a compound assertion, i.e. 
an assertion formed, as a program is, by combining a collection of assertions. Each type of clause (there 
are four) has a straightforward mathematical semantics together with its own characteristic manipulation 
rules for general program massage. In addition, the informal operational view of (some) Lucid programs 
(described in a previous paper) can be extended to give an (incomplete) operational understanding of 
the effect of the clauses. In this framework a compute clause defines a block; a mapping clause defines 
a conventional (pointwise) function; a produce clause defines a block with persistent memory (or an anonymous 
process or actor ); anda function clause defines a sort of procedure with own variables (or a general 
kind of coroutine). INTRODUCTION Lucid is a nonprocedural or denotative language; a Lucid program is 
an assertion or set of assertions defining its output, rather than a set of commands which some machine 
must obey in order to produce the output. Lucid is by no , means the first such language; the distinction 
between imperative and denotative languages, and the advantages of the latter, have been well understood 
for at least a dozen years (see Landin [51). Up until now, however, denotative languages have been almost 
universally regarded as elegant curiosities, the playthings of academics unfit for real programming. 
The Lucid project is an attempt to demonstrate that this view is unwarranted, that denotative programming 
can be practical, and that in some respects it need not be so radically different from conventional well 
structured programming. Objections to denotative languages are all based on the supposedly obvious fact 
that denotative programs cannot be executed, and that they give rise to no activity (other than function 
calling); in other words, that they have no operational meaning. Thus iteration, for example, is supposedly 
impossible because it is an operational concept: assignment is necessary (to update loop variables) and 
transfer is needed (to go back and start another iteration, and to exit on completion) . Furthermore, 
denotative languages must (so goes the reasoning) be inherently inefficient, because their implementations 
cannot take advantage of various operational shortcuts such as the moving of constant expressions outside 
loops or sharing of variables; and finally, it is argued, denotative languages must always be cumbersome 
because they lack the rich variety of constructs found in imperative languages: the for­loops, case statements, 
multilevel exits, own variables and so on, all of course invented to bring about a desired operational 
effect . The denotative programmer, on the other hand, is supposedly restricted to recursive function 
definitions, so that his languages can never be anything more than syntactically sugared variants of 
the A-calculus. The first version of the Lucid language, (as described in [1], henceforth referred to 
as Basic Lucid ) refuted some of these objections by showing that a well-structured form of iteration 
can be expressed very naturally in a denotative framework. But even more, we showed that it is indeed 
possible for denotative programs to have operational interpretations. The operational semantics for Basic 
Lucid (actually for a subset thereof) can be used informally as a guide to the programmer, but it can 
also be made precise, and used as the basic of an implementation, for example a compiler. Of course, 
a Programming language needs much more than a facility for iteration if it is to be practical, and in 
particular it needs facilities which allow programmers to restrict the scope of variables, and to define 
their own functions. In this paper we present an extension of Basic Lucid which has these features. We 
define the new constructs , their mathematical semantics and the class of programs, and give the (derived) 
mani­pulation rules for verification and transformation of programs. 17 CLAUSES nested. Lucid has constructs 
for structuring programs analogous to the blocks, while-loops and procedure declarations of Algol-like 
imperative languages. These constructs are called clauses. Clauses are used in programs to define data, 
function or mapping variables, but, in the more general framework of the formal theory, a clause is a 
compound assertion, i.e. an assertion built up by combining a collection of assertions. Produce clauses 
The simplest type of clause is the produce clause. A produce clause is used to limit the scope of certain 
variables so that the same variable can be used in different places with different meanings. A produce 
clause has the form produce <data term> using <variable list> <set of assertions> end The <data te~> 
at the head of the clause is the subject of the clause, the <variable list> is the global list, and the 
<set of assertions> is the body of the clause. The variables occurring in the global list are the global 
variables of the clause. The special variable output (which must not appear on the global list) and any 
other variable not on the global list, but occurring free in an assertion in the body of the clause, 
is called a local variable. Here is a simple example produceDroot _ ~,~z~., output = ( B + fi)/(2 A) 
end Here, A , B and C are the global variables and output and D are the local variables. If this clause 
is in a program, the definition of D in the clause is not valid outside it, although the definitions 
of A , B and C are available inside the clause. This is because semantically a produce clause is an assertion 
about the subject and the globals of the clause, Inside the clause the special local data variable output 
refers to the subject. The clause, considered as an assertion, is true iff there exist values for the 
local variables which make all the assertions in the body true when output has the value of the subject 
term. Thus the meaning of a produce clause is independent of the choice of local variables. For example, 
we could have used E instead of D is the clause above. A produce clause is used in a program as a pseudo-equation 
defining its subject. When used this way, the body of the clause must (as in the example) be a subprogram, 
i.e. a set of equations and clauses defining output and other local variables in terms of each other 
and the globals (for more details see the next section). In particular, local variables can in turn be 
defined by other produces, i.e. produce clauses can be The definition of the meaning of a pro­duce clause 
given above works (makes sense) even when the body is not a subprogram. This is very important because 
it allows us to continue the Lucid practice of freely mixing program text with assertions in the course 
of verifying a program. Function clauses Function clauses are compound assertions about function variables, 
and are used in programs to define functions. A function clause is of the form function <function term> 
(<data variable list>) using <variable list> <set of assertions> end The function term is called the 
subject of the clause, and the data variables in the parentheses are called the formal parameters. As 
before the global variables are those in the global list but now the locals are those occurring free 
in the body which are neither globals nor formal parameters . Formal parameters must all be distinct, 
and may not occur in the global list. Here is a typical function clause taken from a program: function 
Root A,B,C) $ D =B -4 A-C output = (-B + fi)/(2 A) end In this case the global list is empty and the 
word is deopped. * A function clause is an assertion about the subject and the globals. It asserts that, 
for all values of the formal parameters, there exist values of the local variables which make every assertion 
in the body of the clause true when output has the value of the subject applied to the formal parameters 
values. When used in a program, a function clause is a definition of its subject, which must simply be 
a function variable, and the body of the clause must be a subprogram consisting of definitions of the 
locals. Both these constructs are quite general and do not involve any of the functions in Lucid. They 
could be added to any assertional language to give facilities for restricting the scope of variables, 
and for defining functions. Lucid has, in addition, two special versions of produce and function clauses, 
which allow the definition of subcomputations. They achieve this by implicitly applying -to the global 
variables and formal parameters, and -1 latest to the result (see [2]). These analogs of the produce 
and function clauses are the com­pute and mapping clauses respectively. In form they are identical to 
their analogs, except that 18 the word compute replaces the word produce , the word mapping replaces 
the word function and the subject of a mapping clause is a mapping expression. The terms subject , global 
, local , formal parameter etc. are defined as for produce and function clauses. These clauses are used 
in programs to define their subjects, which in the case of a mapping clause must simply be a mapping 
variable. When used in a program, the body of compute or mapping clause must be a subprogram defining 
not the variable output but the specizl variable result , which is synonymous with = output . Since the 
latest value of anything is quiescent (see [2]), result must be defined to be quiescent e.g., by an expression 
of the form x~P.t Semantically, these clauses, like their analogs, are assertions about their subjects 
and their globals. A compute clause is true iff there exist values for the local variables which make 
all the assertions in the body true when each global has its latest value and result has the latest value 
of the subject. A mapping clause is true iff for all values for the formal parameters there exist values 
for the local variables which make every assertion in the body true when every global and formal parameter 
has its latest value and result has the latest value of the subject applied to the latest values of the 
formal parameters. AN OPERATIONAL VIEW The mathematical semantics of clauses is given rigorously in [3]. 
It is simple and precise, even when stated formally, and is used to justify the rules of inference for 
reasoning about programs and to prove implementations correct. However, it is not the best guide for 
writing and understanding programs, because there is no notion of computations taking place or of anything 
happening at all. We therefore present an alternative, operational view of the semantics of clauses in 
program?, which extends the operational view of Basic Lucid pro­grams in terms of loops, described in 
[1]. This operational view is informal and is derived from the more basic mathematical semantics. Of 
the four types of Lucid clauses, the simplest operationally (or at least the most conventional) is the 
compute clause. In a program, it is like an Algol block in that its subject is defined to be the result 
of a subcomputation carried out in a single step of the enclosing iteration, during which time the globals 
are considered to be frozen . If the body of the clause has inductively defined variables, the subcomputation 
can be thought of as an inner loop. For example, the following program statement t In this paper we will 
abbreviate ~m~ by ~and~~by~ . compute loglOX using X I =0~1+1 P l~P.lo first(A,B,logA,logB) = (P,= P,I,= 
I) asa next P> X compute C using A,B first R= A*B/2 =next R = (R+AoB/R)/2 result = R~ IA*B -R21 < .00001 
end loge = (logA+logB)/2 next(A,B,logA,logB) = if X < C then (A,C,logA,logC) else (C,B,logC,logB) result 
logc~ IA-BI < .00001 . end has an inner compute clause which defines each value of C to be (an~proximation 
to) the cor­responding value of 4A*B . This inner compute clause can be considered to be a nested loop 
which is run through completely on each step of the enclosing iteration, The compute clause replaces 
the Basic Lucid begin-end construct. The other clause with a fairly conven­tional operational interpretation 
is the mapping clause. In a program, a mapping clause defines a function guaranteed to be pointwise in 
its argu­ments and globals, i.e. a function whose value at a given point in time depends only on the 
values of its arguments and globals at that time. It does this because it freezes its parameters as well 
as its globals. Here, for example, is a definition of a mapping variable trans mapping trans(L) using 
trans,dict result = if null(L) then NIL else m atom(L) then cons(trans(car(L)) ,trans(cdr(L))) else 
L D = diet ~ cdr(D) E = car(D) entry = E ~ car(E) eq L V null(E) L = if null(entry) then L else cdr(entry) 
end which, when applied to the S expression L returns the S expression formed by replacing each atom 
by a corresponding S-expression, the correspondence being given by the pairlist diet. Because we want 
the definition of trans to be recursive the function variable trans must appear on the global list. Terms 
involving mappings can be thought of as giving rise to Algol-like mapping calls , as will be shown when 
we consider the manipulation rules for clauses. The two types of clauses defined give the programmer 
roughly the facilities of Algol s blocks and procedures, with certain restrictions on side effects. One 
of the reasons that these two clauses have a fairly conventional operational interpretation is that that 
in addition to restricting the scope of definition, they also freeze their globals and parameters so 
that they can be thought of as describing self-contained subcomputations. The produce and function clauses 
19 do not use this freezing effect and therefore their operational interpretation is completely different, 
because inner computations can interact with those of the enclosing iteration. Operationally, the difference 
between a compute and a produce is that a produce clause must be considered either as an anonymous ongoing 
process which continuously produces values of its subject; or, alternatively, as a block of code which 
is repeatedly executed but with persistent internal memory in the form of inductively defined local variables. 
For example, the following clause produce Y !x?A?43X N =l&#38;N+l T =first X~T+*X output = TIN end defines 
the values of Y to be the running averages of the values of X up to that time, e.g. the third value of 
Y is the average of the first three values of X . The local variable T , for example, keeps a running 
total of the values of X . We must imagine either that the iterations of the body of the clause are running 
in parallel but in step with those of the enclosing iteration, or, alternatively, that the clause body 
is executed once on each step of the enclosing iteration, but the values of the local variables ,1 II 
I and T are remembered between executions of the clause body. Function clauses can be thought of as templates 
for processes, with each textual occurrence of a function call corresponding to the process which ia 
the appropriate instance of the template. These processes must, like those defined by produce clauses, 
be thought of as operating in parallel, but synchronized with the enclosing iteration, and as updating 
internal variables even if, on some steps of the enclosing iteration, the output values are not required. 
Alternatively, the function body can be thought of as a conventional Algol-like procedure body which 
is called and returns a result, provided in addition that (i) the inductively defined local variables 
are thought of as own variables whose values are remembered between one call and the next; (ii) different 
textual occurrences have separate copies of these variables; and (iii) the procedure is called on each 
step of the iteration containing the function call, even when the value is not needed, for housekeeping 
purposes , namely to keep the own variables up to date. For example, the following piece of program N=l,&#38;Qj 
N+l function Avg(X) I =1~1+1 T .QA%GXM.XT+2%LX output = T/I end Y = Avg(N) Avg(N2) ~ N eq 5 defines 
Y to be 33, the average of the first five positive integers times the average of the first five squares. 
Whether we interpret this program in terms of processes or in terms of procedures with own variables 
the formal semantics requires first of all that the two occurrences of Avg make use of separate copies 
of I and T , and secondly that the values of these variables be kept up to date even though no actual 
averages need be computed until the fifth step of the main iteration. The operational view just described 
can be extended to cover recursive functions, but we must imagine that each recursive call sets up a 
new process, or generates new copies of the own variables. Some existing coroutine languages are capable 
of this, for example that of Kahn and McQueen [4]. In fact, languages already exist which exhibit similar 
features to most of those found in this operational interpretation of produce and function clauses, but 
the difference is that the designers started with the operational view, selecting those features which 
conformed to a personal and preconceived view of what processes and coroutines are. In Lucidon the other 
hand, any operational interpretations must conform with the mathematical semantics of clauses, and this 
in turn is simply the result of combining the Lucid view of iteration with the ability to define functions 
and limit the scopes of variables. We can therefore claim, with 11coroutine some and justification, 
process are that our the true notions ones. of PROGRAM PROOFS BY PROGRAM MANIPULATION We have rules 
for transforming programs which can be rigorously justified using the formal semantics. Using such transformations 
it is poaaible to reason about programs in a very natural way. The first two rules allow us to carry 
on normal reasoning within clause boundaries. The first says that we can add to any subclause any assertion 
that follows logically from the assertions in the subclause. Conversely, the second rule says that we 
can throw away any assertion from any subclause. There is also a set of movement rules which allow us 
to move across clause boundaries assertions whose free variables are all globals of the clause. Any such 
assertion can be moved in or out of a produce or function clause, and any such i assertion which is pointwise 
can be moved in or out of a compute or mapping clause. Furthermore in the case of a produce clause, assertions 
which refer to output can be moved out of the clause provided output is replaced by the subject of the 
clause, and conversely, assertion which refer to the subject can be moved in provided the subject is 
replaced by output . Similarly, the same is true of compute clauses, if we consider result rather than 
output . ? An assertion is pointwise if it is a pointwise term or a compute or mapping clause whose sub­ 
ject is a pointwise term or a function clause with no global variables.  20 These are the most important 
rules  E?w!w2~ because they allow both small and large changes to an assertion in a single step -the 
assertions being moved can themselves be clauses. In order to prepare the stage for the application of 
these rules we also need rules for adding global variables to a clause and for renaming its local variables. 
We also need a rule which allows any function or mapping clause to be transformed to a produce or compute 
clause (respectively) by adding the formal parameters to the global list and by making any consistent 
substitution of terms for the formal parameters. While these rules are natural and easy to use, we know 
of no small well-structured symmetric subset of them which are inmme sense complete. Computational Behavior 
of Functions and Mappings The formal definitions of clauses and the manipulation rules above are sufficient 
to answer questions of an operational nature about functions and mappings. We will first illustrate how 
the rules can be used to perform symbolic execution of a function call. Consider produce M function 
Min(X) moutPut mx = output = if output < next X then output . *-X end z =3$&#38;l&#38;2 output = Min(Z2) 
end We first use the function transformation rule, with the formal parameter X being replaced by 22 , 
yielding produce M roz:~;;:: * z =WJut % output< =22 then output else = 22 end 7-=3 ~l&#38;2 output 
= Min(Z ) end Then we use our movement rule to move the definition of Z inside the produce clause yielding 
produce M produce Min(Z2) * 2 first output = first Z next output = if output < _ 22 then output else 
* 22 z =3~l,f&#38;2 end output = Min(Z2) end Then inside the produce we substitute 3 &#38; 1-2 for every 
occurrence of Z , perform some simple calculations and, after discarding unnecessary statements, we have 
produce Min(Z2) using Z output =9,@J l&#38;l end output = Min(Z2) end . The assertion output = 9 ~ 1 
~ 1 can be moved out of the inner produce, yielding Min(Z2) = 9 ~ 1~ l . Then substitution of equals 
for equals yields output = 9 &#38; 1 ~ 1 in the body of the outer produce and this can be brought out, 
giving M=9~lf&#38;l . Any mechanism to implement functions and mapPings must produce effects that are 
consistent with all properties that can be proved using the manipulation rules. In particular, one such 
parameter-passing mechanism is the call by name rule as considered in Vuillemin [6]. To see that call 
by value does not work, consider produce V mapping f(x, Y) = f result = if X eq O then O else f(X-l,f(X,Y)) 
. end output = f(l,o) end We can duplicate the mapping clause, and then transform one of the copies 
into the corresponding compute clause (setting up the actuallformal parameter correspondence) giving 
produce V mappin~ f(X,Y) using f result = if X eq O then O else f(X-l,f(X,Y)) end compute f(l,O) using 
f result = if 1 eq O ~ O else f(l-l,f(l,O))  end output = f(l,o) end Inside the compute clause we obtain 
result = f(o, f(l,o)) which can be moved out , and the compute clause discarded, giving produce V m~ 
f(x,Y) * f result = if X eq O then O else f(X-l,f(X,Y)) end f(l,o) = f(o,f(l,o)) output = f(l,o) end 
We repeat the process with formal parameter X being replaced by O and Y being replaced by f(l,o) . Inside 
the resulting compute clause we get result = if O eq O then O else f(O-l,f(l,O))) .  This simplifies 
to result = O 21 and when we move this out and discard the compute clause we get produce V f(o,f(l,o)) 
= o f(l,o) = f(o,f(l,o)) output = f(l,o) end. From this we clearly get output = o which we can move out 
giving V=o. In a call by value implementation of this function, the program would diverge, which is inconsistent 
with the fact that v = o . A more efficient mechanism than call by name is the delay rule or call by 
need of Vuillemin [6], and Lucid may be first programming language that can actually use it. Finally, 
we will show that the manipula tion rules can be used to settle the question of dynamic versus static 
binding of global variables of functions and mappings. Consider compute U mapping f(X) using Y result 
=X+Y end Y=l compute result * f Y =2 result = f(3) end end . The question is whether the value of U 
is 5 or 4, which depends on whether the inner or outer definition of Y is used in the evaluation of f(3) 
. In a language like LISP which has dynamic binding, the inner value would be used, in Algol the outer. 
It is easy to see that the manipulation rules imply that Lucid uses static binding. We cannot move the 
mapping inside the inner compute clause until we have renamed the inner local variable Y . The variable 
Y can then be added to the global list of the inner compute, and the mapping can be moved giving compute 
V Y=l compute result using Y map ping f(X) using Y result =X+Y end z2 . result = f(3) end end . The 
definition of Y can now be brought down into the mapping, and it is then straightforward to finally obtain 
V = 4 . [1] Ashcroft E.A. and Wadge W.w., Lucid, a non-procedural language with iteration , CACM 20, 
NO. 7, pp. 519-526. [2] Ashcroft E.A. and Wadge W.w. , Lucid -a formal system for wriiing and proving 
programs , SIAM J. Comput. 5, No. 3, pp. 336-354. [31 Ashcroft E.A. and Wadge W.W., Lucid: Scope structures 
and defined functions , CS-78-01, Computer Science Department, University of Waterloo. (Revised version 
of CS-76-22.) [4] Kahn G. and MacQueen D.B., Coroutines and networks of parallel processes , Proc. IFIP77 
pp. 993-998, North Holland. [51 Landin P.J., The next 700programming languages , CACM 9, pp. 157-166. 
[6] Vuillemin J., Correct and optimal implemen­tations of recursion in a simple programming language 
, 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Austin, 1973. 22 
			