
 COMMUNICATION SKILLS REQUIRED BY COMPUTER PROFESSIONALS Norman Enger Applied Management Systems ABSTRACT 
Computer professionals usually have technical backgrounds that concentrate on information systems and 
computer science courses. These courses primarily emphasize the use of various technologies to implement 
automated systems. This emphasis often neglects the teaching of interpersonal communication skills and 
understanding of human factors as they relate to the design and implementation of computer-based information 
systems. The computer professional usually needs these neglected communication skills to successfully 
implement integrated information systems. INTRODUCTION The success or failure of a major computer system 
development effort often depends on the interpersonal communication skills of the project's systems analysts 
and software engineers. If computer professionals are aware of the human factors that inhibit effective 
interpersonal communication and impede the implementation of a system, they can often act to eliminate 
potential human barriers to the success- ful development of an information system. Unfortunately, few 
data processing managers, systems analysts, or software engineers have received formal training in either 
inter- personal oral and written communications skills or human factors con- siderations related to information 
systems. Academic computer science and information system curriculums often stress technical system 
analysis and software engineering skills and minimize courses that cover human fac- tors or behavioral 
sciences. &#38;#169; 1981 ACM 0-89791-04~3/81/0600/0080 $00.75 See Page ii for Copyright Statement For 
example, the successful design and implementation of a major new system often requires marketing skills 
and an understanding of human and organizational psychologies. Often, data processing management and 
the technical staff must "sell" a system to both policy management and user personnel. They must overcome 
the human fears and resistance to change that are common to most large organizations. Management and 
the systems analysts become "marketeers" "selling" the benefits of the new system to prospective users. 
They often must make oral presentations promoting the development and implementation of a new system. 
 Many data processing managers have been promoted from the data pro- cessing ranks. These managers usually 
have strong technical skills, but limited formal managerial and business training or background. Difficul- 
ties can be created when a data processing person is promoted into a managerial position because a talented 
systems analyst or software en- gineer does not necessarily make an effective manager. A recent book 
by J. Daniel Couger and Robert Zawacki, Motivating and Managing Computer Personnel, indicates that computer 
professionals have a lower social need and higher growth need than other professionals. The need for 
social interaction with co-workers or user personnel is low. Many computer professionals are "loners", 
who obtain great satisfaction from technical achievements and have limited interest in socializing or 
communicating with co-workers. This profile of computer professionals has implications for the skills 
required to develop information systems. Organizations may have to develop special seminars and training 
classe~ to strengthen the oral and written skills of computer professionals. Data processing management 
may have to actively promote more effective ¢ommunica' tion between computer professionals on development 
teams and between the teams and users. REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS During the Requirements Analysis phase 
of system development (See Figure l: Structured Systems Life Cycle Phases), the functions to be performed 
by the new system are defined. The systems analyst works closely with the user organization to identify 
the user requirements that must be satisfied by the new system. The analyst identifies the infor- mation 
that is needed, the sources of the information, the destinations of the information, the use of the information, 
the required frequency of output reporting, and the response time requirements. The analyst will use 
this definition of requirements of the "problem" to be solved to deve- lop the "solution" in the Logical 
Design phase. The user requirements become the framework for the future development of the system. Interviewing 
users is usually the systems analyst's primary method of data gathering to identify user requirements. 
The analyst schedules inter- views with the user organization to discuss the functions to be peformed 
by the new system. Unfortunately, the importance of interviewing skills is often not recognized by data 
processing organizations. The systems 82 analyst typically receives extensive training in technical 
subjects but little training in interviewing techniques or technical writing. Inter- personal relations 
and communications skills which are vital to effective interviewing are neglected. Two types of interviews 
commonly used by analysts are structured interviews and unstructured interviews. A structured interview 
uses a set of predefined questions to guide the interview. It is normally used when several people with 
similar or related positions are to be interviewed, either individually or in small groups in an attempt 
to arrive at a set of conclusions. An unstructured interview is less formal and more flexible in structure. 
The format and direction of the interview session will vary greatly with the personality of each interviewer 
and interviewee. However, the analyst will still have established objectives for the interview prior 
to the meeting with the user. Too often, if three different analysts are sent to interview the same 
user group and define user requirements, they will define three different sets of user requirements. 
The three sets of requirements will overlap but they would not be identical. A fourth analyst might interview 
the user group and find additional requirements not contained in the first three definitions. This variation 
in user requirements definition by the analysts usually reflects flaws in the interviewing methodology. 
If the "problem" to be solved has not been properly defined, then the "solution" will probably be unsatisfactory 
to the user organization. Interviews must be carefully planned and the interview results should be 
checked for accuracy and completeness. Some general rules for inter- viewing are:  Understand the business 
functions of the user organization being interviewed to better relate to the needs of the organization. 
  Study the job functions of the person to be interviewed to under- stand his or her work responsibilities. 
  Set objectives for the interview to guide the interview and measure the success of the interview. 
  Have an appearance and bearing appropriate to a computer professional.  Try to be a listener--do 
not dominate the conversation.  Prepare questions to stimulate the thought process of the person being 
interviewed.  Seek to make the person being interviewed relax, to develop a friendly context for the 
interview.  Discuss user responses to remove ambiguity or contradiction and where appropriate, promote 
a more detailed discussion of an answer  Set a tentative time limit for the duration of the interview. 
  Document the interview results during and immediately after the interview while recollection of the 
interview is still vivid.  Schedule a second meeting with the same person if additional information 
is needed.  Use the interview as a vehicle to build a working relationship with the user organization. 
  Questionnaires can also be used for gathering facts where the analyst must contact large numbers of 
individuals and obtain answers to a variety of questions. These questionnaires must be carefully worded 
to elicit meaningful responses that will contribute to the study. The questions must be tested for both 
clarity and objectivity. The systems analyst must be able to prepare interview questions and questionnaires, 
conduct interviews, establish rapport with interviewees, and accurately document the information obtained 
from the interviews. Gathering data by means of interviews is a primary method of collecting data to 
define user requirements. The analyst can use the interview to win user cooperation and support for the 
information system to be devel- oped by involving the user in defining specifications for the new system. 
 LOGICAL DESIGN During the Logical Design phase, the "solution" to the "problem" identified in the requirements 
analysis phase is developed. This phase requires that the user requirements be transformed into a logical 
model of the new system environment. A major communication challenge is the translation of user require- 
ments for a major information system into logical design specifications. This remains one of the weakest 
steps in the entire system development life cycle. There is substantial risk that this translation will 
contain flaws that will, if they are not corrected, cause user dissatisfaction with the operational system. 
The analyst may misinterpret a user state- ment or fail to verify a user requirement. Any communication 
problems be- tween the analyst and user will increase the probability of a poor translation. The systems 
analyst must be able to communicate effectively with th user during this logical design phase. If the 
user is deeply involved during the design phase, he can often make suggestions which are useful the analyst. 
These suggestions may lead to methods for performing func- tions which the analyst may not be aware can 
be changed. Through user interaction, the analyst can quickly identify the functions in the user organization 
that have a high resistance to change. He can then, with full awareness of the attitudes of the user 
organization, proceed with t development of the new system. When considering how one should go about 
designing a system or data processing program with active user involvement and whether there is som orderly 
process by which the design of a system can be organized, the to down design method emerges as the currently 
popular approach. The structured top-down approach stresses extensive interaction dur logical design 
between the systems analyst and the user organization. Although referred to by such other names as hierarchical 
design or sys- tematic design, most of the variations of top-down design have the same objective: to 
identify the major functions to be accomplished and then proceed to the identification of the lesser 
functions that derive from tl major ones. This functional decomposition results in hierarchy charts o~ 
the system that should be discussed, in detail, with the user organiza- tion. As the top-down design 
process proceeds from the identification oJ the major functions and their interfaces to the breaking 
down of these functions into successively smaller ones, each sublevel becomes a self- contained component 
whose operation is subordinate to the next higher level. Top-down design facilitates the clarity of 
communication between data processing and user organizations by producing graphic presentations of the 
new system that can be understood by and discussed with users. It results in the construction of a modular, 
hierarchical system and it is the isolation-by-function feature that can be used to great advantage to 
decompose, with the user, the logical structure of the system. Due to this functional modularity, the 
scope of needed changes can readily be ascertained, and the changes made and tested with a minimum of 
effort. Perhaps the most important element contributing to the success of top-down design is its formal 
approach to the specification of each module's inputs, functions, and outputs. A precise definition of 
user requirements is essential to the development of a correct system or program. Too fre- quently, the 
contents of specification packages are vague, inaccurate, and incomplete, resulting in the developed 
system possessing these same charac- teristics. It is for this reason that several serious attempts to 
for- malize the steps of top-down design have been made. If a structured approach is being followed 
by the analyst, he can use data flow diagrams, a data dictionary, data structure diagrams, and trans- 
form descriptions to define the logical description of the system. Deci- sion tables, decision trees, 
Warnier Bracket Diagrams, Nassi Schneiderman Charts, or Chapin Charts could be used to illustrate the 
logical processes and data transformations in the new system. Structured English or pseudo- code might 
be used by the systems analyst to describe policies and proce- dures in a precise form of English using 
the logical structures of struc- tured coding. One of the more widely known examples of a method to 
illustrate a system or software hierarchy is IBM's HIPO. HIPO is an acronym for Hierarchy plus Input, 
Process, and Output. It is one of several valid methods of graphically describing a software system or 
program as an arrangement of functions to be performed. HIPO provides both documen- tation and process 
visibility through its diagrams. Some of the major benefits claimed by some users of HIPO in the design 
phase are:  A description of system requirements represented in HIPO form is more easily understood 
by users than standard written specifications  The capability of specifying specifications through 
HIPO allows a user organization to graphically describe a system and its functions.  Users become acquainted 
with hierarchical design and the concept of "function" during specification development. This familiarity 
helps them to follow design walk-throughs and to understand their system more readily.  The hierarchy 
portion of HIPO involves a structure which is much like an inverted tree. This tree-like structure is 
comprised of functions, actions, and objects. Each function is represented as a box and can be described 
within that box by an action verb and by an object (the data which is affected). Each branch of the tree 
will have its subordinate branches; therefore, any element of the tree can easily be traced back to its 
root. The hierarchy of functions is created by a technique known as functional decomposition, wherein 
a function is exploded into increasingly lower levels of detail until all subfunctions have been defined. 
The top box of the hierarchy describes the entire system or program as a single function, and each lower 
level function is a subset of the function above. The top level functions contain the control logic which 
determines when and in what order lower level functions are to be invoked, and the lower level functions 
are where the coding statements are predominantly found. When the thoughts and ideas of the user and 
designer are not properly recorded, the results are inefficient use of time, implementation of am- biguous 
functions, and the creation of a system which does not adhere to its intended purpose. HIPO provides 
a means of more precisely defining user requirements and improving communication between the users and 
the data processing staff. The systems analyst should be willing and able to explain or demon- strate 
elements of the new system to the user organization. To improve communication, the analyst will often 
prepare, for the user, examples of system output displays and reports. The user can review and discuss 
these 89 tangible system outputs with the systems analyst rather than just narra- tive descriptions. 
The software engineers might also develop a prototy[ of the final system for the user organization. The 
prototype might have proposed visual and hard copy outputs derived from a test data base. O~ some projects, 
the prototype could be gradually refined by the systems analysts and software engineers into the final 
system. STRUCTURED PHYSICAL DESIGN AND TOP-DOWN IMPLEMENTATION During the Structured Physical Design 
phase, the logical design is used to produce detailed subsystem, data base, and program specificatiol 
The logical design is matched to the physical software and hardware enw ronment in which the system must 
operate. The communications challenge to translate the logical design specifications into physical design 
req, ments. At this point, also, there is substantial risk that the logical physical design translation 
can be flawed. Following the structured approach, hierarchy (HIPO) or structure charts would be used 
to delineate the software modules of the system. These charts show each module as a part of a hierarchy 
and identify inw cation, intermodular communication, and the location of major loops and decisions. An 
unresolved communications problem in the Physical Design phase is the role of the systems analyst relative 
to the software engin, This issue, as to which of the two professional groups performs the phy ical software 
design work of this phase, has become a controversial iss~ in the industry. Whichever group performs 
this translation function, there is a continuing need to communicate with the user organization and clearly 
define the physical software design requirements to the imple- menters of the system. During the Top-Down 
Implementation phase, the software modules de- fined in the physical design phase are coded and integrated 
into the framework of the ultimate system. Structured techniques have proven to be very effective in 
this phase of the system life cycle. The analysts and programmers, following the structured life cycle, 
would use such tech- niques as top down implementation, structured programming, chief pro- granmner teams, 
and structured walk throughs to code, program, and inte- grate the software. Communication requirements 
during top-down implementation relates to team organization and structured walk-throughs. Working with 
a software engineering team requires that the Chief Programmer, Team Leader, or Pro- ject Leader and 
the staff have effective oral and written communication. The technique of top-down expansion of functional 
specifications must be combined with the computer professional's perceptive analysis of the task to be 
programmed. Testing each level of a program before engaging in further programming will assure that the 
resultant program achieves the intent of the original specifications. Therefore, design and interface 
errors will not belatedly be discovered. Top-down program development, starts with the functional requirements 
of the program and develops the design downward with the lowest level modules being designed and coded 
last. The traditional development phases--design, code, unit test, and integration--are no longer sequential 
processes for the entire project but are concurrent and overlapped through- out the development cycle. 
A program unit is coded only after the module which invokes it has been completed. After an input routine 
is coded, it is then tested and integrated into the existing code, which, at the same time, design and 
coding may be in process on another routine. This approach enables the unit testing of an element of 
the system as soon as it is completed and can be of great value in isolating errors early in the development 
process and in reducing the time spent in correction. Structured walk-throughs can be used to improve 
the exchange of infor- mation among team members at various phases of a project. These are formal reviews, 
held at specific points throughout the development process. They are formal, with an agenda, and all 
participants are walked through the problem, program, or project. In the Top-Down Implementation phase, 
the purpose of a walk-through could be to insure correctness of a programs or module. A walk-through 
will be set up to determine the completion of a milestone event wherever possible. When complex subjects 
are to be ad- dressed, all participants should be provided working papers in advance. All attendees should 
be aware of what is expected of them and what is to be accomplished. The purpose of a structured walk-through 
is to determine if the design or coding is correct. If necessary, a separate meeting should be scheduled 
to discuss op- tions and alternatives directed toward improving a system or code. The person conducting 
the walk-through has the responsibility to keep the walk-through direct and effective. When alternative 
approaches that could improve the design or coding are identified, it is the responsibility of the Chief 
Programmer or the Team Leader to insure that a separate meeting is scheduled to investigate these alternative 
approaches. The backup for a project may be established by having backup personnel attend these walk-throughs. 
 Attendance at structured walk-throughs will vary depending upon the specific subject being discussed. 
Users may have to attend meetings dis- cussing the system's functional capabilities. Management attendance 
may be required when information on subjects outside the jurisdiction of the team is required, or when 
the status of the project is to be reviewed. On projects that have been set up for structured testing, 
the test supervisor should attend appropriate walk-throughs. The programmers on a software development 
team may have to communicate and interact with a Librarian who manages the written and machine documenta- 
tion of a software development effort. The Librarian maintains a support library for a team effort. The 
programmer will usually enter modifica- tions to programs and will initiate compilations after the first 
one. Unit testing will always be directed, and normally accomplished by the programmer. The Librarian 
catalogs all formal changes to the contents of the library. No version of a program or document can be 
entered or deleteq from the library without the Librarian. Usually an initial entry of p~ gram and changes 
is made by the Librarian. Programs for system testin~ and integration are provided from the library. 
Prior to the performan, of a test, the Librarian selects the program requested from the librar~ and transfers 
the responsibility for it to the Test Director. When a is completed, the Librarian will, as directed 
by the Test Director, idq tify and/or store, in the appropriate form, the versions of the prograt tested. 
A catalog or index of the library contents is maintained by the Librarian. Each document or program entered 
or deleted will be recordq to include the date, action, and if appropriate, the authority of the action. 
The Librarian will usually initiate the first compilation of program. Subsequently the Librarian will, 
when requested, initiate ful ther compilations and test programs. These may be done by the Librari~ only 
if sufficient instruction and test data are available. In summary, during the Physical Design and Top-Down 
Implementatiot phases, there is a need for the systems analysts and software engineer~ communicate between 
themselves, with user organizations, and as member~ development teams. Top-Down Implementation encourages 
team developmen! efforts and structured walk-throughs which in turn require effective 94 inter-personal 
cormnunication. Chief Prograrmuer Teams have Librarians who are responsible for the external (written) 
and internal (machine) documen- tation of a software project. ACCEPTANCE TEST GENERATION PHASE, QUALITY 
ASSURANCE PHASE, AND SYSTEM OPERATION The structured systems life cycle provides for an Acceptance Test 
Generation Phase and a Quality Assurance Phase. During the Acceptance Test Generation Phase, test specifications 
and test cases are developed. During the Quality Assurance Phase, acceptance tests are performed using 
the test cases and users are trained to operate the new system. Struc-tured testing techniques would 
be used during the quality assurance test-ing of the system and, therefore, each level of the system 
will be tested to assure that the new system satisfies the acceptance test specifications and that design 
and interface errors are not discovered after the system becomes operational. When a new system is installed, 
there is often a major change in the environment of the organization. The employees may have different 
job functions or be separated from co-workers. Work formerly performed by the employee may now be automatically 
produced by the computer system. This may be a report that was formally manually prepared but that now 
is com- puter produced. This in turn may cause a feeling of loss of importance in the worker. The worker 
may discover that his contribution to the end 95 product of the system is no longer very visible and 
they therefore may have less interest in the end product. The unhappy employee may express his or her 
hostility by deliberately reducing work efficiency or making system errors. Job security fears may 
also arise. The workers may fear that the ne~ system will displace them. If the workers have not been 
involved in the development of the new system, they may regard it as an undesirable ex- ternal force. 
Fears may be overcome if the analyst involves end users in the development of the system, asks them to 
contribute ideas during syste~ development, and provides them with adequate pre-operation training. 
Employees may be reluctant to learn new computer related jobs and overtly upset the system. This reluctance 
may stem from feelings of personal inadequacy. They may fear complexities in their new job role. The 
analyst should try to overcome early signs of resistance before it hardens. He should try to develop 
good working relationships with the users and stress the benefits of the new system. At some point, trust 
between the user and the analyst should be established. Even if the user and data processing staff interact 
well during the development and design of the system, they may fail to consider the cleri- cal staff 
that will operate the system. A system which is designed with- out consideration for the clerical staff 
that will use it, is likely to result in a system that will be difficult for them to use. The effect 
new procedures will have on the clerical staff must be considered. Work must remain challenging to 
the clerks and they must feel they are constructively contributing to the system or otherwise boredom 
will set in, there will be many careless errors, or they many sabotage the system. Often, the effect 
 of a new system on office attitudes is not considered. The testing of computer programs and systems 
prior to implementation should be a formal process in which the input is well defined and the expected 
results are known, Effective testing also has the characteristic of enabling the quick isolation of errors 
when they are encountered and should be an orderly and well planned process. The Test Plan should indi- 
cate who will perform the test, the environment of the test, the input descriptions, the output requirements, 
and the test process. These items should be addressed in sufficient detail to provide understanding. 
 Testing discipline should be used to insure that there is an orderly, step by step process of testing. 
This involves the identification of a supervisor, the establishment of a specific order of test, and 
the method of keeping track of progress. Using top-down development, programs and/or modules will be 
created in the sequence in which they are to operate. A level of detail of the Test Plan should be set 
so that an orderly sequen- tial test can be defined and tracked through the testing process. The Chief 
Programmer, Team Leader, or Project Leader will construct this chart. A program/module to be tested may 
range from a single module of one page of coding to a major part of a full system of several thousand 
lines of 97 code. The System Operation phase begins after the system has been fully tested, user personnel 
have been trained, and conversion has been success- fully completed. CONCLUSION The computer professional 
needs various communication skills to pro- perly implement integrated information systems. These skills 
are often overlooked in conventional educational programs for computer professionals. During the Requirements 
Analysis effort, interviewing techniques must be improved to better define user needs. Rapport with the 
user organiza- tion must also be established to develop a cooperative working relationship~ During the 
Logical Design phase, a communications problem exists in trying to effectively translate the user requirements 
into logical design func- tions. Top-down design promotes communication by using graphic displays of 
the hierarchy of a system. During Physical Design, problems may exist between the systems analysts and 
software engineers who often fail to agree upon the boundaries of their work domains. The development 
of soft- ware during Top-Down Implementation requires effective inter-personal communication for team 
operation and structured walk-throughs. Finally, during Acceptance Test Generation, Quality Assurance, 
and System Operation, the analyst must calm user fears of the new system and overcome any resistance 
to change. Usually, the computer professional requires numerous inter-personal communication skills during 
the develop- ment of major integrated information systems. 98 Norman En~er~ Ph.D.s C.D.P. Norman Enger 
is the President of Applied Management Systems, Inc., an international consulting company serving a variety 
of industrial, institutional, government, and scientific clients. The company's activities have included 
the design and installation of large tele- communications networks, the design and implementation of 
numerous com- puter applications, the design of data base systems, the education of data processing personnel 
and the development of complex simulation models. Prior to founding Applied Management Systems, Inc., 
in 1970, he was a Director of Systems for the Control Data Corporation. He is a frequent speaker before 
the ACM, DPMA, and other profes- sional groups on the design and implementation of computer based information 
systems. His latest book, Computer Security: A Management Audit Approach was published by the American 
Management Association in 1980. He is the author of four other books and a large number of pro- fessional 
articles. Since 1967, he has been an Adjunct Professor of Information and Management Sciences, School 
of Government and Business Administration, The American University. In 1979, he was presented with the 
Distinguished Adjunct Faculty Award by the American University's Center For Technology and Administration. 
 A Certified EDP Auditor (CDPA) and a Certified Data Processor (CDP), he is a member of the Association 
for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). 99 
 
			