
 Complete Algorithms for Reorienting Polyhedral Parts using a Pivoting Gripper Anil Rae* David Kriegmant 
Ken Goldbergl Utrecht University Yale University Usc 1 Introduction Achieving a desired spatial configuration 
of a part is a funda­ mental issue in robotics. In industrial applications, a famil­ iar task is that 
of feeding parts: bringing parts into a desired position and orientation (pose). To rapidly feed a stream 
of industrial parts arriving on a conveyor belt, the vision-based system proposed by Carlisle et. al. 
[1] uses a SCARA-type arm with only 4 DoF (three translator and one rotatory) due to cost, accuracy, 
and speed requirements. However, such arms can only reorient parts about the vertical axis due to kinematic 
limitations (see Fig. 1). Contact between apart and a supporting plane only occurs along its convex 
hull. When rotations and translations in the plane are ignored, the part generally assumes one of a finite 
number of stable configurations [3]. In this communication, we will consider computing a sequence of 
pivoting actions that will move a polyhedral part with n faces from an initial stable configuration S 
to a final stable configuration f. The decision question is whether or not a single pivot action can 
accomplish this task: we give a O(rt log n) time solution. It may not be possible to move the part between 
an arbi­ trary pair of stable configurations in a single pivot action; in general a sequence of pick-pivot-place 
operations may be necessary. Therefore, we consider computing the complete graph of possible transitions 
and give an algorithm that runs in O (m2 n log n) time, m being the number of stable configu­ rations. 
A path through this transition graph represents a plan which moves the part from some initial to final 
configuration. The algorithm is complete in that whenever a path of pivot Department of Computer Science. 
Rao is supported by the ESPRIT Ba­ sic Research Action No. 6546 (Project PRoMotion). ani l@cs . ruu. 
nl bepnrtment of Electrical Engineering. Kriegman was supported in part by an NSF Young Investigator 
Award IRI-9257990. kriegrnan@yale . edu department of Computer Science. Goldberg is supported by NSF 
Young Investigator Award IRI-9457523 and IRI-9123747 and by Adept Technology, Inc. goldberg@usc . edu 
 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are 
not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
of Computing Machinery,To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
1Ith Computational Geometry, Vancouver, B.C. Canada G 1995 ACM 0-89791 -724 -3/95/0006 ...$3.50 \ Figure 
1: The pivoting gripper mounted on a SCARA arm. actions exists, each conforming with the gripper accessibil­ity 
and friction constraints, it will be found. See the complete paper [4] for the details which also includes 
a generalization that considers capture regions around stable configurations.  2 Problem Statement We 
assume (i) The worktable is a flat plane orthogonal to gravity at a known height; (ii) The parallel-jaw 
gripper is able to translate with 3 DoF and to rotate about the gravity vector; (iii) The gripper has 
a passive degree of freedom a pivot axis, parallel to the support plane joining the two points of contact; 
and iv The gripper makes two hard contact with the part point contacts with friction which offers no 
static resistance to rotation about the pivot axis. Fig. 1 shows the robot work cell. The input to the 
algo­rithm is: A polyhedral part T stored as a boundary represen­tation (B-rep), its center of gravity, 
c, which is taken to be the origin of the coordinate system used to define the B-rep, and c 22 1. Determine 
the half-plane A of grasp axes which will successfully pivot P according to Eq. (2) and the direc- Final 
 a tion of the grasp axis ii from Eq. (1). Con fig 2. Compute the intersection of A with IJ which yields 
a Init. collection of intersection polygons P in the grasp plane. Config. \ 3. In the direction ~ within 
the grasp plane, compute the 1.2 upper U and lower C envelope of the polygon(s) P. The importance of 
points on these envelopes is that they 4 are accessible to a gripper linearly approaching the part JE!l 
along the grasp axis. 4. For each edge of U U L whose corresponding face has ooo surface normal n, determine 
if the face can be grasped by a point contact with friction in the direction ii accord­ 5 ing to: Ilii 
. nll < cos a. Here a is the ,friction angle &#38;i!!2 d&#38;ii  d!i3!2d2!iia2 computed from tan (a) 
= ~~t at iC. 5. Merge the two sorted envelopes U and L into a set A = UA%where each A, is a closed interval 
of A. Associated 6 with each interval is the pair of functions u(~) and 1(A) which return the grasp points. 
0.9 o 1.2 LIIL L!!3L U!I!k2 a 6. If A # 0, create an arc in the transition graph between .4 and f. The 
complexity of the algorithm is dominated by the con-Figure 2: The partial matrix of transitions for the 
part with six struction of the envelopes which takes O(rz log n) time per stable configurations. Cell 
(i, j) indicates the family of ac-iteration [2]; the rest of the steps have linear complex­cessible pivot 
grasps that will move configuration i to config-ity, Since there are 0(m,2 ) pairs of stable configurations, 
.. .. uratlon j; the optimal grasp (requumg muumal ~~tatiC ) from the complexity of constructing the 
entire transition graph is among this family is shown as a pair of disks. Numbers in 0(m2n log n). For 
star-shaped (wrt the center of gravity) the upper right-hand-corner of each cell indicate the minimal 
polyhedra, this reduces to O(m2n) because the intersections required coefficient of friction. computed 
in Step 2 will each consist of a single sku-shaped polygon. Implementation: The algorithm for planning 
pivot ac­ the coefficient of static friction ~~tatic. tions was implemented in the Symbolic Computing 
System The output is a transition graph whose nodes are the sta-Maple V. The choice of Maple was made 
because several ble configurations, or faces F, of the convex hull. The arcs primitive geometric tests 
and computations are built in with between nodes describe points on the part corresponding to Maple s 
geom3d package. As an example, consider Fig. 2. grasp axes that will rotate the part from one stable 
face to an-The part has n = 11, m = 6. The entire transition graph, a other. fourth of which is shown 
in the figure, was cc)mputed in 28 3 Computing the Transition Graph seconds on a Silicon Graphics workstation 
(R4400 processor First compute the convex hull H for the polyhedron 7. A running at 150 MHz, 96.5 SPECfp92, 
90.4 SPECint92). face of H is stable when the projection of the center of gravity References in the normal 
direction onto the face lies within the face; the stable faces become the nodes of the transition graph. 
For [1] B. Carlisle, K. Y. Goldberg, A. S. Rae, and J, Wiegley. A every ordered pair of stable faces 
of 74, whose normals are pivoting gripper for feeding industrial parts. In Intl. Con$ on given by Q and 
~, determine the s~t of grasp points (if there Robotics and Automaton, pages 1650-1655. IEEE, May 1994. 
are any) that will pivot the part to f as described below. The [2] J. Hershberger. Finding the upper 
envelope of n line segmentsdirection of the grasp axis is given by: . in O(n log n) time. hjhrn. Process. 
Lett., 33: 169 174, 1989. Gxf g.. (1) [3] D. J. Kriegman. Computing stable poses of piecewise smooth 
16x fl A objects. CVGIP: Image Understanding, 55(2), March 1992. Note: ii is undefined when &#38; and 
f are parallel or anti­ [4] A. Rae, D. Kriegman, and K. Goldberg. Complete algorithmsparallel. In these 
cases, precise pivot actions are unneces­ for reorienting polyhedral parts using a pivoting gripper. 
Tech­sary or impossible. The parametric equation of the family of nical Report UU-CS-1994-49, Utrecht 
University, 1994. Sub­grasp axes indexed by A is: mitted to the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and A utomation. 
a~(t) = t~ Af, (2) Available by anonymous ftp from f tp. cs . ruu. nl where A > 0 can be interpreted 
as the distance from the cen­ /pub/RUU/CS/ techreps/CS-1994 /1994 -49. ps. gz. ter of gravity to the 
axis. Thus, the grasp axis must lie in the half-plane, A, spanned by &#38; and $. n o<  
			