
 COMPUTER USER COOPERATIVES: PROVIDING USER SERVICES TO GROWER-PRODUCERS L. Edward White Benjamin G. 
Mullinix Rural Development Center P.O. Box 1209 Tifton, Georgia 31794 (912) 386-3420 The type of computer 
used largely determined the capability of the user before the advent of integrated circuit computers 
of the early sixties. Until then, most substantial computer complexes required a vast housing facility 
needing huge cooling capacity. The large-scale integrated-circuit computers of the late sixties made 
available a new technology called time-sharing which permitted for the first time use of large numbers 
of interactive terminals. Computer technology during this period was developed in conjunction with the 
needs of the space and military research projects. Changes occurred in software technology during the 
same period which enabled users to utilize the computer more to their advantage. This was due in part 
to the development of easy-to-use languages with simple commands expressed in common English. The greatest 
breakthrough in technology came when software was married to the hardware to produce a virtual-memory 
environment enhancing both storage and processing capabilities. Among the first uses of the computer 
by business was to accumulate historical data for tax purposes and keep customer accounts up-to-date. 
Perhaps the first direct use of the computer in agriculture was the maintenance of data bases involving 
milk production records of dairy cattle in New York. These data bases were used to obtain 9. enetic effects 
of sires and dams on milk production which resulted in succeeding daughters being able to produce more 
milk than did their mothers. Computer technology made little headway in the agricultural community as 
compared to the advances made in areas such as government, business, research, and the space program 
until the late sixties. This is when the universities really discovered the tremendous power computers 
had in solving problems and it paved the way for the computer to enter into the agricultural community. 
Most of the universities had the hardware in hand making it possible to adapt to the new technologies 
as they emerged. One new technology allowed use of interactive terminals situated at sites long distances 
from the computer making it easy to take the computer to the grower-producer (i.e., farmer). The computer 
was at their fingertips. The problem was the software used to make the computer work for these new users 
so they too could benefit just as the universities had years earlier. The generating of new software 
could not keep pace with the users' needs which delayed efforts to take the computer to the grower-producer; 
yet despite this, they were ready to invest in this new technology. Two steps were taken to keep these 
new users interested in the computer. First was the delivery of up-to-date market and futures information 
from the commodity exchanges who had been delivering this to their clientele. The university being among 
their clientele made it easy to funnel the commodity information to these users. Second was the fact 
that &#38;#169;1981 ACM 0-89791-054-0 80/0010/0055 $.75 see page ii this terminal acts much like a teletype 
machine in a newspaper office so weather information consisting of yesterday's weather around the state, 
today's forecast, and severe weather advisories could be quickly disseminated to the users. Nebraska 
was among the first states to send weather warnings via the terminal due to its extreme importance to 
the grower-producer. Weather and commodity data helped to quickly establish their AGNET computer nework 
giving the university a vehicle for dissemination of services for their users. Several other states, 
including California, Indiana, Texas, Virginia, Minnesota, and Kentucky, have initiated computer networks 
to deliver services also. During the seventies, entrepreneurs ventured into supplying agricultural application 
software. The majority of them came from the universities where a collection of programs was developed 
by a professor to aid him in conducting his research as well as advising others including grower-producers 
on how to do something more efficiently. They were encouraged because users were willing to pay. One 
such professor is Dr. Ted Nelson of Oklahoma State University who has developed several programs that 
run on various configurations of the microcomputer, Radio Shack's TRS-80, and any other microcomputers 
that are similar to this one. Material sent by Dr. Nelson on request gives hints on what items to purchase 
with the microcomputer to make it capable of executing his programs. Every effort is made to insure that 
the user receives a copy of the program in form designed for his microcomputer. The programs are sold 
on contract by Oklahoma State University. Another professor who has developed several programs is Dr. 
Earl Fuller of the University of Minnesota. His programs are designed to run on Apple II and Apple II 
plus microcomputers. He provides whatever assistance he can to help the first-time user get started using 
these programs. As with Dr. Nelson, the programs are the property of the university and first priority 
concerning assistance is given to the grower-producer. Another source of entrepreneurs was computer-oriented 
resource personnel associated with the space and military research projects of the past. This source 
is expected to provide the majority of entrepreneurs in the next few years. These people process the 
knowledge of what the computer is capable of doing, what the new technology will be like, and the education 
to communicate with agricultural professionals. One of these well-known persons, William Norris, is the 
board chairman and founder of Control Data Corporation. He personally committed a portion of the company's 
resources to make this new technology available to the family farm. On 1200 acres of land near Minneapolis, 
ten families are living on farms a small as eighty acres and as large as one hundred twenty acres. During 
the duration of the project, which is set for ten years, these families are to farm according to recommendations 
of the Extension Service and show that the small family farm is alive and well. His motivation stems 
from the struggle his parents had during the depression on their Nebraska farm. His philosophy embraces 
the concept that the university is defending the existence of the family farm and these ten families 
are to make use of every service Extension has to offer. He also believes that his company has a chance 
to profit if the company addresses the needs of society and solves problems with the technology it already 
possesses plus any other technologies it can obtain. Another project of his is Rural Ventures, Inc., 
which supplies computerized assistance to small farmers who contract with them. They offer services to 
a group of grower-producers who pay accorkin9 to their ability. Critics claim that Mr. Norris has interfered 
in Extension's responsibility to provide assistance to the small farmer, has changed goals set by the 
university with respect to small family operations and has done the entire venture for the purpose of 
receiving free publicity at the expense of the taxpayers. His rebuttal remarks include the fact that 
his parents lost their farm because the state was not in a position to help and that to date (1980) the 
firm has yet to turn one cent profit despite the fact that millions have been invested including the 
millions given to various universities for research into ways to save the family farm from ruin. If these 
ventures work, then the company will prosper because someone has to supply the computer resources needed 
for all the new users. He discovered that most current computer delivery systems serving grower-producers 
are centered around a large mainframe which supports many interactive terminals employing another new 
technology called time-sharing distributed processing. In the last five years, these large computer systems 
as well as their users have been beset by a variety of problems. One is phone service because, in various 
parts of the country, there are as many as one hundred telephone companies operating at different levels 
of sophistication. Another is rising operating expenses associated with the need for both experienced 
personnel and new equipment to meet increasing needs. Users who dial into the computer are facing ever 
increasing phone charges as well. As a result, computer firms manufacturing smaller computers have offered 
decentralized systems designed so users can dial into them thus incurring less phone charges. Consultants 
have helped by assembling systems designed to utilize both dial-up and local (stand-alone) capabilities. 
The current trend in technology seems to be heading in two directions: small but powerful computers, 
and efficient storage devices that behave like computer memory. Grower-producers in Kentucky can get 
a terminal with a phone modem to deal into the computer for less than two thousand dollars. For under 
four thousand dollars, they can get an intelligent computer terminal for use as either a terminal or 
computer. A sophisticated minicomputer with all the features of the large computer including the capability 
to dial into it can be obtained by a group of grower-producers for under twenty thousand dollars. This 
minicomputer is being tested as to its capability to receive a down-loaded program from the larger computer 
that is ready to be used once the transfer is completed. The three sizes of computers just described 
are becoming specialized in their assigned tasks. The large computer is a logical place to develop needed 
programs from research, storage of historical data, and the central distribution point for new products; 
the minicomputer, to run programs too large for personal computers, intermediate storage of historical 
data, and a message center so members can communicate quickly with others concerning recommendations 
and common problems; and the personal computer, to store recently-acquired historical data, to make immediate 
decisions concerning the farming enterprise, and the capability to do things at home without the aid 
of a larger computer. Hardware technology would be useless if there were not a way for it to benefit 
the potential user. This type of technology is called software, which provides users with such capabilities 
as dialing into the large computer, running a program on current data which aids in making a decision, 
logging practices used to make a crop grow and money spent during the course of growing that crop, determining 
appropriate methods to purchase new equipment, and how to market the harvest crop. The possibilities 
are seemingly endless in the future of agriculture-related software making the computer capable of doing 
vamous tasks. This development will come about as the grower-producer demands more from his computer 
terminal, the ag consultant utilizing the computer to assist in accomplishing his work more efficiently 
and the computer expert coming into contact with both where the exchange of ideas results in the computer 
becoming as important a tool as the tractor. Areas where work has already been done are business programs 
(bookkeeping functions) which summarize crop and financial data; weather data banks which disseminate 
current and future weather patterns so field work can be planned days in advance; dissemination of current 
market information concerning different commodities including future trends in the market; and aids in 
determining appropriate equipment size, feed I'ations for livestock, method of payment, depreciation 
schedules for tax purposes, requirements for a crop at seme stage of development to achieve the best 
quality at harvest, and marketing the crop for the highest price. Since time is a critical factor in 
insect scouting, it has become comput:erized and is employed in California, Texas, the Mississippi River 
Delta area, and Nebraska to mention a few. Organization of users into groups for the purposes of obtaining 
services from the computer has undergone considerable changes in the past twenty years. The first attempts 
to offer computer services were made by the university, where the user was located and educated on the 
use of this technology to his advantage. At first, the grower-producer was enamored by what he could 
do from the Extension Agent's office or his farm, but soon the newness wore off and the university had 
to provide additional services to keep his interest alive. What happened was that these services were 
designed to get the user hooked on wanting to use the computer more, but the user was not interested 
in what was being offered. More services were offered until a service was provided which suited him and 
he was truly hooked. This situation brought about a new problem: Instead of the university being under 
pressure to get him interested in using the computer, the user had gained enough knowledge to want more 
things because he knew instinctively that the computer could do it. Now the university had to respond 
or the user might be tempted to go elsewhere for services. It was this situation that the enterprise 
of providing computer services to the grower-producer began to flourish because the user was willing 
to provide the needed support to develop what he needed and encourage others in using the available services. 
Through necessity, users formed groups to pool resources allowing them to afford sophisticated equipment 
and someone to operate it. This need has encouraged groups to form that are as different as night and 
day. The type of group formed depends upon the environment existing at the time between the grower-producers 
and provider of the computer services. California users were willing to pay for needed services, so they 
formed oraganizations which hired scouts and provided money to the Extension Service for use of the computer 
and university to develop and test much-needed programs using their lands to conduct the necessary research. 
Through their invested resources, these users have scouts or Extension agents come to their fields to 
assess crop conditions and make recommendations on the site by using a poratable terminal with a car 
phone. In Texas, several Extension centers were placed across the state staffed with specialists and 
equipped with terminals so recommendations can be made using the computer in control of insects on crops 
or maintenance of livestock on pastures. A call to the nearest office by the specialist gives him access 
to the computer so scouting data can be processed and recommendations made. In the Mississippi River 
Delta region, private scouting firms are flourishing with the aid of a computer to assist the scout with 
his client's fields and a portable terminal to quickly obtain recommendations since time is of the essence. 
Some of the clients wishing to save the cost of a scout are encouraged to purchase their terminals and 
obtain recommendations from their own scouting reports on what action to take. Current practices in computer-delivered 
services vary widely. The University of Kentucky is currently experimenting with a project called Green 
Thumb where the grower-producers of two counties use the computer via terminals. These two counties were 
selected because the basic crops grown are different. Initially provided were up-to-date market and futures 
information from the commodity exchanges and current weather forecast because both were readily obtainable. 
As other programs became available, they were released for use. Their latest report indicates that over 
half of the use centered on market and weather information. Monthly data indicates that during certain 
months weather data becomes the most used service. For instance, Shelby County grower-producers who grow 
hay for dairy and horse operations use the weather during the haying season; while in Todd County where 
row crops are grown, the harvest months result in greater dependence on the weather. Other indications 
from the project coordinators are that grower-producer in other counties are purchasing computer terminals 
because the word is out that the computer has helped. What the coordinators see is that having the computer 
down on the farm has changed the operation a lot. One of the recent benefits discovered is that the County 
Extension Agent can alert all the the grower-producers via the county message facility on the computer 
to protect their crops against a potential pest. The influx of computer terminals into the agricultural 
community of Kentucky has resulted in the recent promotion of computer services by outside firms. Among 
these are Elanco Chemicals' promotion of PRO-FARM of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Radio Shack's promotion of VISICALC 
and other software packages, and many more. In Indiana, Purdue University has been providing computer 
services from Control Data's AGSERV to grower-producers who could afford to pay for the service. Kellogg's 
has been providing free service to farmers growing corn under contract with them. Purdue recently entered 
into direct competition with AGSERV by providing computer services through Extension, but AGSERV can 
continue to use the computer resources of Purdue. Other states have contracted with Purdue to provide 
their own grower-producers access to computer services. Virginia offers computer services to its grower-producers 
and recently has entered onto contracts with neighboring states. The University of Minnesota has been 
offering to its grower-producers programs developed under contracts with Control Data Corporation for 
use on mini-and microcomputers as an alternative to the practice of dialing into a central computer because 
of spiraling phone charges. This service has brought unexpected dividends in that CENEX, the farmer-owned 
cooperative, has emerged as a provider of computer services to member co-ops whenever the grower-producers 
of a particular local co-op form a computer cooperative. The help that CENEX provides includes an agronomist 
and, if the cooperative can afford one, a person to operate the computer. The Production Credit Associations 
(PCA's) working with the Federal Land Bank of the North Central Region in St. Paul throu.gh an organization 
called AG.~IFAX have started to offer computer services to their members in an effort to make them more 
efficient resource managers. The effort first started with the seventh district Federal Land Bank and 
spread to other districts located throughout the heavy agricultural areas. Much to the surprise of the 
various Federal Land Bank districts including the one in our area at Columbia, South Carolina, only the 
seventh district has had any success with this venture and the other districts have discontinued this 
service but direct PCA members of the seventh district. The cost of the service is quite high for an 
individual when local PCA but it is very reasonable per individual when individuals collectively contract 
through their local PCA. The average charge per grower-producer through his local PCA is about two hundred 
per year. Currently, forty-six PCA's in the seventh district are using AGRIFAX and within another year 
all the PCA's will be involved. More than one hundred PCA's outside the district have contracted for 
this service and this number is expected to double by 1985. The responsibility of the local PCA wishing 
to utilize AGRIFAX is to provide personnel and equipment to generate a file of transactions to be processed 
so high-speed transmission of the data by phone can be accomplished. Most local PCA's have purchased 
minicomputers which can provide all the necessary functions required by AGRIFAX. Costs are kept to a 
minimum through the use of this equipment for everyone. AGRIFAX services include depreciation scheduling 
(most popular), itemized bookkeeping of farm-related expenditures written against the farm account and 
tagged to individual crops, loan amortization schedules, lease-purchase comparisons, income tax itemizations 
and profit calculations by each crop or the enterprise as a whole. All of these services affect the grower-producer's 
ability to get credit financing to purchase materials needed to grow crops and pay back the borrowed 
money. With the cost of money so high, local PCA's are moving toward a policy of loaning only to members 
who keep itemized records. Utilizing the computer service not only helps him to manage his resources 
but gives him an idea of how much it actually costs to grow a crop. The PCA policy began with the PCA's 
located in the northern agricultural region but has steadily gained support from PCA's located in the 
southern agricultural region as well. Recent surveys of successful Georgia grower-producers show they 
not only manage their resources but run the farm as a business enterprise rather than as has been done 
in the past. Today it is rare to find a grower-producer who can finance his own operation so the computer 
can help him to keep the cost of money down and be able to use borrowed money more wisely. Nebraska's 
AGNET computer delivery service is probably the most used in the whole country in that many states contract 
services for their grower-producers; while in other states, individuals obtain contracts. The service 
was orginally designed to help the Extension agent work with the grower-producer at the agent's office. 
After the first few sessions, many of the grower-producers obtained their own terminals so the work with 
the agent could be done on the farm. Some users have even installed the necessary equipment around the 
farm so terminals can be used out in the field. Programs currently available include insect scouting 
(grasshoppers), irrigation scheduling for corn, weather advisories concerning winter's cold nights or 
summer's hot days so stress on the livestock industry can be minimized as well as feed rations during 
these stressful periods, up-to-date news about the county or state, calculating costs of installing irrigation 
equipment, appropriate equipment size for the type of farming operation, and nourishing meals the homemaker 
can prepare for her family based on budget needs or ages of family members. To keep their users informed, 
a newsletter is issued monthly describing either a new or existing progrm plus any other news of interest. 
AGNET is now a regional project involving five states. The message system is expected to become the most 
popular feature in AGNET because it is geared to provide for either countywide, statewide, or nationwide 
distribution as needed by the sender. The insect scouting program is expected to get a severe testing 
this year because grasshoppers are predicted to be as much or more of a problem than they were last year. 
Critical timing in controlling these pests is paramount because any delay could result in irreparable 
damage to both crops and pastures. In the South, many uses of the computer have been made. With the exception 
of insect scouting, all other applications on the computer either originated in the corn belt, Great 
Plains, or California. Insect scouting with the aid of a computer originated in the Mississippi River 
Delta region, Texas, and California at about the same time. Transfer of scouting technology from cotton 
to other crops was first practiced in California and spread to the southeastern states. Alabama and Kentucky 
are far in the lead among the southeastern due to the combined efforts of both the university and local 
farm organizations in encouraging local 60 groups to organize so the computer and its capabilties can 
be used efficiently. In Kentucky, the Green Thumb project and related efforts of the Extension Service 
have encouraged grower-producers to unite into small groups of between fifty and one hundred to pool 
their resources to purchase minicomputers and encourage each individual to purchase his own computer 
terminal. In Alabama, the effort was initiated by the Farm Business Associations of the state and has 
since been encouraged by the offering of expertise fron Auburn University. Advertisements playing up 
the advantages of forming a computer cooperative appear In local newspapers that are read by grower-producers. 
Numerous articles appear in various publications such as Southeastern Farm Press and Progressive Farmer 
which document the successes of grower-producers since acquiring the use of a computer. An Alabama Extension 
swine specialist is at the leading edge of computer application technology in his work with swine producers 
of Southeast Alabama. Through his efforts, programs were obtained which calculate the best feed ration 
for pigs as they grow bigger and older. The local producers learned how to write their own pig inventory 
program which allows the producer to keep track of each pig and how well he has done from birth to market. 
The most used part of this program is the sow inventories which indicate how well each sow does with 
each farrowing and how the weaned pigs do at market. Through this record keeping system, the producers 
have been able to cull their herds, decrease overall expenses per marketed pound of pig and show more 
profit at the end. The dairy producers of Eastern Alabama are taking note of the successes that one of 
their number has experienced since acquiring his computer terminal. This producer, with the help of the 
local Alabama Extension dairy specialist, has harnessed the computer literally to the dairy cow. The 
belt worn by each cow has a device that, in response to the needs of the cow, triggers the computer terminal 
to issue a command to feed her. By keeping detailed records on each cow, he has been able to sense her 
nutritional needs by how much grain is consumed each day. The real payoff comes because any drastic change 
in her habits alerts him to get the veterinarian over to examine her. The savings alone from catching 
cows at the beginning of an illness have paid for the terminals many times. But the appearance of the 
computer on the farm has not been restricted to just a few states. Enterprising grower-producers in other 
states on reading or seeing the benefits from a computer-assisted farm operation are joining the growing 
list of farms that have been affected by what is called the greatest aid to mankind since the wheel. 
There is a dairy producer in McComb, Mississippi, who claims his computer is as important as the milk 
cows. He has a minicomputer complete with a package of business programs which assists him daily in the 
operation of his dairy farm. The increase in efficiency, faster culling of the dairy herd, and detailed 
milk production records have helped him make decisions increasing average daily milk production per cow 
to levels comparable to Wisconsin. This is a feat in itself for the climate of the South is known to 
produce adverse stress effects on dairy cattle. Another milk producer who is a beneficiary of the computer 
has his dairy farm near Demopolis, Alabama. The local PCA voted to contract with the seventh district 
Farm Land Bank in St. Paul, Minnesota, to provide access to the computer for their members. About one 
hundred local grower-producers have signed up to have the computer do their bookkeeping chores for them. 
They use the service known as AGRIFAX which provides different aspects of the farming enterprise much 
as an accountant would do for a small business. The dairy producer put his dairy operation on the computer, 
which significantly lowered time spent just manipulating numbers to indicate where he stood on profit 
and loss. The computer has given him more time to spend looking after his operation instead of doing 
paperwork. The reports he gets back from the computer have helped him make management decisions many 
times and every cent he 61 spends on the computer doing his farm records is an investment instead of 
a liability. The grower-producer in Alabama does not leave the computer world when he leaves his farm; 
he comes into direct contact with the computer when he markets his crop or livestock. Electronic marketing 
which started within the past few years to help the grower-producer get the best price he can has done 
wonders compared to the old way of marketing. The grower-producer, if he can afford it, does not have 
to leave his house to meet potential buyers whereas others go to the local headquarters to meet potential 
buyers. Part of the electronic marketing is accomplished by submitting messages to the terminal describing 
what you have to sell and the buyers make bids. The buyers and sellers are informed of each other's location, 
not their identity. This arrangement allows both parties to know how much to bid and if the bid is acceptable. 
The livestock auction arenas even have taken on a different look with television cameras so buyers anywhere 
can inspect the livestock for sale. Often what occurs is a buyer located at one place will purchase the 
livestock and ship them to another location. This allows a large number of buyers to come together without 
having to visit every auction held in his locale. The sellers agree that they fair far better when there 
are a large number of buyers present. Telemarketing. groups have formed within major commodity areas 
or geographic regions of the country. Cotton throughout Texas and Oklahoma is sold primarily through 
TELCOT located in Lubbock and as much as ninety-five percent of the crop is sold over the telemarketin9 
network. The advance of telecommunication capabilities in the past few years, communication satellites 
and fast reacting computers have made telemarketing not only a reality but a real bargain to the grower-producer 
in that he does not have to travel miles and miles to find a buyer. Many of the terminals used in telemarketing 
are equipped with buttons allowing the buyer, seller, and auctioneer to communicate with each other. 
Grower-producers in Georgia have been exposed only in a small way to the capability of the computer to 
assist them on the farm. Near Douglas, a computer cooperative began operation about a year ago. Local 
grower-producers through necessity banded together to afford a minicomputer to communicate with the various 
services offered in neighboring states. It is too early to tell if the venture will survive and reports 
indicate the principal use of the facility centers around information from the commodity exchanges. Ag 
Producers, a medium-sized cooperative, has recently begun providing members some services via the computer. 
At the present time, it is not known if the largest cooperative in Georgia, Gold Kist, is providing any 
services via the computer other than their poultry operations in the northern part of Georgia. They have 
initiated an advertising campaign to encourage their members to consult with their agronomists. The Extension 
Service has employed the computer in insect scouting of cotton and to some extent in soil analysis. The 
current practice is for the agent to contact professors at the university for access to the computer. 
Some of the agents as well as the professors have been using services from Virginia, Purdue, and AGNET. 
The Extension Service hopes to have a computer delivery service available within a few years for use 
in their day-to-day operations. The minicomputer and the microprocessor have seen their way into the 
hog farms of Southern Georgia where they are used to develop feed rations, control the environment in 
the enclosed lots where the hogs never see the ground from farrowing time till they are marketed. Grower-producers 
have taken on themselves to use the services currently available in other areas of the country to limited 
but steadily increasing extent. In one southwest Georgia county, the cotton grower-producers have pooled 
their resources to contract with a Memphis firm specializing in insect scouting where recommendations 
are made based on the computer analysis of the scouting 62 data. The main advantage is that it takes 
a few scouts to cover the county where in the past each grower-producer would have to either hire a scout 
or do his own scouting. The idea here comes from Texas where research showed that the insect problem 
usually is not restricted to just a farm but rather involves a large area and preliminary research in 
Georgia has indicated a similar pattern occurring. The vegetable canning industry centered in Southwest 
Georgia uses the terminal to relay crop conditions and insect scouting data to the canners' offices for 
recommendations concerning when to irrigate, to spray for pests, and schedule for optimum harvest. Follow-up 
research in Minnesota shows that the best use of the computer terminal is achieved when the users are 
associated with some common umbrella organization. CENEX found out that, without the aid of the local 
branch co-op, terminal use is inefficient or non-existent. The computer cooperatives made up of CENEX 
members are overseen by the officers of the branch co-op where they live. This arrangement provides expertise 
in handling financial problems but also provides quick access to CENEX experts to provide additional 
expertise since the officers are already trained to do this. AGNET is fostered by the land-grant univesities 
in the five-state region which assures access to needed expertise through their Extension agents. Another 
feature of AGNET is that the commands necrssary to use any of the programs are very easy to learn. All 
the programs are equipped with a "help" feature which is used to inform the user on how to use the program 
and each program prompts the user as to what to do next. The umbrella system environment making AGNET 
easy to use is a software product of IBM called CMS (Conversational Monitoring System). The members of 
local PCA's who use computer services benefit because not only do they learn how to manage their resources 
more efficiently but they actually, in the long run, will spend less in interest on borrowed capital. 
Where the grower-producer does not utilize any outside expertise to help him run his enterprise, interest 
costs are usually a significant portion of his total expenses, and payment of interest does not get one 
extra seed planted, one extra irrigation applied, or one extra acre to harvest. Even publishers of farming 
journals have entered the computer down on the farm business. The interest is that the grower-producer 
should be informed of what is available and what to do and not to do. This philosophy has led Successful 
Farming: The Magazine of Farm Management to institute a publication aimed at grower-producers who already 
own computers or are considering purchasing a computer to give them hints. The senior editors of the 
publication have working minicomputers in their possission and take a portable unit with them on their 
trips to various users or suppliers. It is hoped through this publication that the grower-producer will 
be able to make intelligent desisions concerning what computer to get or what software to purchase for 
his needs. The first issue which was distributed to potential readers for their inspection has three 
features that may very well become the best friend of the grower-producer. The first is the reader input 
section that allows individuals who own computers to communicate their own experiences, brief articles 
by the editors on their experiences with the suppliers of equipment and/or software and how to get the 
two to work together, and finally a want ad section which allows commercial enterprises to advertise 
their wares. The grower-producers should make use of this type of publication since many of them are 
not educated on what is actually required to make a piece of computer equipment or a software package 
work the way the seller advertises it works. Communication with one of the editors was enlightening in 
the fact that prior to initiating this publication, they had never had exposure to the computers used 
on farms of America. This position gives them a major advantage in that they can relate to the grower-producer 
in the dilemma he must face when purchasing a computer for his farm. Bibliography "AGRIFAX: Your Key 
to Modern Farm Business Management," published by Farm Credit Service of Federal Land Bank Association, 
St. Paul, Minnesota. Barney, Jerry. "Small Farming, Computer Style," Control Data Publication, Vol. 5 
(taken from CA Highlights, August 1979) Calley, Charlie. "'R2-D2' Down on the Farm," Control Data Publication, 
vol. 6 (taken from Green Mountain Farmer, January-February 1980). Chapman, Carol and Craig Infanger. 
"Taking Computers to Communities: New Developments in the South," Rural Development Research and Education. 
Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 4-5; Spring '78. Fairchild, Dean. CENEX, St. Paul, Minnesota; personal communication, 
1981. "Farm Computer News," Successful Farming. Meredith Corporation, Vol. 1, No. 1; May 1981. Fuller, 
Earl; Professor, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; personal communication, 1981. Gaeu, 
Dan; Coordinator, AGRIFAX, St. Paul, Minnesota. Personal communication, 1981. Gilger, Kristin. "Control 
Data Gets Initial Go-Ahead on Farm Project," Control Data Publication, Vol. 6 (taken from St. Cloud Times, 
February 8, 1980). Howell, Robert L.; Control Data Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Personal Communication 
(phone, October 1978; visit to Georgia Coastal Plain Experiment Station, seminar, February 1979). Kendrick, 
James and Thomas L. Thompson. "Agricultural Computer Network," Agricultural Engineering, Vol. 58, No. 
12, pp. 12-15; December 1977. Manning, Earl. "Computer is as Important as Milk Cows," ProgressiveFarmer, 
Vol. 95, No. 12, pp. 22-23; December 1980. McGrath, Dennis J. "Control Data is Hoping to Aid Small Farmer," 
Control Data Publication, Vol. 6 (taken from Minneapolis Tribune, March 23, t980). Murdakes, Jim; Vice 
President, Control Data Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota; speech presented to University Computer 
Network Services annual meeting, Jekyll Island, Georgia; October 1978. Nelson, Ted R. ; Professor, Oklahoma 
State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma; personal communication, 1981. Ragland, John and Paul Warner. 
"Green Thumb National Pilot Test: Its Results and Future;" paper presented to Science and Education Administration, 
USDA, Jefferson Auditorium, Washington, D.C.; May 6, 1981. Searle, S. R. "Methods of Estimating Variance 
Components From Unbalanced Data;" Chapter l0 of Linear Models. Wiley: New York, 1971. Schutz, Wilfred 
M.; Professor, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska; Administrator, AGNET; personal interview, 1981. 
Smith, Ron. "Computer Feeding Hikes Milk Production," Southeast Farm Press, Vol. 7, No. 14, pp. 52-52; 
April 2, 1980. Sommers, Chuck; Senior Editor, "Farm Computer News," Successful Farming. Des Moines, Iowa; 
personal communication, 1981. Speak, Carl. AGSERV, Control Minnesota: personal interview, 1980. Data 
Corporation; Minneapolis, Special Issue on September 1977. Microelectronics, Scientific American, Vol. 
237, No. 3; Staff. "Computers Aid Hog Farmers in Alabama," Vol. 8, No. 6, pp. 55-56; February 11, 1981. 
Southeast Farm Press, Staff. "Farm Business Association a Needed Service," Southeast Farm Press, p. 
2; January 21, 1981. Staff. "Farmers Cash in on Computer Records," Progressive Farmer, Vol. 93, No. 4, 
p. 72; April 1978. Staff. "More Irrigation and Computers Coming in '80s," Southeast Farm Press, Vol. 
8. No. 3, p. 23: January 21, 1981. Staff Report. "Electronic Marketing: It Works if You Want to Use It," 
Progressive Farmer, Vol 96, No. 3, pp. 25-29; March 1981. Stark, Alfred; Supervisor, AGNET, University 
of Nebraska; Lincoln, Nebraska; personal demonstration of AGNET; 1981. Vacroux, Andre G. "Microcomputers," 
Scientific American, Vol 232, No. 5, pp. 32-40; May 1975. Walden, Dwain. "Computer Aid in Irrigation 
Selection," Southeast Farm Press, Vol. 8, No. 11, p. 41; March 18, 1981. Warner, Paul; Professor, University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky; member of Green Thumb project; personal interview, 1981.
			