
 COMPUTER CENTER SUPPORT OF AN ACADEMIC LIBRARY Cary B. Abend Technical Support Supervisor, System Specialist 
Computer Information and Resource Center The George Washington University . 801 22nd St., NW, Suite B-106 
Washington, D.C., 20052 cary@gwisZcirc.gwu.edu Tel.: (202) 994-8278 Fax: (202) 994-0101 ABSTRACT Institutional 
libraries no longer view computers as items ofluxury. Many publications now am ve with CD-ROMs or are 
available on the Internet. Libraries find that supporting a myriad ofsystems now requires an entire staff 
structure. These internal departments may or may not comply with standards put out by other university 
departments. Some academic mission statements can place restrictions on computing that libraries mayfind 
dificult to follow. The George Washington University approaches this problem with a diflerent set of 
qualifications. The Computer Information and Resource Center (CIRC) considers communication the most 
important aspect. CIRC has placed its own staff in the Gelman Library, at the library s request, to manage 
and develop the computer systems. Several different organizational structures converge to form the Library 
s Technology Support Center (TSC): . CIRC Permanent Staff Library Permanent Staff . CIRC Wage Account 
Student Employees Library Wage Account Student Employees The CIRC Staff provides technical and systems 
expertise, while the Library staff provides institutional computing direction and design requests. Both 
organizations employ wage account students in the library to configure, maintain and support desktop 
and other workstation systems. This structure allows for the maximum communication among disparate departments 
within the university. More effective allocation of funa!s and resources directly resultsfrom this interaction. 
While the structure still has flaws, both the Library and CIRC continually adjust the way in which the 
TSC operates to produce the most eficient working relationship and environment.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I 
would like to thank several people that helped make this paper possible, without whom I would not have 
started this project: My grandfather, Israel Segal, who passed away before I announced my first paper 
proposal; my grandmother, parents and sisters, who gave me their full support throughout the process; 
my manager Blame D Amico, who provided invaluable technical and structural advice; Ray Beach, Manager 
of User Services at CIRC, who has encouraged me to participate in any professional endeavor that I can; 
and my girlfriend, Jo Wilson, who let me use her computer and her creativity to help me write this thing. 
 INTRODUCTION This paper will present The George Washington University s unique approach to the computer 
and systems support of the central library. The computing needs of libraries Libraries have joined the 
computing age. Many have electronic card catalogs. Some provide access to periodicals and other publications 
on CD-ROM. Other materials are now available through the Internet using a Permission to make digitabhard 
copyof all or part of this workforpersonal or classroom use is granted without 1 fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributedfor profit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the titleofthe publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given that coping is by permission ofACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
fee. 0 1997 ACM ISBN # 0-89791-990-4/97/0011 $3.50 Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 -1 Computer Center 
Support ofan Academic. . . web browser or other Internet tool. Certain items deliver only electronically, 
and are no longer available in paper form from the publisher. Library staff use computers to execute 
their daily routines. E-mail, networking, client/server applications, and access to the Internet are 
now commonplace in many libraries. Every day new developments or systems become available in libraries. 
 The computer support needs of librgwies Many libraries employ a Systems Librarian to decide upon the 
electronic options available. These decisions reflect the library s needs to advance the goals and environments 
of the library community. The Systems Librarian may evaluate any number of pertinent aspects of computing 
including cost analysis, hardware and software recommendations, network structures, and so forth. Support 
for these systems usually falls to this librarian as well, and these responsibilities can quickly overwhelm 
available time and skills. Libraries have several options available to contend with this ienormous support 
load. Many have their own internal staff. Others contract services as needed from within or without the 
university. Failures in communication among the parties involved in any large project can result in poorly 
functioning or needlessly expensive implementations. The George Washington University takes a different 
approach to the support of its central library.  THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY The University main 
campus is five blocks from the . White House in downtown Washington, D.C. The campus, encompassing approximately 
36 acres, consists of 106 academic, research, administrative, dormitory and student services buildings. 
Statistics for the Fall of 1995: Enrollment: 17,000 students on the downtown campus. Slightly more than 
half of all students are pursuing graduate degrees; about one third of all students are part time. Faculty: 
the school employed a total of 4200 faculty, with 1400 working full-time. Cary B. Abend  THE COMPU J 
ER INFORMATION ,&#38;ND RESOURCE CENTER (CIRC) Structure CIRC is divided into several departments that 
service different student, faculty and staff needs. The current organization includes User Services for 
computer accounts, software instruction, and lab support. The department has devoted several staff members 
to the support of its cluster of Unix boxes. The Web Development Group helps faculty and organizations 
design and maintain web-based services. CIRC also supports a full-service computer store and a separate 
full-service maintenance group. Other positions are dedicated to lab networking, including PC and Macintosh 
specialists, and a Statistical Analyst. CIRC recently opened a University-wide Helpdesk and an Instructional 
Learning Multimedia Center opens during Fall 97. Each staff member maintains good working relationships 
with employees in other departments. For instance, the network manager consults frequently with members 
of university telecommunications. This allows for quick and accurate planning and deployment of new or 
updated services. Interactions with other university support staff in departments like Human Resources 
and Financial Aid allow for the quick resolution of staff- related administrative problems. CIRC also 
employs students to provide most of its front line support activities. Mostly consisting of undergraduates, 
the students engage in nearly every aspect of departmental function. Students answer telephone support 
calls and some go out to do hardware repairs. Others work in the store involved with sales and inventory 
control. A graduate in Statistics interns as a consultant for students and faculty requiring statistical 
analysis help. Students field software and hardware configuration questions from both walk-in and telephone 
clients. Library Support $kwAure CIRC also provides direct support to the main library. Several staff 
members, both permanent and student help organize and maintain the library s unique support needs. The 
staff currently consists of a full-time manager in charge of total operations, including systems integration 
and deployment, cost analysis, and networking structure. A full-time supervisor oversees much of the 
 2 -ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Are You Ready? Cary B. Abend Computer Center Support ofan Academic. . . student-based 
work force including hiring and training, along with networking and library helpdesk management duties. 
Two part-time computer operators (one unfilled) serve as frontline technical experts and engage in supervising 
and training the student technicians.  THE GELMAN LIBRARY Current computing structure and support needs 
The Library currently maintains more than 300 PC desktop workstations. These machines vary in model and 
make and cover a broad spectrum of computing power. Pentium Pro machines running Windows NT Workstation 
4.0 down to a few 286 and 386 machines running DOS all require coordinated management. The card catalog 
system runs on a mainframe system maintained by the Washington Research Library Consortium. This system 
consists of many dumb terminals within the library and several other methods of access including TN3270, 
Telnet, and Web browsing. Each method has a different set of access permissions assigned to it, depending 
on location and needed functionality. The consortium maintains the catalogs for several schools in the 
region, and includes indexes for several databases. The networking structure includes access to the Internet. 
This requires nearly every PC to have its own IP address. The system requires parts of five Class C IP 
subnets. Currently, the library runs on seven Novell NetWare servers of various power. Our primary topology 
is Ethernet, with some Token Ring stations. Over the past year we have begun to deploy a fiber backbone 
connected to Fast Ethernet switches, which then farms out to shared hubs and switches at lOMbit/s. Each 
of the seven servers performs a discrete set of functions, though not all the machines are used for production. 
Combining several functions onto fewer boxes may be possible, but the current wisdom believes that this 
may hurt network performance. The staff uses Novell s GroupWise 4.1 as its messaging software, and Corel 
s WordPerfect Suite 7 for standard word processing and spreadsheet applications. Workstations not running 
Windows 95 run Core1 Suite 6. The few remaining DOS-only stations that require word processing use WordPerfect 
5.1+. Applications can be set to run locally or from the server, depending on the need of the local configuration. 
Are You Ready? Over the past two years, the Library has expanded the available public computers. Along 
with banks of WRLC dumb terminals and standalone CD products, networked computers serve as public Internet 
and networked CD-ROM stations. Plans for the future The Technology Support Center plans to upgrade 
all servers to the latest versions of Novell NetWare over the next two years. Plans to upgrade the GroupWise 
installation to version 5.1 are underway; Novell plans to release GroupWise 5.2 shortly. The staff uses 
one of the university Unix boxes for Internet e-mail. We plan to integrate Internet access with GroupWise. 
Core1 recently released a new version of its application suite for which transition plans are already 
progressing. The biggest project currently facing the library involves nearly every staff member. WRLC, 
at the request of the members libraries, is changing hardware platforms and cataloging vendors. Instead 
of character based dumb- terminal interfaces, all workstations must run a client/server application on 
a Windows 95 platform by the end of 1997. This means the replacement of all the dumb terminals with PCs 
powerful enough to run Windows 95, and the upgrading of all library staff to the same. A major part of 
this plan involves the purchase of nearly seventy five computers. Both Gelman and WRLC have allocated 
funds for these machines. An accelerated time schedule calls for configuration and deployment of these 
systems needs over only two months. Since we must quickly move these machines to public areas and staff 
desktops, we have .created a new wage-hour technician position with separate funding for this project. 
Wiring projects go on throughout the year, and plans to renovate the TSC operations and server rooms 
are underway. Part of this project includes integrating the library helpdesk with the University-wide 
system.  THE GELMAN LIBRARY TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT CENTER  Structure As previously stated, the academic 
computer center provides some staff for the library, but many parts make up the total function of the 
center. The Library ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 -3 Computer Center Support ofan Academic. . . provides funding 
for wage hour technicians,, and office space for the operation. The manager and supervisor of .the Support 
Center work closely on a team with library staff to help determine the best directions for new systems 
and projects. The core members of:the team provide various administrative and technical functions for 
the library. The Assistant University Librarian for Information Services and Technology heads the team. 
The contract for CIRC s services falls under his purview and is discussed among the AUL, the University 
Librarian and the Director of CIRC. Provisions of the contract are under continual review as CIRC s services 
and responsibilities within the library grow.. The Director of CIRC and the Manager of the TSC determine 
the nature of the contract, which they then pass to the Library for approval. The original contract had 
a one year length, which the library -then extended several -times. -Due to the explosive growth of the 
Library s resources and CIRC s responsibilities within the library, the contract is now out of date, 
since there has been no time to produce a newone. ,, The library contributes two other people. The Electronic 
Reference Coordinator and the Staff Training Supervisor also serve on the team. The reference coordinator 
partially administers the CD-ROM network, and recommends placement of incoming material. One of her primary 
functions on the team is to assess the needs of the library patrons and the impact of changes to the 
public computing structure. This is balanced against the training supervisor s assessment of the library 
staff needs. The training supervisor makes training and, software recommendations and partially administers 
the staff network and mail system. Her assessment includes the impact of changes upon the library staff. 
Once the TSC staff adds the technical details, the entire group decides which course to take, under the 
final authority of the AUL. The team can set computing policies and procedures along with budgeting recommendations. 
Occasionally, some decisions on policy and budget need referral to the Library administration for further 
discussion and decision making. Once a budget has been allocated, final purchasing authority lies with 
the AUL, who signs orders for equipment prepared by the TSC. A distinct advantage to this cooperative 
structure shows itself readily. The TSC enjoys two .sources of funding. CIRC will pay for training of 
staff and certain expenses related to the functioning of CIRC staff inside. the 4 -ACM SIGUCCS m 1997 
Cary B. Abend operation. The Library will also pay for training, and for expenses related to furthering 
the function of the TSC within the Library. This is advantageous in cases where funding may be required 
from both parties, when not enough may be available from only one. Technology Support Center staffing 
issues The TSC employs both permanent and temporary staff. The permanent staff manages, supervises and 
trains the temporary staff. CIRC, and therefore the TSC, chooses to use students as technicians. This 
provides a low-cost alternative to expensive, full-time technical staff. The CIRC staff manages Library 
wage employees, so some provisions for the CIRC operations emerge. This sometimes creates a convoluted 
environment. The TSC does. not directly handle the Library technicians budget. This function currently 
lies with the Electronic Reference Coordinator and the staff in her primary department. Planning, proposing 
and spending the budget occurs as a cooperative effort between the TSC and the Library, but the Library 
handles the actual administration of the pay process. The advantage here becomes quite clear: this requires 
less work for TSC staff, but only if the process functions correctly. Errors or corrections can be very 
difficult to accommodate, since CIRC (TSC) does not have direct administrative control. This occasionally 
manifests itself as a type of Who is in charge? question. The answer can be highly dependent upon the 
exact context of the question, Sometimes CIRC maintains authority, sometimes not. The agreement addresses 
many circumstances that do not have a great deal of clarity. Occasionally, an established precedent dictates 
control. These precedents enter the agreement between the Library and CIRC so,that. we can periodically 
overhaul outdated protocols. This has sporadically raised questions about signature authority and grievance 
procedures. The AUL for, IT/S position did not exist when CIRC and the Library originally entered the 
agreement. Since the creation of the position in 1996, and the installation of a new University Librarian 
in 1995, many of these issues have been resolved. Largely, since the computing-structure has grown so 
rapidly and so complex, the library has granted TSC nearly complete authority in all matters involving 
related spending and policy. With the AUL s approval, CIRC now recommends nearly all hardware, software 
and infrastructure purchases and related policy* and procedure questions. The AUL addresses most Are 
You Ready? Cary B. Abend other matters. We view this as a strength of the agreement, and as a measure 
of quality performance and professionalism. This also displays a measure of trust that usually does not 
usually exist among parties in a contract, unless specifically defined in the contract. Since we have 
not revised the current agreement since before the installation of the AUL, we are pleased at this development. 
Using students as technical staff has other idiosyncrasies as well. We expect the students to place the 
priority of their academics over that of the workplace. This can lead to difficult scheduling conflicts, 
if many employees have classes simultaneously. Since many of our employees are students in computer-related 
majors, this happens regularly. Problems become especially severe during the first few weeks of a semester, 
when class schedules are more malleable, and the last few, around finals, when employees ask to drop 
shifts to do extra studying. We have not yet developed an effective solution, though larger, more diverse 
employee pools make scheduling somewhat easier. Unless a student decides to continue to work for TSC 
past graduation, employees have an expected life span of four years or Iess. Many factors govern the 
attrition. Since the budgets are small, so are pay rates. Students understand this from the start. We 
actively pursue students with work-study grants. Some students will work through the summer break to 
earn extra money. Occasionally a student will get a better offer from a private company, or a different 
department within the university. In order to help retain our staff, we allow them off-hours access to 
our state-of-the-art equipment for their personal use. CIRC set the precedent for this perk with its 
own wage hour staff. Short life spans also effect skills and training. New hires and returning employees 
always require training, since the summers tend to be our most active deployment season. Returning employees 
need to adjust to a new environment. Varying levels of skill among all employees present a challenge 
for management. We cannot guarantee that any new hire will have any skills, and employees learn at different 
rates. By having several grades of technician at different pay rates, we encourage our staff to learn 
and increase their skills. This system has helped retention, as students become interested in our environment 
they know that learning more will increase both pay and responsibility. TSC has taken advantage of this 
structure by leveraging some of CIRC s budget to pay for exceptional employees, to release that burden 
from the library. There have been several cases where a Computer Center Support ofan Academic. . . wage 
hour library employee moved to a CIRC wage hour employee and then on to a CIRC permanent employee. This 
further entices staff to remain. Placing such great responsibility on students sometimes causes problems. 
Many have never worked in similar environments before, and for some, this is a first job. Beyond the 
technical training the permanent staff provides, we want to groom our staff for professional positions 
either within our department, or elsewhere in their lives. We continually train the technicians in matters 
of professionalism, communication, . responsibility, and decision making. We also use these qualities 
in performance evaluations and for raises and promotions.  SUMMARY The Library enjoys an agreement 
with The Computer Information and Resource Center, part of The George Washington University s academic 
computing structure. This agreement frees the library to focus on developing as a whole, and not spend 
precious resources on technical and technology matters. CIRC impresses its management standards on library 
systems, and this allows stronger integration with other CIRC services. The library uses this integration 
to deliver electronic products and services to greater numbers of patrons, both on and off campus. This 
may not always be possible in environments where a lack of communication produces incompatible systems 
and standards. The Technical Support Center models its structure after CIRC, its parent department. Part 
of this structure includes the use of students as a technical labor force. Since the library pays for 
these students, many of which receive work-study grants, the TSC retains a highly flexible employee base 
at the cost of some reliability and expertise. Over the past few years, both the.Library and CIRC have 
come to see this agreement as a powerful tool. This synergetic interaction enables both parties to deliver 
more services at a higher quality, with a Iower cost, to the university environment than would otherwise 
be possible. Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 * 5 
			