
 Computer-Mediated Performance and Extended Instrument Design Thomas Ciufo tc@ciufo.org 1 Overview This 
talk will explore conceptual and technical approaches tocomputer-mediated improvisational performance. 
Many artistsare pursuing a musical practice that combines the roles ofcomposer, system/instrument designer, 
and performer/improviser. In addition to integrating these often overlapping roles, it is alsopossible 
to use computation and interactive systems to refashionthe very nature of improvisational performance 
practice. Manyimprovisers feel that their musical intuition and ideas are moredeveloped than their physical 
skills or instrumental technique.This leads to the idealistic notion that somehow, we should be able 
to focus our energy on the higher-level conceptual aspects of improvisational music/sound making, and 
use the availabletechnology to reduce some of the physical constraints, steer thelarger formal progression, 
and manage the low-level necessities. This is not laziness or naive 'better living through technology'rhetoric. 
The history of instrument building and musicalperformance has followed a path of developing better, more 
expressive, easier to play instruments using availabletechnologies. In acoustic instrument design, this 
has been arelatively slow evolution and is usually a re.nement of an existinginstrument or performance 
practice, rather than a total paradigmshift. I am following this evolution using computer technology, 
but the opportunity to radically rede.ne the composer-improviser­instrument relationship is unprecedented. 
This involves designingperformance systems that re.ect our own aesthetic and conceptualorientation towards 
music making, and encoding in the software/hardware the features and functionality that are important 
to us ascomposer-improvisers. One clear advantage of designing systemsfor our own use is the opportunity 
to design for our particularstrengths, and around certain weaknesses.  Copyright is held by the author 
/ owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2009, New Orleans, Louisiana, August 3 7, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-726-4/09/0008 
 
			