
 CO~UTER GENERATED IMAGES FOR MEDICAL APPLICATIONS by Alexander Sunguroff and Donald Greenberg Program 
of Computer Graphics Cornell University ABSTRACT Two computer graphics systems for the presentation 
of biomedical information for diagnosis and treat- ment planning are described. Both systems presented 
utilize computer tomographic(CT) data as input. One of the systems produces three-dimensional surface 
representations of organs and anatomical features found within the body. The other system is a radiation 
treatment planning aid which uses tomographic data in its computations. COMPUTING REVIEWS CLASSIFICATION: 
3.34, 8.1, 8.2 KEYWORDS: Computer Graphics, Three-Dimensional Surface Representation, Radiation Treatment 
Planning, Smooth-shaded Color Displays i, INTRODUCTION This paper describes two computer graphics systems 
separate parts. One part is devoted to computation for the presentation of biomedical information for 
of beam dosage levels while the second part is con- diagnosis and radiation treatment planning. The 
cerned with the graphical communication and inter- three-dimensional reconstruction system is divided 
action with the user of the system. into three parts. The first part is used to ex- tract contours 
of various objects found in tomo- The system has been developed to allow the user to grams. The second 
part then uses this contour create interactively a treatment plan by generating information to produce 
a three-dimensional mathema-indiv{dual radiation beams and by computing the tical representation of 
each object. The final part cumulative result. The area to be treated and the then uses these descriptions 
to create smooth-dosage levels are displayed to the user by means of shaded color perspectives for medical 
diagnoses and a color display monitor that depicts the radiation treatment planning. levels as colored 
areas superimposed upon a tomo- gram. The user is able to specify target and source The contour extraction 
module produces contours position, divergence, width, frequency, and initial either with the aid of 
an edge-following algorithm intensity profiles for each beam and place filter- or interactively under 
user control. Contour defi-ing devices such as lead wedges in the path of the nitions are constructed 
for each of the objects of beam. Beams are positioned until an adequate dos- interest on each of a set 
of tomograms. Such ob-age pattern covers the tumor area. If a beam leads jects as the skull surfaces, 
ventricles or tumors to undesired results, it may be removed and then can be defined. regenerated with 
suitably modified parameters. When all of the tomograms have been processed, the There are several major 
advantages which this sys- information is sent to a surface forming program. tem offers, including the 
following: B-splines are used for representations of the sec- tional contours and then Cardinal splines 
are used A. Various treatment strategies can be selected to form the three-dimensional surfaces by lofting. 
and easily modified under user control until The resulting surfaces can be dynamically viewed as an 
efficient plan is obtained. wire-line drawings. B. The actual density information obtained from the 
CT scan is used to compute the radiation The final module of the system creates smooth- dosage levels. 
 shaded color images of these objects for visual C. Radiation dosages are depicted using pseudo- presentation 
to the physician. One is able to color displays, and each beam is super- assign different colors and 
transparencies to each imposed on the actual tomogram. of the component objects in order to best distin- 
D. The visual feedback of the displays allows guish them and to make the total image most under-for 
irm~ediate comprehension of the complex standable. spatial phenomena. E. The digital output can be 
put in a form The radiation treatment planning system is an in-which can be used to control the actual 
teractive computer graphics program composed of two radiation treatment. 196 2. THREE-DIMENSIONAL RECONSTRUCTION 
SYSTEM The three-dimensional reconstruction system was developed to satisfy two objectives. The first 
was to provide a precise mathematical definition of complex three-dimensional biological organs. The 
 second was to enhance the visual feedback mechan- isms available to the physician to enable a more comprehensive 
understanding of the spatial rela- tionships. Both objectives contribute to improving diagnostic techniques 
and treatment strategies. The three-dimensional reconstruction system is divided into three portions: 
a contour extraction module, a surface representation routine and a color display section. A. Contour 
Definition The contour extraction module is an interactive system used to provide the initial definition 
of the contours. This is either done interactively by digitizing or by initiating an "edge detection" 
program. The edge-follower is used wherever possi- ble. If it does not produce a satisfactory result, 
at any stage or for any portion of the contour, a hand drawn contour may be substituted. Automatic construction 
of a boundary of an object is generally performed in a hierarchical manner such that information extracted 
at one level is then combined to form information at a higher level. Long edge and boundary detection 
is accom- plished by combining information about various smaller features such as short edges, edge 
frag- ments and edge points. Most edge detection procedures usually first deter- mine a spatial derivative 
or gradient of the orig- inal picture intensity. This derivative character- istic has been proven most 
likely to remain more constant along the length of a contour than the measurement of the primary quantity 
itself and, thus, is useful for edge detection algorithms. Edge points become those points in the image 
that neighbor on other points with similar values for the derivative quantity. Connecting such edge points 
results in edge fragments. Edge fragments, which may be separated by gaps, are then connec- ted to form 
long edges, boundaries or contours. The combination procedures can be categorized into sequential and 
parallel schemes. In the sequential procedures, an edge or boundary is extended one element at a time. 
In order to produce the best possible contour, sequential algorithms may use techniques such as "back-tracking" 
in which an edge is erased to some pgint from which an alternate path may be taken. i0 Parallel combination 
schemes mix information from each of the local elements. The parallel scheme that has received much attention 
in the last few years has been the relaxation method devised primarily by Rosenfeld~l-6T I-7- In relaxation 
methods of edge detection, values of the neighbors of a point change the probability of that point as 
a candidate for an edge point. Other procedures are a mixture of the two methods and explore a number 
of sequential paths in a paral- i lel manner. Excellent surveys on picture process- ing and computational 
techniques for feature ex- traction, including extensive bibliographies, ap- pear in the Journal of Computer 
Graphics and Image Processing,15,17 and thus a comprehensive bibli- ography is not included herein. 
Our edge-follower uses a simple gradient detector and travels at right angles to the direction of the 
maximum gradient. It may be set to follow various predefined types of boundaries such as bone/tissue 
 or tissue/water (cerebral spinal fluid) or opaque- dyed (tumor) tissue/normal tissue. Due to the sim- 
plicity of the current follower which has neither automatic back-tracking capability nor uses proto- 
 type information, the edge detection currently works best on the bone/tissue boundaries. Signifi- cantly, 
however, the system is interactively con- trolled by the user who can stop, backup and restart the 
detector manually. Figures 1 and 2 show the original tomogram of a patient with large ventricles and 
the tomograms with the skull and lateral ventricles outlined. The skull was outlined automatically and 
the ven- tricles by digitizing. The same type of contour definitions can be constructed for any object 
of interest on each cross section of a standard set of eight to ten tomograms. In this manner, it is 
 possible to define such objects as the outer sur- face of the skull, the inner and outer surfaces of 
 the brain, tumors, ventricles, etc. B. Surface Representation An interactive computer graphics method 
for the rapid generation of arbitrarily shaped three-dimen- sional surfaces has been developed at Cornell's 
Laboratory of Computer Graphics. 20 The method is a synthesis of spline theory and algorithms, inter- 
active procedures for man-machine communication and software for static or dynamic graphics display. 
Complex shapes can be created by the combination of a number of surfaces that have been separately gen- 
erated and automatically joined. The system is presently operational and has been successfully utilized 
for three-dimensional representations of the inner and outer skull surfaces, as well as tumors and the 
ventricular cavities of the brain. The basic technique employed is a modified lofting method in which 
sectional curves are represented by uniform B-splines, and the surface is inter- polated between sections 
by Cardinal splines. 7 The splines are used because of their ability to repre- sent complex shapes with 
a minimum amount of data. 14 The sectional curves need not be parallel and may consist of any combination 
of open or closed curves. One of the major advantages of this system are fea- tures which enable interactive 
modification of the B-spline representation of the sectional curves. This allows the contour information 
to be entered in either of the two modes previously described. The physician can "trace" in the desired 
contour based on his interpretation of the enhanced tomo- gram, or the boundary contours can be determined 
automatically, using image processing techniques. For both input modes, the contour will be simul- taneously 
displayed with the original tomogram. At 197 this stage, a B-spline curve is automatically gene- rated 
to represent the digitized contour. By using a unique inversion procedure which forces the B- spline 
representation to pass through a predefined number of points on the original contour, a very D close 
mathematical approximation can be obtained. Furthermore, since standard editing routines for manipulation 
are included, the physician can inter- actively modify the contour and match any existing information. 
At all stages of the process, the spatial information is graphically displayed to the user. The efficiencies 
necessary for this inter- action are obtained by the use of difference equa- tions which enhance the 
speed of the repetitive calculations. After the B-spline sectional con- tours have been defined and 
the surface created, one can then view the resulting objects as a wire- line mesh drawing that can be 
rotated dynamically providing a complete three-dimensional representa- tion (Figure 3). This figure was 
created from the same series of tomograms shown in Figure i. The model illustrates the amount of information 
that is attainable even though the amount of data along the axis of the CT scanner is minimal (i.e., 
the lat- eral ventricles appear on only five of the tomograms in the series). C. Smooth-Shaded Image 
Generation Algorithms to simulate-smooth shading have been used for image synthesis during the past 
eight years. In 1971, Gouraud used a simple model to generate smoothly shaded images of surfaces approx- 
imated by small planar polygons. 8 In his approach, a weighted or average normal was computed at each 
vertex of the polygonal surface. A color intensity was selected, based on the cosine of the angle be- 
tween the surface normal and the light ray. The surface was then shaded using a linear interpola- tion 
process which first determined edge inten- sities and then scan line intensities. Phong im- proved on 
Gouraud's method by interpolating surface normals rather than colors and also included a specular reflection 
component. 19 Blinn used an improved specular reflection simula- tion algorithm based on the Torrance-Sparrow 
model of light reflection. 2,18 Surfaces are modeled by many mirror-like facets that mask and shadow 
each other. Parameters that control the facet distribu- tion account for different specular characteristics 
of surfaces. The results compare favorably with photographs of real surfaces, particularly at shallow 
angles of incident light. More accurate models of curved surfaces can be ob- tained by displaying patches. 
This numerical des- cription allows an exact surface normal to be com- puted at each point in parametric 
space. Catmull used this approach by recursively subdividing the patch down to the ras~er level and 
generated very sophisticated images. ~ Problems at the silhouette edges and surface intersections, 
inherent with polygonal methods, were elminated, but the compu- tation time for a single image was 
greatly increased. On our system, the polygon descriptions of the ob- jects to be smooth-shaded are 
obtained using the sectional techniques previously described. The resulting geometric description has 
a major advan- tage for smooth-shaded images when compared to standard polygonal techniques. Most continuous 
shading methods approximate the vertex normal vec- tors by averaging the continuous polygon normals. 
However, using the spline technique, a continuous surface is interpolated, and thus an exact surface 
normal is obtained at each vertex. Intermediate normals are then interpolated from the exact values at 
the vertices. This provides the basis for simu- lating the effects of specular and diffuse reflec- tion 
as well as transparency. The resulting shaded image accurately represents the object being simu- lated. 
 The final module of the medical image reconstruc- tion system uses this approach to create full color, 
smooth-shaded images of the lofted surfaces. One is able to assign different colors and transparen- cies 
to each of the component objects in order to obtain maximum clarity in presentation. Figure 4 shows the 
left lateral view, and Figure 5 shows the front view of the same brain with ventricles, as is shown in 
the previous figures. The ventricles are depicted as shiny opaque objects within a trans- parent outer 
surface of the brain. Different colors are used for the ventricles--the right lateral ven- tricle is 
red, the left one blue, and the third and fourth ventricles green. Finally, Figure 6 shows information 
from the same series of tomograms but showing different objects. Here the outer surface of the brain 
(blue) and the eyes (red) are imbedded in the skull (transparent). It is evident that the three-dimensional 
color dis- plays can provide an excellent visualization and comprehension of complex structures. Furthermore, 
 all of the posit%onal and volumetric information is numerically available. The potential uses of these 
techniques have not yet been fully explored. 3. RADIATION TREATMENT PLANNING SYSTEM An x-ray beam passing 
through a substance is gov- erned by an exponential decay determined by the radio-opacity of the substance 
being transversed. Energy removed from the primary beam eventually is converted into heat, usually 
after existing as some form of secondary radiation (scattering, anni- hilation, etc). Dosage for treatment 
depends on the total energy level of all these types of radi- ation. Since the removal of energy from 
a beam (its atten- uation) is dependent on the density of the sub- stance, quantification of the density 
is important for correct computation. For the different sub- stances occurring in tissue, the composition 
and density substantially affect the attenuation co- efficients. It is impossible to obtain density 
information from conventional radiographs since they only provide a superimposition of objects in the 
path of the beam and not the actual placement of the objects along the axis of the beam. However, with 
the prolifera- tion of the computerized tomographic (CT) scanners, it is now possible to readily obtain 
an accurate description of the internal densities of a cross section through a patient. 3,5 This ability 
to know the actual density values within the patient 198  through use of CT scans has greatly increased 
the accuracy of the dosage values that can be computed using a model of the radiation and target. 
In the last few years, a number of systems which compute primary and secondary radiation levels have 
been developed and are used clinically.6, 9 These calculate accurate dosage patterns but do not use tomographic 
data in the computation. Several other projects have developed an inter- active mode of operation. 
12,13 However, in gen- eral, radiation planning systems have not ap- proached the capability and power 
that such sys- tems could theoretically provide. An interactive computer graphics system has been developed 
at Cornell for radiation treatment plan- ning. The system uses tomographic data, offers an improved efficiency 
for the therapist and enhances treatment accuracy and capability. The program is composed of two separate 
parts: the first part is devoted to computation of beam dosage levels, while the second part is concerned 
with the graph- ical communication and interaction with the user of the system. The dosage computation 
component, though not presently implementing a complete model of radiation transmission, does address 
itself to all the physical mechanisms involved and thus pro- duces meaningful results for the interactive 
plan- ning process. A. Dosage Computation The initial state information plus the density in- formation 
of the tomogram is used to compute the dosage levels. The current attenuation model used is essentially 
an exponential decay dependent on the density along the path, in addition to an in- verse square decay 
dependent on distance from the source. II In mathematical form, this is expressed by -u..Ax. ie, 1.1 
1) Iij = li-l'J (i + Ax./x.) 2 1 1 where Ioj = source intensity for the jth beam  I.. = intensity of 
the ith point of the 13 jth beam u.. = attenuation constant for the ith lJ interval of the j th beam 
 Ax. = the interval between the i-i th and i ith points x. = ith distance from the source (x.= i 
+ Ax.) i xi-i 1 The computations are performed for a number of ad- jacent component beams since the 
total beam is much wider than the density variations across its path. This is illustrated in Figure 7. 
The initial in- tensity profile determines how the initial inten- sities of these component beams vary 
from the maximum intensity. This is used to model the effects of collimation and initial filtering of 
the beam. The exponential decay due to transmission uses the density information of the tomogram in small 
increments along the path of the component beam. The current version of the system does not compute secondary 
radiation though provision has  been made for calculating this in the future. This can be accomplished 
by considering points along the primary beam to be sources with parallel and per- pendicular components 
determined by the frequency of the beam. B. Interactive Graphical Communication The system has been 
developed to allow the user to create interactively the treatment plan by generat- ing individual radiation 
beams and by computing the cumulative result. The area to be treated and the dosage levels are displayed 
to the user by means of a color display monitor that depicts the radia- tion levels as colored areas 
superimposed upon a tomogram. The user is able to specify target and source positions, divergence, width, 
frequency, and initial intensity profiles for each beam. One may also place filtering devices such as 
lead wedges in the path of the beam. The system uses a storage tube console, a color television display 
and a pen/tablet combination. Most information is communicated to the user via the color display while 
the user graphically con- trols the system primarily through use of the pen/ tablet combination. A 
session using the Radiation Treatment Planning System consists of selecting and positioning beams until 
an adequate dosage pattern covers the tumor area. After the contours have been defined, the user graphically 
selects a target point and a source point by movement of the pen (Figure 8). One can next give the command 
to generate the beam, either with default values for the beam parameters or by specifically defining 
them. The beam is then computed and the results displayed. The radiation levels are coded using both 
variations in color and different intensities of color. Figure 9 shows the generated beam. One can also 
adjust the width and the divergence of the beam (Figures i0 &#38; ii). This is accomplished by using 
the pen and interactively "dragging" the lines that demark the limits of the beam. (a) b) 1 2 3 ~ 5 
6 J Figure 7.a)lllustration of manner in which radia- tion beam is divided into adjacent component beams. 
b) Graph of typical profile of initial intensities across the component beams.  200  It is also possible 
to add filtering devices if desired For example, one may expose the treatment area through a lead wedge 
in order to achieve a particular penetration pattern. Figure 12 shows two beams traversing lead wedges 
with different source points. As additional beams are placed, the results are combined and the cumulative 
dosage levels displayed. If a beam leads to undesirable results, it may be removed and then regenerated 
or positioned with suitably modified parameters. The session is com- plete when an adequate dosage pattern 
covers the treatment area. In this case, Figure 13 may be judged to be adequate. 4. CONCLUSION The 
ability to obtain a complete mathematical des- cription of complex three-dimensional biological organs 
has been presented. By combining edge find- ing methods with a unique surface representation approach, 
all positional and volumetric information can be obtained from a standard tomographic section. The resulting 
surfaces can be displayed in color to provide an excellent visualization and comprehension of these complex 
structures. The numerical informa- tion can be used for both diagnosis and control of treatment strategies. 
 A radiation treatment planning system has been des- cribed which uses actual density information ob- 
tained from tomographic scans to compute the radia- tion dosage. The graphical system provides visual 
feedback to the physician and enables an interactive development of the treatment plan. Although the 
two-dimensional treatment planning system provides a powerful tool for the radiation therapist, the potential 
implications are even greater. The sys- tem should be expanded to allow treatment strategies to be developed 
on arbitrary cross sections. We are currently working on combining the three-dim- ensional reconstruction 
system with the radiation treatment planning system to provide full three-dimensional capacity. ACKN 
OWLED GEMENT S The authors gratefully acknowledge t~he support of the Whitaker Foundation and Cornell 
University who jointly sponsored this work. The systems described are a collaborative effort between 
Cornell Medical School and the Cornell Program of Computer Graphics. The surface representation algorithms 
were developed by Sheng-chuan Wu, and the smooth-shading display routines were created by Doug Kay, both 
graduate students at Cornell. The medical imaging and con- sulting were provided by Dr. Gordon Potts 
of Cor- nell Medical School REFERENCES i. Ashkar, G.P. and Modestino, J.W., "The Contour Extraction 
Problem with Biomedical Applica- tions," Proceedings of 1977 IEEE Conference on Pattern Recognition and 
Image Processing, pp. 216-221, Troy, NY (1977). 2. Blinn, James J., "Models of Light Reflection for 
Computer Synthesized Pictures," Proceedings SIGGRAPH, 1977, pp. 192-198.  3. Budinger, T.F. and Gullberg,G.T. 
"Three- Dimensional Reconstruction in Nuclear Medicine Emission Imaging," IEEE TransactioNs on Nuclear 
Science, Vol. NS-21, No. 3 (June 1974).  4. Catmull, Edwin A., A Subdivision Algorith m for Computer 
Display of Curved Surfaces, Dept. of Comp. Sc., Univ. of Utah, UTEC-CSc-74-133, Dec. 1974. Also, Computer 
Display of Curved Sur- faces, Proc. Conf. on Comp. Graphics, May 1975 (IEEE Cat. No. 75CH0981-IC), 11-17. 
 5. Cho, Z.H., "General Views on 3-D Image Recon- struction and Computerized Transverse Axial Tomography," 
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol. NS-21, No. 3 (June 1974)  6. DeClemented, A., Mohan, R., 
Reddy,M.T., Holt, J.G., "The Memorial Hospital External Beam Treatment Planning Program " Memorial Hospital 
New York, NY (Nov. 1971).  7 Gordon, W.J. , " ' Spllne-Blended Surface Interpo- lation through Curve 
Networks," J. Math. Mech. Vol. 18, No. i0 (1969).  8. Gouraud, Henri, Computer Display of Curved Sur- 
faces, Dept. of Comp. Sci., Univ. of Utah, UTEC-CSs-71-113, June 1971. Also IEEE Trans- actions on Computers, 
Vol. TC-20, June 1971.  9. Lane,K., Bloch, P., Davis, L.W., "Computer Generated Isodose Curves for High 
Energy X-Ray Machines," American Journal of Roentgenology, Radium Therapy and Nuclear Medicine, 121(4), 
pp. 865-872, Springfield, ili. (Aug. 1974).  i0. Liu, H.K., "Two- and Three-Dimensional Boundary Detection," 
Computer Graphics and Image Pro- cessing, 6:2, pp. 123 (1976). ii. Meredith, W.J. and Massey, J.B., 
"Fundamental Physics of Radiology," John Wright Sons Ltd., Bristol (1968). 12. Neilson, I.R., Slater, 
J.M., Crispens, J.W., Chu, T., and Carlsen, E.N., "Interactive Com- puter/Ultrasound System for Radiation 
Treatment Planning," in Medinfo 74, North-Holland Pub- lishing Co. (1974).  13. Newton, C.M., Ryden, 
K., Nelson,R. and Johnson, J., "Remote Graphics Treatment Planning (RAD- GRAF)," in UCLA Health Sciences 
Computing Facility UCLA, Los Angeles, Calif.  14. Riesenfeld, R.F., "Applications of B-Spline Approximation 
to Geometric Problems of Computer Aided Design," PhD Thesis, Syracuse 15niv.(1973).  15. Riseman, E.M. 
and Arbib, M.A., "Computational Techniques in the Visual Segmentation of Static Scenes," Computer Graphics 
and Image Processing 6:3, pp. 492-501, NY (1977).  16. Rosenfeld, A., "Iterative Methods in Image Analysis," 
Proceedings of 1977 IEEE Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image Processing 14-18, Troy, NY (1977). 
 17. Rosenfeld, A., "SURVEY, Picture Processing: 1976," Computer Graphics and Image Processing Vol. 
6, No. 2, pp. 157-183 (April 1977).  18. Torrance, K.E. and Sparrow, E.M., Theory for Off-Specular Reflection 
from Roughened Sur- faces, J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 57, No. 9, Sept. 1967, pp. 1105-1114  19. Tuong-Phong, 
Bui, Illumination of Computer- Generated Images, Dept. of Comp. Sci., Univ. of Utah, UTEC-CSs-73-129, 
July 1973.  20. Wu, S.C., Abel, J. and Greenberg, D.P., "An Interactive Computer Graphics Approach to 
Sur- face Representation," Comm. of ACM (0ct.1977).   202  
			