
 Comparing Child and Adult Language: Exploring Semantic constraints Ismaïl El Maarouf Licorn, Valoria, 
Université de Bretagne Sud UEB Rue de Saint Maudé, BP 92116 56321 Lorient, France ismail.el-maarouf@univ­ubs.fr 
 Jeanne Villaneau Valoria, Université de Bretagne Sud UEB Rue de Saint Maudé, BP 92116 56321 Lorient, 
France jeanne.villaneau@univ­ ubs.fr Dominique Duhaut Valoria, Université de Bretagne Sud UEB Rue de 
Saint Maudé, BP 92116 56321 Lorient, France dominique.duhaut@univ­ ubs.fr Farida Saïd LMAM, Université 
de Bretagne Sud UEB Rue de Saint Maudé, BP 92116 56321 Lorient, France farida.said@univ-ubs.fr  ABSTRACT 
Actual research on child-machine interaction indicate that children are speci.c with respect to various 
acoustic, lin­guistic [7], psychological, cultural and social factors. We wish to address the linguistic 
factor, focusing on the seman­tic knowledge which needs to be mastered by a computer system designed 
to interact with children. Our work is in­tentionally usage-based and application-driven. The research 
was conducted in the frame of the EmotiRob project, which aims at building a companion robot for chil­dren 
experiencing emotional di.culties. The robot is sup­posed to understand the emotional state of the child 
and respond (albeit non linguistically) adequately [1]. The in­teractional capacities are heavily dependent 
on the results of the comprehension module. The comprehension model incorporates semantic knowledge such 
as children-based on­tologies and speci.c semantic associative rules. Our study is based on a corpus 
of Fairy Tales, which will later be compared to an oral corpus when the latter is com­pleted. We argue 
that lexical knowledge and semantic asso­ciations discovered in this corpus will not di.er greatly be­tween 
writing and speech. Fairy Tales constitute privileged material for teachers and psychologists who argue 
that they play a crucial role in child socialization and structuration of concepts. To spot child language 
speci.cities, we provide a con- Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the .rst 
page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
speci.c permission and/or a fee. ICMI-MLMI 09 Workshop on Child, Computer and Inter­action November 5, 
2009, Cambridge, MA, USA Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-690-8/09/11 ...$10.00. trastive analysis of 
semantic preferences according to pro­duction (child VS adult authored text) and to reception (child 
VS adult destined text). We use a shallow ontology to compare verb constraints on speci.c syntactic positions 
in child VS adult texts. Preliminary results show, as ex­pected, a signi.cant di.erence in terms of reception, 
though questioning the idea that adult language is much more con­straining, while di.erences in terms 
of production are less obvious and call for a detailed qualitative study. Categories and Subject Descriptors 
I.2.7 [Arti.cal Intelligence]: Natural Language Process­ing Language parsing and understanding, Text 
analysis; J.5 [Computer Applications]: ARTS AND HUMANI­TIES Linguistics; I.5.3 [PATTERN RECOGNITION]: 
Clustering Similarity measures; H.5.2 [Informations In­terface and Presentations]: User Interfaces Natural 
lan­guage  General Terms Language, Human Factors Keywords child language speci.cities, semantics, NLP, 
corpus analysis, contrastive analysis 1. SEMANTIC CONSTRAINTS The linguistic feature studied here is 
the so-called selec­tional restrictions between verbs and nouns [11, 8]. It con­cerns semantic constraints 
imposed by verbs on the seman­tic type of their arguments so that violations of these con­straints can 
be interpreted as clues of deviations, such as .gurative language, errors, and so on. For example the 
verb think expects a [[HUMAN]] in its subject slot which is contradicted in (1): (1) The bird thinks 
we d better take a shortcut. Semantic constraints have been studied in psycholinguis­tics, and used as 
a criterion to analyze how children develop and organize semantic knowledge. The hypothesis is that children 
are not fully aware of se­mantic constraints [6] and produce more semantically incor­rect sentences than 
adults. Duvignau and her colleagues [4] compared adult and children production of anomalous sen­tences 
in experiments and showed that the phenomenon they call semantic approximations is speci.c to children. 
In other words, children allow for semantic combinations such as (2), not observed in adult speech. (2) 
Mary is undressing the orange. The anomaly can be spotted here by a system which would only associate 
the verb to undress with words belonging to the semantic type [Human]. The shift of semantic type entails 
detecting the oddness and reinterpreting the verb ( to peel ). We wish to test whether semantic constraints 
can be used to characterize children language. We constituted 4 cor­pora. We .rst compare adults and 
children production with respect to an equivalent task: Fairy Tales writing. We then contrast adult with 
children reception by selecting a corpus representing a sample of each of their universe, namely Press 
and Fairy Tales.  2. DATA AND METHOD 2.1 Size and Productivity For the purpose of analyzing the constraining 
power of verbs in a corpus, we argue that frequency is not as impor­tant a criterion as productivity. 
Frequency corresponds to the number of times the same event is observed, while pro­ductivity designates 
the number of di.erent events observed in a speci.c con.guration, regardless of their respective fre­quency 
[2]. As we are more interested in how many di.erent semantic types may occur in a speci.c linguistic 
context, productivity becomes primary. For example, the number of di.erent words in object po­sition 
with respect to the verb prendre ( to take ) is 142 in the adult-Audience corpus and 137 in the children-Audience 
corpus, while their cumulated frequency is respectively of 1021 and 284. Our analysis of Reception is 
based on a Fairy Tales corpus of 170,000 words contrasted with a Press corpus of 1,200,000 words. These 
two corpora should not share anything in common since they represent completely di.erent linguis­tic 
worlds which are representative of Children universe and Adult universe respectively. We however found 
a common vocabulary of 1800 words: 120 verbs and 1680 arguments (17% of Press arguments and 58% of Fairy 
Tales arguments). Our analysis of Production is based on two Fairy Tales sub-corpora which are much more 
balanced in terms of fre­quency (roughly 60 000 running words for each). What is more, they share an 
equivalent text genre and should there­fore show a broader similarity of vocabulary. We noticed that 
the main di.erence concerns text length: children pro­ductions are usually shorter.  2.2 Corpus Processing 
The corpora were parsed semi-automatically with the help of Syntex [3] so as to draw lists of lexical 
units occurring in speci.c syntactic positions (subject, object,...) with respect to a given verb (called 
lexical distributional databases). The lexical units are then matched with a general-purpose shal­low 
ontology (containing 40 semantic types) in order to ob­tain the list of semantic types which .t in a 
speci.c verbal position. For example, the verb voler in the meaning of to .y , cooccurs with arguments 
such as avion ( plane ) in the adult-Speaker corpus, which belongs to the type [Vehicle], whereas it 
strongly collocates with arguments such as oiseau ( birds ) in the child-Speaker corpus ([Flying Animal]). 
We however do not deal with the phenomenon of polysemy and associate every word to its main semantic 
type. A proper treatment of polysemy implies indexing every verb and noun according to one of its senses. 
 2.3 Method : comparing verb classes In order to have a comparable basis, we extracted from the distributional 
databases only the couples which featured common vocabulary. We here wish to study how adults and children 
combine verbs with nouns, considering that they possess the knowledge of each of them. Thus, we only 
selected the verb-noun couples for which each of the verb and noun were present in both corpus, independently 
of their co-occurrence. One couple may be authorized in one corpus while it may not be observed in the 
other. To compare verbs accross corpora, we analyzed produc­tivity and semantic constraints in the following 
way: To measure each verb s constraining power, we simply compute the number of di.erent semantic types 
observed in a speci.c position, a measure we call semantic productivity. We then evaluated how semantic 
constraints di.ered from one corpus to another by clustering semantic types occurring in the same syntactic 
position with respect to each verb. We de.ned the similarity index between two semantic types as the 
ratio of their shared verbal contexts to the total verbal contexts in the study. The dissimilarity between 
semantic types i and j is then computed as: nij dij =1 - (1) n where nij is the number of shared verbal 
contexts and n is the total number of verbal contexts in consideration. We used Ward s hierarchical clustering 
method to build clusters of semantic types using the dissimilarity measure above. Each semantic type 
is initially assigned to its own singleton cluster. The analysis then proceeds iteratively, at each stage 
joining in a new cluster the two clusters whose fu­sion results in minimum increase in inertia loss , 
continuing until there is one overall cluster. The inertia loss resulting from the fusion of singleton 
clus­ters [i] and [j] is given by : mimj 2 .ij = dijmi + mj where dij stands for the dissimilarity measure 
between i and j and mi, mj their respective masses. The resulting cluster I =[i, j] is of mass mI = mi 
+ mj and grouping it with another cluster [k] results in the fol­lowing inertia loss : 1 .Ik = {(mi 
+ mk).ik +(mj + mk).jk - mk.ij } . mI + mk Figure 1: Children-Reception dendrogramme of semantic types 
using Ward criterion. Figure 2: Adult-Reception dendrogramme of semantic types using Ward criterion. 
  3. RESULTS 3.1 Analysing verb constraining power To have a global view on verbs constraining power 
we computed the verb mean productivity of each sub-corpus: Table 1: Verb Mean Productivity for Adults 
and children according to Reception and Production. Audience Feature Reception Production Children 4.8 
3 Adult 10.7 3.4 We observe that, on a similar task (Production), Adults and Children do not signi.cantly 
di.er in terms of their use of semantic constraint. This result questions the hypothesis that children 
allow for loose semantic associations. We have looked up each verb and could not identify similar phenom­ena 
to semantic approximation. On the contrary, the verb mean productivity di.erence is much more important 
regarding Reception: the adult corpus shows a wider .exibility of semantic types. Again, this result 
goes against the idea that adults associate speci.c semantic types to speci.c verb positions. In the 
face of such results, we conducted a qualitative verb-by-verb analysis to see whether the mean productiv­ity 
criterion hid speci.c uses of verbs in Production. We observed that movement ( to jump, to run ) and 
emotional ( to like ) verbs seem to be more frequent and more produc­tive in children productions. 3.2 
Clustering semantic types There are two main .ndings which stem from the cluster analysis. The most productive 
class is [Human]; it combines with most verbs: a [Human] talks, moves, likes, thinks, uses, etc. It occurs 
at least with 50% of verbs in every corpus. 1. The Reception corpora both show regular semantic vi­olations 
for several verbs. As expected, the text genre in.uences semantic constraints and therefore, the clus­tering 
process: For Fairy Tales (see Fig.1), the [Animals], [Plants and Trees] and [Imaginary Creatures] classes 
share strong similarity with the [Human] class, since they put on characteristics which are usually attributed 
to humans (speaking, thinking, etc.). We call this process human­ization. [Objects] and [Locations] are 
also clustered with [Humans] but this also happens in the Press cor­pus. In the Press corpus (see Fig.2), 
we observed the same semantic extension with classes like [Organization], [Ab­stract Concept], [Event] 
and [Information], which is explained by the typical metonymical language used and destined to Adults, 
as in (3). (3) The government declared a state of emergency. 2. No signi.cant di.erence of this kind 
was observed re­garding Production, since both Adults and Children allow for talking trees and thinking 
rabbits when it comes to writing a Fairy Tale. However, semantic vio­lations were helpful to spot idiomatic 
expressions and metaphorical language, which, according to the data, are much more common in Adult productions, 
as at­tested by French examples (4) and (5) (4) Les blessures qui d´echirent vos coeurs. trans.: The 
wounds which tear your hearts out. (5) Il s y est cass´e les dents.  trans.: He broke his teeth. [He 
tried hard but could not make it] This would indicate that adults are much more creative in terms of 
metaphors than children and that they also master idioms better than them.  4. APPLICATIONS -PERSPECTIVES 
It is clear from our research that the method using se­mantic restrictions cannot help us to identify 
potential dif­ferences between adult and children productions. Our study seems to indicate that children 
do not di.er sig­ni.cantly from adults in terms of semantic constraints when involved in a similar task 
(Fairy Tales writing). Such dif­ferences may remain at the syntactic level in the mastering of speci.c 
complex constructions ( [9, 10]). However, the semantic universes sampled here can be contrasted thanks 
to a cluster analysis of semantic types applied to each of the reception corpora. Concerning the semantic 
level, it ap­pears that the situational context in which an interaction is engaged has a greater impact 
on verb-noun combinations than the kinds of Speaker involved in it. We are actually working on the possibility 
of automatizing this method, basing ourselves on larger structures, called semantic patterns [5], which 
incorporate syntactic as well as semantic information in order to evaluate to which extent situational 
context can be linguistically characterized. One important aspect of semantic patterns is that each pattern 
correspond to a single verb meaning. If we accept the premises of this research, then our con­trastive 
analysis of Reception corpora justi.es the fact that children and adults evolve in di.erent semantic 
universes. This, in turn, entails that the robot s knowledge should be based on children-targeted data 
so that the robot s compre­hension module makes the right semantic associations out of children s input. 
We have thus, for every verb, created a database of all and only the semantic types which were found 
associated in each syntactic position in the Fairy Tales cor­pus. The corpus helped us tuning the robot 
s knowledge and constituting a .rst version of the system. This work now needs to be validated and completed 
with corpora col­lected in real situation, such as children playing and telling stories to their plush 
robot. We wish to insist on the fact that such corpus analy­ses, based on real data, provide authentic 
information to build cognitive models, which will later be applicable to real children-machine interactions. 
 5. REFERENCES [1] A. Achour, J. Villaneau, D. Duhaut, and F. Said. Cognitive and emotional linguistic 
interaction. In Child, Computer and Interaction (ICMI 08 post-conference workshop), Chania, Crete, Greece, 
October 2008. [2] D. Bourigault. Upery : un outil d analyse distributionnelle ´etendue pour la construction 
d ontologies `a partir de corpus. In Actes de la 9`eme conf´erence annuelle sur le Traitement Automatique 
des Langues, pages 75 84, 2002. [3] D. Bourigault. Syntex, un analyseur syntaxique op´erationnel. Habilitation 
`a diriger les recherches, Toulouse, Universit´e Toulouse II Le Mirail, 2007. [4] K. Duvignau, M. Fossard, 
B. Gaume, M.-A. Pimenta, and J. Elie. Semantic approximations and .exibility in the dynamic construction 
and deconstruction of meaning. In N. Moura, Vieira, editor, Metafora e contexto / Metaphor and Context, 
volume 7, pages 371 389, 2007. [5] P. Hanks. Lexical patterns: From hornby to hunston and beyond. In 
Proceedings of the XIII EURALEX International Congress, pages 89 129, 2008. [6] S. L. James and J. F. 
Miller. Children s awareness of semantic constraints in sentences. In Child Development, volume 44, pages 
69 76. 1973. [7] A. Potamianos and S. S. Narayanan. A review of the acoustic and linguistic properties 
of children s speech. In Proceedings of IEEE Multimedia Signal Processing Workshop, Chania, Crete, Greece, 
2007. [8] J. Pustejovsky and E. Jezek. Semantic coercion in language: Beyond distributional analysis. 
In Distributional Models of the Lexicon in Linguistics and Cognitive Science. 2008. [9] G. Sampson. 
The structure of children s writing: moving from spoken to adult written norms. In Extending the Scope 
of Corpus-Based Research, pages 177 193. 2003. [10] M. Tomasello. Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based 
Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard University Press, 2003. [11] A. Wagner and M. Mastropietro. Collecting 
and employing selectional restrictions. In Papers of the First Swiss-Estonian Student Workshop on Computational 
and Theoretical Linguistics, 1996.  
			