
 Computer-Aided Design of Graphical Review Lessons for Audio-Tutorial College Algebra and Trigonometry* 
 Rudy Svoboda and Robert Sedlmeyer Indiana University-Purdue University at Fort Wayne 2101 Coliseum Blvd. 
Fort Wayne, Indiana 46805 Abstract An audio-tutorial minicourse system of instruction is being developed 
for the college algebra and trigonometry courses offered at Indiana University-Purdue University at Fort 
Wayne. This system of instruction is patterned after the one developed by S. Postlethwait. At present 
a college algebra course, MA 153, is being taught using audio-tutorial minicourses. In the spring semester 
two trigonometry courses, MA 112 and MA 154, are planned to be taught using this system of instruction. 
Also, a fourth course, MA IIi, will be taught using this system in the spring, 1980, semester. Much 
mathematics is more easily understood by using graphs. In many minicourses students are required to draw 
graphs. It is difficult to convey how one graph is "shifted" to obtain another graph using printed materials. 
As a result, a computer program was developed to create audio-visual review lessons of graphing concepts 
covered by the audio-tutorial minicourses. A review lesson may contain not only simple concepts such 
as point plotting, but also dynamic displays of graphs and their transformations. Creation of a review 
lesson is divided into four steps: (I) coordinate system definition, (2) function definition, (3) example 
definition, and (4) example viewing. The user is guided through each step via a series of menus. A sophisticated 
ten minute review lesson may take only 15 to 30 minutes to create. The program is written in TUTOR and 
runs on the University of Illinois PLATO system. INTRODUCTION was needed. We sought an individualized 
system; however, we also desired to include deadlines for This is a preliminary report on the on-going 
the completion of work and personal contact college algebra and trigonometry audio-tutorial between the 
instructor and the students. minicourse project at Indiana University-Purdue University at Fort Wayne[l,2]. 
In this paper we We decided to adapt the audio-tutorial mini- present a brief summary of the scope of 
the mini- course system of instruction to the college alge- course project and discuss the development 
of a bra and trigonometry courses. This system of PLATO-based graphics system for the design of instruction 
was developed by Samuel N. Postlethwait audio-visual review lessons. to teach an elementary botany course 
at Purdue University[3]. THE AUDI0-TUTORIAL MINICOURSE SYSTEM IN MATHEMATICS The first course to be 
adapted to the audio- The Department of Mathematical Sciences at tutorial system of instruction was 
~ 153. It was Indiana University-Purdue University at Fort Wayne divided into 31 units of material called 
mini- currently offers six college algebra and trigo- courses. Each minicourse consists of a study nometry 
courses. Over the last four years class guide and an audio tape. These materials were sizes have tripled 
in some of the courses. Due developed by a Minicourse Project Team in the to the limited resources of 
the University, this Summer of 197712]. resulted in increased class sizes in all classes. Because these 
are service courses they are popu- Mathematics lends itself well to the audio- lated by students of extremely 
diverse tutorial system of teaching. The learning of backgrounds, motivations, and aptitudes. While mathematics 
requires the understanding of a these students need individual attention, sequence of facts which l~ad 
to an importamt increased class sizes have resulted in the mathematical principle. The minicoursea present 
students receiving less and less individual these facts by means of a variety of learning instruction. 
We felt that a change from the tra- activities. Students can accurately measure their ditional lecture-recitation 
system of instruction progress since they are provided with self-testing *The development of the audio-tutorial 
minicourses was supported by a National Science Foundation Local Course Improvement for Undergraduate 
Science Foundation Grant No. SER77-02454 and a grant from the Exxon Foundation. The development of the 
graphics program was supported by the Exxon Education Foundation Grant. 232 exercises in the study 
guide. Because of the nature of mathematics these exercises have either right or wrong answers, and the 
students immedi- ately know how well they understand the material. Up to the present time all of the 
mathematical ideas have been presented using the printed materi- als in the study guide. For learning 
many alge- braic skills this is sufficient. However, much of mathematics is more easily understood by 
using graphs. In many minicourses students are required to draw graphs. We desired to reinforce and sum- 
marize the graphing concepts such as plotting points, relating an equation to its graph, and locating 
intercepts, asymptotes, foci, vertices, symmetrics, and other geometrical properties of the graphs. Also, 
it is often difficult to convey how one graph is shifted, compressed, or stretched to obtain another 
graph using printed materials. As as result, a computer program was developed to create audio-visual 
review lessons of graphing concepts covered by the minicourse. THE MINICOURSE GRAPHING AIDS SYSTEM MiniGAS 
 The main objective of the Minicourse Graphing Aids System is to supply mathematics instructors with 
a tool to create audio-visual review lessons of graphing concepts presented in the minicourses. To be 
a useful tool we felt that MiniGAS should be human-engineered. Many of the minicourse instructors are 
not familiar with computer operations, therefore a simple interface between the system and the user is 
a must. Two other features were considered desirable: a procedure for one-take videotaping/ filming of 
the review lesson to minimize the time- consuming task of editing; and the flexibility to accomodate 
review lessons for minicourses planned in calculus and analytic geometry. The PLATO system was an obvious 
choice on which to implement MiniGAS. PLATO supplies a wealth of special function keys (such as -NEXT- 
and -HELP-) which not only facilitate user response but also simplify programming. In addition, the TUTOR 
language possesses powerfuZ graphics features. Like many PLATO programs, the MiniGAS interface consists 
of a series of menus describing possible actions the user may take. The user is always prompted for a 
response, and this response usually takes the form of pressing a letter, a digit or a function key. 
COO¢~D I NATE SYST El-1 DEF I I,I. kT ION . COOED I NATE SYSTEt.1 I,IOD I F I CAt I Ot) FU~;ST I Otl 
DE f: I r l I "I I 0~41 LDE POLYIiOr41AL . 1 CI~CLE The overall structure, as characterized by the 
menus, is diagrammed below. The specific features of the MiniGAS system are described in the remainder 
of the paper. A MiniGAS review lesson consists of a series of one or more exa~p!es each of which contains 
at least one function2: All functions are plotted on a predefined coordinate system. The user inter- 
actively creates each example and function used in the review, and may redefine the coordinate system 
or alter the review lesson at any time. Four basic steps are required to create a review lesson: coordinate 
system definition, function definition, example definition and example viewing/taping. In general, subject 
to a few obvious restrictions, these steps may be taken in any order and may be repeated as often as 
necessary. A detailed explanation of each step is given below. Coordinate S~stem Definition. To draw 
a graph, an appropriate coordinate system must be defined. MiniGAS is designed to plot functions in either 
the Cartesian coordinate system or the polar coordinate system; however, only the former system has been 
implemented. For viewing purposes, the Cartesian coordinate system is defined by five parameters: maximum 
x-coordinate, maximum y- coordinate, x-axis label, y-axis label, and a grid flag. If the grid flag is 
"on" then a coordinate grid is displayed (a nice feature to use when students are plotting on graph paper); 
otherwise only the axes are drawn. MiniGAS supplies default values to all five parameters which may be 
selectively changed by the user at any time. Function Definition. All examples involve plotting graphs 
of functions or conic sections. MiniGAS presently supports four function types (linear, polynomial, 
exponential and logarithmic) and all the conic sections (circle, parabola, hyperbola and ellipse). Two 
additional function types, trigonometric and rational, are planned for implementation in the near future. 
For a single review lesson a maximum of 20 functions may be defined. Function definition is quite simple; 
the user first selects the type of function desired, then either supplies an appropriate equation for 
the function or supplies parameters which uniquely define the function. For example, a line may be defined 
by supplying the coefficients of the general linear equation Ax + By + C = 0 or by specifying the slope 
and y-intercept. ,l i E>:Ar4~LE i I!~T 0 "/ I v'e~"'r!J: t ~LE l IA~L[ I l FUI~CT IOM UEFIflI] ICq 
SELECIIO!4 I SELECI1o~, I 233 MiniGAS assigns a unique function identifier to each function defined. 
The function identifier is an integer and is assigned in the same order as functions are defined; i.e., 
the third function defined receives the function identifier "3". These identifiers are used while creating 
an example to designate which functions are used in that particular example. The user need not memo- 
rize the order in which the functions are defined since MiniGAS maintains a function definition table 
accessible to the user at all times. The table contains the function identifier, type and equation for 
all functions previously defined. Example Definition. The basic unit of a graphing review lesson is 
the example. An example contains one or more functions along with a sequence of optional actions for 
each function. Example definition consists of two parts: selection of all functions contained in the 
example, and selection of the action sequence for each function. Up to five actions may be specified 
for each function. These include displaying an xy- coordinate table, plotting individual points from 
 this table, selecting pertinent display information (such as the equation of the function), plotting 
 the function, and plotting transformations of the function. Any combination of actions may be chosen 
with one exception--an xy-coordinate table must be defined if the user desires to plot points from such 
a table. Some additional information must be supplied for each action the user selects. For example, 
the user must designate the x-coordinate for each point in the xy-coordinate table. For all actions, 
the user is prompted for the necessary information. A table of additional information or options is given 
below for each action.  ACTION ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED xy-coordinate table x-coordinate of 
each point plot points from table plotting character select option pertaining to display of coordinates 
as each point is plotted plot function select line type display function information select desired 
information for function such as equation, asymptotes, intercepts, etc. plot transformations enter function 
identifier representing function transformation for each transformation desired. Example Viewing. Example 
viewing is the final identifiers are completely analogous to function step in the creation of a review 
lesson. It serves identifiers. Also, an example table is maintained two purposes; first, to allow the 
user to examine ! by MiniGAS. This table contains an entry for each and properly sequence the examples 
contained in the example consisting of tbe identifier and a review; and secondly, to permit one-take 
taping/ function list~ Immediately after the example list filming of the lesson. Prior to the actual 
is comDleted the actual display begins. viewing, the user creates a viewing list contain- ing all the 
examples he wishes to see. Each entry An outline of the example display process is in this list is an 
example identifier. Example given below. start (DISPLAY-EXAMPLE) erase screen for each example in display 
list display axes for each function in example obtain next action case action of  i. xy-coordinate 
table: draw xy-table display function equation display coordinates for each point in the table 2. plot 
points: individually plot points from xy-coordinate table  3. plot function: draw graph of function 
using line type and intervals previously selected  4. display function: display selected function information 
 5. plot transformation: for each transformation display transformation equation plot transformation 
using broken line pause erase graph of transformation  end end case end erase screen end end (DISPLAY-EXAMPLE) 
 234 Although MiniGAS has been successfully imple- mented and sample review lessons created, several 
technical difficulties have hampered the inte- gration of these visual review lessons with the current 
audio-tutorial minicourses. Video-tape was chosen as the final display medium for two reasons. First, 
color enhancement and audio could be added with the equipment available on campus. Secondly, video tape 
cassettes are easily handled by the large number of students served by the minicourses and a number of 
video tape cassette players, each of which may be used by a single student or a group of students, are 
available on campus. During the implementation of MiniGAS, several videotaping trials were performed 
with limited success. A major difficulty lies in the poor reso- lution and low light level of the PLATO 
screen. These problems may be solved by limiting the area of the screen being taped, either by zooming 
in on portions of the screen or by squeezing the entire display into a much smaller area. Both solutions 
have proved undesirable. Zooming makes one-take taping much more difficult since the camera oper- ator 
must know the exact sequence and location of information in the display. Also, the camera must be repositioned 
continually to follow the action in the display. Jamming the entire display into a restricted area of 
the screen causes unpleasant distortions in the graphs. These distortions are highly undesirable since 
the main objective of a review lesson is to give the student a clear notion of the relationship between 
a function and its graph. In addition, the density'of the infor- mation increases significantly to the 
point where one can't see the forest for the trees. Two other alternatives are being explored. There 
has been much success in taking slides of the PLATO screen. In order to explore this alternative, a pause 
facility was added to MiniGAS. This facility can be used to indefi- nitely halt the display during the 
viewing phase. Using this alternative, 20 or 30 slides of the review lesson are taken. These slides are 
then videotaped. A videotape slide presen- tation offers one major disadvantage: the ani- mation of the 
plotting process is lost. It's one thing to see an equation and its corre- sponding graph; it's another 
to see the points being plotted, followed by a curve passing through those points. Another alternative 
which may prove more fruitful is filming the screen. Using 8mm film, several successful films have been 
made in the past. A problem does exist with graininess, but overall picture quality is acceptable. Em- 
ploying this alternative regains the one-take objective, but adds one more step to lesson creation since 
the film must be videotaped and probably edited. We feel certain that one of these alterna- tives can 
be used to overcome the technical problems previously described. We envision future algebra and trigonometry 
minicourses to present a multimedia approach to graphing topics. Each minicourse will be divided into 
two parts: an audio-tutorial presentation of  of the topic as described in the first section of the 
paper; and an audio-visual review of the topic which would contain animated examples of exercises contained 
in the student study guide, and descriptive comments emphasizing the major objectives of the lesson. 
Each review lesson would be 5-10 minutes long. SUMMARY  Indiana University-Purdue University at Fort 
Wayne has developed a series of minicourses for algebra and trigonometry students. Presen- tation of 
the material is based on Postlethwait's methods of individualized instruction. A need was seen for visual 
augmentation of those mini- courses which covered graphing topics. As a result, a PLATO-based graphics 
system was developed to permit mathematics instructors to create audio-visual review lessons. These review 
lessons are integrated with the minicourses to offer an enhanced audio-tutorial system of instruction 
for mathematics. BIBLIOGRAPHY [1] Svoboda, Rudy G., "The Adaption of the Postlethwait Audio-Tutorlal 
Minicourse System to College Algebra," presented at the Fourth National Conference of the Center for 
Personalized Instruction, San Francisco, California, April 15-17, 1977. [2] Svoboda, Rudy G., "Audio-Tutorial 
Minicourse for College Algebra and Trigonometry: A Progress Report," presented at the Ninth Annual Conference 
of the International Congress for Individualized Instruction, West Lafayette, Indiana, November 6-8, 
1977. [3] Postlethwait, S. N., Novak, J., and Murray, Jr., H. T., The Audio-Tutorial Approach to Learning, 
Third Edition, Burgess Publishing Co., 1972.  235 
			