
 Consequences Of Stratified Sampling In Graphics Don P. Mitchell Microsoft Corporation ABSTRACT Antialiased 
pixel values are often computed as the mean of N point samples. Using uniformly distributed random samples, 
the central limit theorem predicts a variance of the mean of O(N-1). Stratified sampling can further 
reduce the variance of the mean. This paper investigates how and why stratification effects the convergence 
to mean value of image pixels, which are observed to converge from N-2 to N-1, with a rate of about N-3/2 
in pixels containing edges. This is consistent with results from the theory of discrepancy. The result 
is generalized to higher dimensions, as encountered with distributed ray tracing or form-factor computation. 
CR Categories and Descriptors: I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image generation. Additional Key Words: 
Sampling, Stratification, Discrepancy, Antialiasing, Variance Reduction.  INTRODUCTION One of the most 
general solutions to the aliasing problem in image synthesis is to supersample, compute many sample values 
within a pixel area and average them to estimate the actual integral of the image over an area. Several 
different theories have been applied to this sampling problem. Shannon s sampling theorem provides the 
justification for sampling at a higher density when an image is not sufficiently bandlimited for sampling 
at the pixel rate. The signal-processing viewpoint is not perfectly suited for treating the sampling 
of discontinuous signals (i.e., an image with sharp edges) or for understanding nonuniform sampling methods, 
although nonuniform sampling has been analyzed from this standpoint [Dippe85, Cook86, Mitchell87]. Another 
point of view is the theory of statistical sampling or Monte Carlo integration [Lee85, Kajiya86, Purgathofer86, 
Painter89]. The pixel value is estimated by the mean of a Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. &#38;#169; 1996 ACM-0-89791-746-4/96/008...$3.50 
number of samples taken within the pixel area. If the pixel area is sampled at uniformly distributed 
random locations, the central limit theorem implies that the variance of the mean is O(N-1). This is 
true even if the pixel area contains edges or if the domain being sampled has an unusual topology (e.g., 
sampling a function on the surface of a sphere) cases where signal processing theory is difficult to 
apply. A third viewpoint is the theory of discrepancy, which deals with the ability of a sampling pattern 
to estimate areas of subregions in a pixel. Quasi Monte Carlo methods [Halton70] are based on deterministic 
sampling patterns with low discrepancy, typically optimized to estimate the area of arbitrary axis-aligned 
rectangles within a square pixel area. Shirley introduced this sample­pattern quality measure to computer 
graphics [Shirley91], and Dobkin et al. introduced and analyzed a discrepancy measure based on arbitrary 
edges through a pixel [Dobkin93]. The most commonly used sampling strategy in ray tracing and distributed 
ray tracing is stratified sampling (often equivalent to the so-called jittered sampling patterns). This 
type of sampling has been studied from all three theoretical viewpoints mentioned above. This paper presents 
some theory and observations about the consequences of stratified sampling in computer graphics. EXPERIMENTAL 
OBSERVATIONS In the statistical viewpoint, a pixel value is the mean value of a small square area in 
an image. This assumes the use of a box filter, which is not ideal. Using a better filter simply involves 
computing a weighted mean, so for simplicity we will restrict the discussion to pixel-area averaging. 
A pixel value is estimated by a sample mean, the average of a number of point samples within the pixel 
area. The variance of the sample mean is a measure of the accuracy of this pixel estimate. The variance 
of the mean can be directly measured by repeatedly estimating the same pixel with M independent trials 
of N samples xi: N x = x 1 . ji N i=1 M 1 s 2 = xx- )2 x .( j M -1 j =1 general rough working rule that 
stratification gives a variance of the mean of O(N-3) [Hammersley64]. Hammersley was commenting on the 
numerical integration of one-dimensional functions. Looking at multi-dimensional radiation transport, 
Spanier reports that stratification doesn t give much benefit [Spanier69]. 02468 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 
 Figure 1. One of several ray-traced images analyzed. A simple experiment demonstrates the O(N-1) behavior 
predicted by the central limit theorem. Choose a set of pixels to study in a ray traced image such as 
the one shown in Figure 1. For progressively increasing values of N, measure the variance of the mean 
by performing M trials of uniformly distributed random samples. Plotting the log of the variance versus 
the log of N shows points fitting closely to a line of slope 1, for any pixel area in the image. Figure 
2 shows a histogram of the measured slopes (derived from least-square fits) for test pixels. 30 25 20 
15 10 5 0 0.75 0.9 1.05 1.2 1.35 1.5 1.65 1.8 1.95 2.1 2.25 Figure 3. Measured variance of mean for 
a pixel versus It seems appropriate then to actually measure the variance of the mean in the pixels of 
an image. Using several ray-traced images, M = 50 trials were performed with stratified sampling for 
N taking on values of 1, 4, 9, 16, up to 256, and performed a least-square fit in log space to measure 
the closest fit to a convergence of the mean of the form O(N-p). Figure 3 shows the data from one pixel 
and the least-square fit. Figure 4 shows the histogram of resulting values of p, using pixels from the 
image in Figure 1. The result is typical: a range of values from 1.0 to 2.0. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0.75 
0.9 1.05 1.2 1.35 1.5 1.65 1.8 1.95 2.1 2.25 Figure 4. Convergence of the Mean for Stratified Sampling 
of Pixels. Figure 2. Convergence of the Mean for Uniformly Distributed Random Sampling of Pixels. A standard 
variance-reducing technique is stratified sampling. Instead of distributing N random samples uniformly 
within the pixel area, the area can be divided into a grid of N × N cells, with one sample placed randomly 
within each cell. The literature of Monte Carlo methods contains varying comments about the effectiveness 
of stratification. Hammersley reports a By inspecting various pixels and their associated rates of convergence, 
three fairly distinct types can be found. Areas containing extremely complex features converge with a 
variance proportional to N-1 . Areas containing smooth regions of the image exhibit a variance of the 
mean that converges more rapidly, as N-2 . Pixels that exhibit N-3/2 variance are found to contain smooth 
areas delimited by a few edges. Figure 5 shows several typical examples: Figure 5. Pixels with p = 1.89, 
1.45, and 1.12. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS The N-1 behavior in highly complex regions of the image is not 
surprising, since this is what would result from sampling a randomly varying function, according to the 
central limit theorem. There is no benefit from stratification in this case. The N-3/2 behavior in pixels 
with edges is consistent with the arbitrary-edge discrepancy of stratified/jittered sample patterns, 
as proven in Beck and Chen [Beck87]. In their derivation of the discrepancy, they note that edge discontinuities 
are one­dimensional features. As N (the number of samples and the number of strata) increases, an edge 
intersects only ON ) ( strata. In computing the variance of the mean, the samples in the edge-crossing 
strata will dominate. Each sample xi is given a weight of 1/N, and so the total variance of the mean 
is: 21 N 2 s 2 s= .si 2 15. xN N i=1 This is equivalent to a convergence of the standard deviation (square 
root of variance) proportional to N-3/4. This is in line with Beck and Chen s bounds for arbitrary edge 
discrepancy are N -34/ -34/ 12 / O() (log N and ON ) [Beck87]. Dobkin et al. and Cross have used simulated 
annealing to generate sampling patterns with nearly half the discrepancy of jittered patterns [Dobkin94, 
Cross95]. These patterns may yield smaller pixel error, but Beck and Chen s lower bound proves that no 
pattern will be asymptotically better than jittered samples. This analysis can be generalized to the 
case of N strata in d dimensions, with a sharp discontinuity of k dimensions. In this case, we expect 
O(Nk/d) strata to be cut by the discontinuity and dominate the variance. In that case, the variance of 
the mean should converge as O(Nk/d-2). The O(N-2) convergence in smooth regions of the image can be justified 
if we make the fairly general assumption that the image obeys a Lipshitz smoothness condition within 
the pixel area. That is, the range of values of the image function f(x) (where x is a point in d dimensions) 
is no more than a constant factor times the diameter of the region: fx - f () () y = C xy - In d dimensions, 
the diameter of each strata is proportional to N-1/d and so we expect the standard deviation (root of 
the variance) of the function to be lower by the same proportion. The variance of the average of samples 
taken from each strata should therefore be: 1 N 2 -1/ d 2 (1 -- 2/ d .si (N ) = ON ) 2 N i =1 For d=2, 
this agrees with the observed result of O(N-2). It may also explain Hammersley s working rule for one-dimensional 
smooth functions, while Spanier was working with radiation transport problems of high dimension and saw 
less benefit from stratification. A FOUR-DIMENSIONAL EXPERIMENT An additional experiment was done to 
test these results in higher dimensions. The calculation of the form factor between two parallel unit 
squares (two units apart and aligned) was computed by Monte Carlo integration in four dimensions. Once 
again, the result was recomputed with M = 50 independent trials for values of N = 14, 24, 104, and an 
estimation of the variance of the mean was found for each value of N. Since this is a smooth function 
with a four-dimensional domain, we expect a convergence of O(N-3/2). The measured least-square fit to 
the data (in log space) gave p = 1.430. Removing the first (least accurate) point from the set gave p 
= 1.501. The same experiment was then performed, with a smaller occluding square between the two planes. 
For each point on a given (two-dimensional) plane, the perimeter of the occluding square presents a one-dimensional 
discontinuity in the differential form factor. Thus, the overall discontinuity in the form factor is 
three-dimensional. Thus for d = 4 and k = 3, we expect a convergence of the mean of O(N-5/4). The measured 
result was p = 1.233, and with the N = 1 point removed we found p = 1.245. CONCLUSIONS Stratified sampling 
is commonly used in ray tracing and distributed ray tracing, but its benefit has not been fully analyzed. 
Pixel accuracy is strictly improved by using stratification. For N = 1 samples per pixel, uniformly distributed 
random sampling and stratified sampling are the same, and as N increases, stratified sampling will often 
converge to the mean asymptotically faster than uniform random sampling. The improvement in pixel accuracy 
depends on the nature of the image within the pixel area. In the worst case, stratification is no better 
(but no worse) than uniform random sampling, . If a finite number of edges pass through the pixel area, 
we expect an variance of the mean to be lower by a factor of N1/2. If the image is smooth within the 
pixel area, we expect a variance of the mean to be lower by a factor of N. The absolute pixel error will 
actually be proportional to the square root of the variance (ie., the standard deviation). The asymptotic 
reduction of error due to stratification is a little less impressive when we take the square root. The 
benefits of stratification are probably a mix of genuine error reduction and the spectral consequences 
of jittering as described by Dippe, Cook and Mitchell (i.e., the tendency of these sampling patterns 
to distribute the error in a high frequency pattern over the image). ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to 
thank Steve Drucker, Steven Gortler, Mike Marr, and my SIGGRAPH reviewers for their helpful comments. 
Thanks also to Josef Beck, Bernard Chazelle and David Dobkin for discussions about discrepancy. REFERENCES 
[Beck87] J. Beck and W. W. L. Chen. Irregularities of Distribution, Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
[Cook86] R. L. Cook, Stochastic sampling in computer graphics. ACM Trans. Graphics 5:1 (1986) 51-72. 
[Cross95] R. A. Cross. Sampling Patterns Optimized for Uniform Distributed Edges. Graphics Gems V, Academic 
Press, 1995, 359-363. [Dippe85] M.A.Z. Dippe and E. H. Wold. Antialiasing through stochastic sampling. 
Computer Graphics 19:3 (1985) 69-78. [Dobkin93] D. P. Dobkin and D. P. Mitchell. Random-edge discrepancy 
of supersampling patterns. Graphic Interface, York, Ontario (1993). [Dobkin94] D. P. Dobkin, D. Eppstein 
and D. P. Mitchell. Computing the Discrepancy with Applications to Supersampling Patterns. Trans. Graphics 
(to appear). [Halton70] J. H. Halton. A retrospective and prospective survey of the Monte Carlo method. 
SIAM Review 12 (1970) 1-63. [Hammersley64] J. M. Hammersley and D. C. Handscomb. Monte Carlo Methods. 
Methuen &#38; Co., London, 1964. [Kajiya86] J. T. Kajiya. The Rendering Equation. Computer Graphics 20 
(1986) 143-150. [Lee85] M. Lee, R. A. Redner, and S. P. Uselton. Statistically optimized sampling for 
distributed ray tracing. Computer Graphics 19:3 (1985) 61-67. [Mitchell87] D. P. Mitchell. Generating 
antialiased images at low sampling densities. Computer Graphics 21:4 (1987) 65-72. [Painter89] J. Painter 
and K. Sloan. Antialiased ray tracing by adaptive progressive refinement. Computer Graphics 23:3 (1989) 
281-288. [Purgathofer86] W. Purgathofer. A statistical model for adaptive stochastic sampling. Proc. 
Eurographics (1986) 145­ 152. [Shirley91] P. Shirley. Discrepancy as a quality measure for sample distributions. 
Proc. Eurographics (1991) 183-193. [Spanier69] J. Spanier and E. M. Gelbard. Monte Carlo Principles and 
Neutron Transport Problems. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1969.  
			