
 Conserved segment identification David Sankoff * Vincent Ferretti 7 Joseph H. Nadeau t 1 Introduction. 
The study of genome rearrangements based on map dat,a depends crucially on the definition and identification 
of COIL-served segments, regions of chromsomes in two related species in which both gene content and 
gene order are parallel in the two species, as illustrated in Figure l(a). As map data ac-cumulate, however, 
it becomes increasingly difficult to find segments that satisfy the criteria of content and order per-fectly. 
This can be attributed, in unknown proportions, to experimental error -either gross mistakes in chromosomal 
assignment of genes or quantitative errors in map positions affecting apparent gene order -or to relatively 
high rates of inversion and transpositions of small regions of chromo-somes. In the human-mouse comparison, 
stringent require-ments of parallel content and order lead to a proliferation of short segments inferred 
instead of the few long segments which have traditionally been recognized. This is illustrated in Figure 
l(b). To correct this problem, our aim will be to try to re-cover, insofar as possible, the configuration 
of conserved segments that results from the evolutionary history of re-ciprocal t,ranslocations accounting 
for the gross differences between the genomes. Our hypothesis is t,hat this goal can be achieved with 
some accuracy by minimizing appropri-ately weighted mapping error plus rearrangement costs. As formulated, 
this is carried out using a variant of single link stepwise cluster analysis performed simultaneously 
on all conserved synteny sets (sets of genes occurring in c01iim011 on one human chromosome and OIIP 
mouse chromosome), with the interim results from each cluster analysis affecting Centre de recherches 
mathbmatiques, lfnivcrsite de Mont,rcal, Ct 6128 Succursale Centre-ville. Montreal, Quebec F13C 357. 
E-mail: sarlkoff@ere.urrlontreal.ca. Research Supported hy grant,s from the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council of C!anada and t,he Canadian Genome Analysis and Technology program Fellow of the Canadian 
Institute for Advanced R.esearch. tCentre de recherches math&#38;natiques, \Jnivrrsit&#38; de MorkrLal, 
(:l 6128 Succursale Centre-ville, Motltreal, Quebec H3C 3.17. E-nlGl. ferretti(c3ere.umontreal.ra. tJackson 
L&#38;oratory, Bar Harbor, Maine U4ciOq. I rcsent address: Department of Genetics, Case Western Keserw 
IJnivcrsit.y, C:lcvclm~l, Ohio 44106. E-mail: jhn48po.cwru.edu Pwmission to mnke digitshhnrd copies of 
all or part of this material for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copy- right notice, the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM, 
Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific 
permission and/or fee. RECOMB 97, Santa Fe New Mexico USA Copyright 1997 ACM O-89791-882-8/97/01 ..$3.50 
 the current state of all other cluster analyses. Parameters are varied so that the solution approaches 
in general charac- teristics, if not in detail, consensus reconstruc tions arrived at by experts. 2 
Background. The quantitative approach to partitioning two genomes into corresponding pairs of conserved 
segments was initiated in [4]. This paper made explicit the hypothesis that the ob-served configuration 
of conserved segments is essentially due to repeated, random occurrences of the process of reciprocal 
translocation. Recent updates of this approach are found in [I, 21. Mathematical extensions of the random 
translocation model can be found in [3, 5, 61. The extent of the problem of inaccurate map position can 
be seen in [2]. As for experimental error in the assignments of genes to chromosomes, some of this is 
due to incorrect homology decisions involving sets of duplicate genes. The following statistics are revealing. 
III April 1996, the Mam-malian Genome Database contained 28 genes which each constituted the sole evidence 
of a homologous segment in some human chromosome and some mouse chromosome, out of about 110 conserved 
syntenies in all. By August 1996, five of these genes had been removed from either the human or mouse 
data, four had been reassigned in one or both of the genomes, and only two had been confirmed by the 
report of another gene on both the human and mouse chromosomes. An additional 6 single-gent segments 
also appeared in the dat.aba.se at, this date. 3 The objective function. The smallest number of segments 
-subgroupings of COII-served syntenic genes -that can be produced by any analysis is just the total number 
of conserved synteny sets c 5 cicz, whcrc: ci and c2 are the number of chromosomes in species 1 and species 
2, respectively. This solution is generally not acceptable because it groups all genes belonging to a 
con-served synteny, no matter how dispersed they are along the chromosome, into a single conserved segment, 
and it does not allow for the real possibility that a single conserved syn-teny may be the result, of 
two or more translocation events. At the other extreme, the largest nurnber of segments that can possibly 
be obtained is n, the total number of homol-ogous genes identified in the two genornes, simply by as-suming 
that each gene defines a different conserved segment and that, genes are adjacent in two genomes only 
by coinci- 252 human chromosome A upq rsthuman chromosome B mouse chromosome (I: mouse ! IIlO .W chromosome 
D , , chromosome D (a) (b) Figure 1: (a). Schematic example of conserved segment in a human chromosome 
(B) and a mouse chromosome (C). Genes u and v have homologues elsewhere in the mouse and human genomes, 
respectively, and thus limit the leftward and rightward extension of the segment. (b). Experimental mistake 
in the chromosomal assignment of s to mouse chromosome D, quantitative error in the assignment of q and/or 
r in the human or mouse map, or inversion of qr or transposition of q or r, results in the erroneous 
identification of three segments, p,qr,t, instead of just one, in human chromosome B and mouse chromosome 
C, and an additional one, s, in human chromosome B and mouse chromosome D. dence. This solution is even 
less realistic than the opposite extreme. More interesting solutions lie somewhere between these two 
extremes. For an appropriate choice of weighting parameters, cr, /3, y, we wish to find the subgroupings 
of con-served syntenic genes into b segments, for c < b < n, so as to minimize D$L?%, i=l where Di is 
a weighted measure of the compactness, density and integrity of segment i. Compactness is determined 
by how close together, in metric terms, the genes in a segment are located in both species. Operationally, 
this concept will be realized by the maximum distance between any two genes in the human segment plus 
the maximum distance between any two genes in the mouse segment. Density can be as-sessed simply by counting 
how many genes are in a segment and comparing this to its metric length. Integrity of segment i is measured 
by how many other segments have elements intervening, in one or both species, between members of i. Formally, 
where &#38;(j) refers to a gene (or its map coordinate) in seg-ment i in species j, m(i) indicates the 
number of homologous gene pairs in segment i and s[i(j)] denotes the number of other segments with elements 
within the range of segment i in species 3. Note that, as formulated, the density term is superfluous, 
since c m(i) = n, a constant. In Section 4, however, we will see that the inclusion of this term in a 
stepwise algorithm privileges certain intuitively more plausible solutions over others with the same 
value of D. 4 The algorithm. Direct minimization of D = c D, is generally not feasible, because what 
is included in segment i impacts the quality of other segments and vice-versa. Instead we propose a rapid 
stepwise upper-bound algorithm and show sufficient condi-tions for it to calculate D exactly. An advantage 
of this method is that it constructs solutions for all b in one pass. Our procedure starts with the extreme 
solution where b = n, the total number of homologous genes in the analy-sis. We than combine step by 
step genes syntenic in both genomes into conserved segments, starting with those genes that are closest 
together in both genomes. Because integrity depends on the number s of other segments intervening in 
a given segment, and not the number of genes in these other segments, each step in the analysis of the 
i-th set of con-served syntenic genes, by decreasing the number of segments by 1, may affect, through 
the s terms in DJ , the further anal-ysis of the j-th conserved synteny. Basic to the algorithm is the 
notion of a rooted binary branching tree Ti with the leaves, or terminal nodes, as-sociated with the 
ni genes in conserved synteny i. This is illustrated in Figure 2. Each nonterminal node v denotes the 
formation of a segment from two smaller segments ~1, vz of distance d(v) = d(vi, ~2) apart, where 4v1, 
v2) = +1 -221 + IYl -Y2ll where Z~ED, and yievi refer to genes in segment V; at po-sitions zi and yz, 
in species 1 and species 2, respectively, which minimize 121 - 221 and Iyr -yzl. m(v;) is the num-ber 
of genes in segment i and s(~r, ~2) denotes the number of different segments with elements between the 
genes at ~1 and ~2. Note that d is a more general type of distance score than a metric, and it is defined 
only for two segments ~1 and 112 containing genes in the same synteny sets. The data on the map location 
of genes generally has an implicit and small range of uncertainty or an explicit and larger range. The 
distance d(zl, zz) is defined to be the minimum possible given the ranges of the two genes zr and ~2. 
After precalculating all these distances, we apply the fol-lowing: 253 human chromosome A Figure 2: 
Two rooted binary trees each representing successive conserved syntenies. Thin lines connect homologous 
genes in the chromosome and that the number of segments from the synteny are constructed from bottom 
up. Algorithm conseg Let nk be the number of genes in the k-th conserved synteny. Set b = n = c nk, the 
total number of homologous pairs of genes, and let seg to be the set of all these genes. For all k, Set 
Sk = -pnk. Initial construction Step for Tk: Identify the terminal nodes with the nk genes in the conserved 
synteny. While there remains a conserved synteny made up of two or more segments in seg, Find the two 
segments ~1 and vz that are closest to-gether, i.e. that minimize d(vl, ~2). Combine 01 and ~2 to form 
a new segment v. Add v to seg and remove 2rl and ~2 from seg. If either or each of ~1 or ~2 is a single 
gene, fix its position (on both chromosomes) within its range to be consistent with d(v1, vz). If v contains 
genes in the k-th synteny, update the construction of Tk to indicate the branching of v t,o Vl, 212 and 
set Sk = Sk + d(v) + /3[rn(Wl) + m(vz)]. Set b = b -1, and output configuration of the b seg- ments in 
seg. Recalculate all distances d given the decrease in num-ber of segments in seg and the possibly newly 
fixed position of one or two genes. Endwhile Set D = Es,. As presented, this algorithm is greatly simplified. 
For ex-ample, when the segments chosen to combine overlap, it is sometimes necessary to forgo fixing 
the positions of the genes within them until a later time. And special measures must be taken when many 
genes are mapped to the same point. But these situations may be incorporated without changing the basic 
concepts of the algorithm. The role of the density parameter ,O becomes clear in this algorithm. Rather 
than combining single genes or relatively sparse segments of a certain length, there is a bias towards 
combining, whenever possible, relatively dense segments of the same length. This ensures that the most 
clearcut exam-ples of conserved segments emerge early during the execu-tion of the algorithm and are 
present for as wide a range of b as posssible. solutions to the problem of identifying conserved segments 
within two two genomes. Note that the conserved syntenies overlap on the human on the right intervening 
between genes on the left changes as the trees The clustering procedure may seem a roundabout way of 
approaching the objective function, but to the extent that gene order is conserved within segments, the 
following the-orem becomes pertinent. Theorem The upper bound D achieved by the algo-rithm is equal to 
the objective D if for each node u = ~1 UVZ, the genes in 2rl and the genes in 212 are in disjoint intervals 
in both genomes. 5 Application Initial applications of the conseg algorithm, which has been implemented 
in C, to human/mouse homologies gives results comparable to the published works of experts, e.g. in [l, 
21. Figure 3 illustrates the results for mouse chromosome 4 for two values of b, compared to the analyses 
in the two sources. Table 1 shows how the output of conseg, with parame-ters suitably adjusted, can conform 
relatively well, in terms of number of segments per chromosome, to the judgements of experts using quite 
different standards for identifying seg-ments. Though some discrepancies (e.g. in mouse chro-mosomes 
3,7,19) are no doubt due to special biological cir-cumstances not taken into account by conseg, others 
are likely due to expert s variable application of subjective cri-teria from chromosome to chromosome. 
In addition, the seg- ments presented in [l] do not take full account of segment disruption due to intervening 
segments within the human chromosome. Finally, our data set is more recent than that in [2], which in 
turn is more recent that in [l]. 6 Discussion The results of the analysis for a fixed value of b repre-sent, 
gross0 mode, a hypothesis about the rearrangement events resulting in the current configurations of conserved 
segments. A segment X which is interrupted by other seg-ments is presumed to have incurred these interruptions 
through intrachromosomal events, either before or after the translocation which gave rise to X. Segments 
Y and Z which are analyzed as distinct although they are in the same con-served synteny are presumed 
to have arisen through separate translocation events. Thus an analysis resulting in a higher value of 
b implic- ltly assumes more mterchromosomal exchanges, i.e. con- 254 Mouse chromosome 4 3 8a 6 8b 6 
9a 9b 9a 9b 9a 9b 9a la 9a la 9a lb 11 lb lc lb (ii) Figure 3: Mouse chromosome 4: Human chromosome 
numbers corresponding to segments are indicated. In each analysis, only lengths of chromosome with the 
same human chromosome number und letter code are considered to belong to the same segment. (i). Analysis 
in [l] compared to conseg analysis for 6 = 113, where a = y = 1 and 4 = 0.3. (ii). Analysis in [2] compared 
to conseg analysis for b = 183, where 01 = 15,~ = I and B = 0. Note that the conseg solutions involve 
more discontinuous segments than those of [l] and [2]. In [I], much fewer data were available and compact 
segments on the mouse chromosomes were generally retained in spite of the non-adjacencies of their human 
homologs. In [2], the map positions of many markers were adjusted to produce non-overlapping segments. 
Both analyses ignored genes whose chromosome assigments seemed dubious. Mouse chromosome 1 Copeland 
et al. 111 5 b=113 a=1 .-(=I ijr = 0.3 7 Debry, Seldin PI 11 b=183 a = 15 y=l p=o 12 served syntenies 
containing several segments arise from mul-tiple translocations. Analyses characterized by lower values 
of b attribute the disruption of conserved syntenies by in-tervening segments to intrachromosomal events. 
Statisical analyses of the number of syntenic segments versus the total number of conserved segments 
on a chromosome, in compar- ison with a random translocation model, should help delimit a reasonable 
range of values for b. Another aspect, which we have only begun to explore, concerns appropriate values 
for the weighting parameters. There are clear limits e.g. /3/y should be less than over-all segment density. 
The approach we presently follow is to compare the number Ui of different human chromosomes represented 
among the 6, segments on a single mouse chro-mosome i, with the number ui expected under a random hypothesis: 
ut = 22[1 -(g)bi]. We chose the parameter values and b so that [ Total Table 1: Number man/mouse data, 
1 I15 ] 113 11 183 of conserved segments in two compared to conseg output. 1 183 1 analyses of hu- In 
our data p = 0.3. set, these &#38;, 1=1 values = fy u;. i=l are b = 174, (Y = 10, y = 1 and 7 Acknowledgements 
We mg thank Marge May conserved synteny of Jackson data from Labs for help the Mammalian in extract-Genome 
255 Database. We also acknowledge helpful comments received from several participants at the The University 
of Pennsyl-vania Conference on Computational Biology to honor the 50th anniversary of the ENIAC, held 
at Princeton Univer-sity in May 1996, where an earlier version of this work was presented. References 
N.G. Copeland, N.A. Jenkins, D.J. Gilbert, J.T. Eppig, L.J. Maltais, J.C. Miller, W.F. Dietrich, A. Weaver, 
SE. Lincoln, R.G. Steen, L.D. Stein, J.H. Nadeau and E.S. Lander. A genetic linkage map of the mouse: 
cur-rent applications and future prospects. Science, 262: 57-66, 1993. [2] R.W. Debry and M.F. Seldin 
Human/mouse homology relationships. NCBZ Web Site, http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Homology/. [3] V. Ferretti, 
J.H. Nadeau and D. Sankoff. Original syn-teny. Proceeding of the Seventh Annual Symposium on Combinatorial 
Pattern Matching, D. Hirschberg and G. Myers ed., Springer Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
1075: 159-167, 1996. [4] J.H. Nadeau and B.A. Taylor Lengths of chromosomal segments conserved since 
divergence of man and mouse. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 81: 814-818, 1984. 
[5] D. Sankoff and V. Ferretti. Karyotype distributions in a stochastic model of reciprocal translocation. 
Genome Research, 6: 1-9, 1996. [6] D. Sankoff and J.H. Nadeau. Conserved synteny as a measure of genomic 
distance. Discrete Applied Mathe-matics, (in press).  
			