
 Coordination Aspects In A Spatial Group Decision Support Collaborative System Sergio P J Medeiros Jano 
M de Souza COPPE/UFRJ COPPE/UFRJ PO BOX 68511 PO BOX 68511 Rio de Janeiro, RJ Rio de Janeiro, RJ Brazil 
Brazil (5521)590-2552 (5521)590-2552 palma@cos.ufrj.br jano @cos.ufrj.br ABSTRACT SPeCS a Spatial Group 
Decision Collaborative Support System intends to integrate Geographic Information Systems (GIS), Group 
Decision Support Systems (GDSS), Electronic Meeting Systems (EMS), and Workflow concepts in a framework 
based on Coordination premises. The coordination features should aid design team members to cope with 
their activities supporting the aspects of multi-criteria spatial analysis within a distributed GIS. 
Coordination aspects of SPeCS, which can vary from workflow facilities to integrated decision support 
tools can, intensively enhance the resolutions achieved that should represent the consensus in a decision-making 
process. This work presents a prototype, which explores the coordination in a spatial collaborative environment 
that supports the georeferencing of the argumentation just as they are being produced by the discussion 
involving the members of the design team. The main task of these groups is to produce a proposal for 
environmental preservations or changes considering social economics, climate and soil aspects.  Keywords 
Coordination, EMS, DSS, GIS, Spatial Decision Support System 1. INTRODUCTION In Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) environments, the multi-criteria spatial analysis present multi-disciplinary characteristics 
which involves shared data that are not easily qualified or modeled. In this situation there is also 
the problem that the structures are only partially known, and the potential solutions are controversial, 
demanding synergy amongst the users of the GIS, which represent different areas, competencies, political 
agendas and social interests. As spatial decisions are made by users, a series of problems inherent to 
group work appears, as for example: failure to define the problem before the judgment; the emphasis given 
to social Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of part or all of this work or for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. specific permission and/or a fee. C 20 00 
, Las Vegas, NV. SAC 2001, Las Vegas, NV Copyright 2000 ACM 1-58113-324-3/01/02 $5.00. &#38;#169; 2001 
ACM 1-58113-287-5/01/02 $5.00 Julia Celia M. Strauch Gustavo R B Pinto EMBRAPA/SOLOS COPPE/UFRJ R. Jardim 
Botânico, 1024 PO BOX 68511 Rio de Janeiro, RJ Rio de Janeiro, RJ Brazil Brazil (5521)590-2552 (5521)590-2552 
julia@cnps.embrapa.br gpinto@cos.ufrj.br activities; the creativity reduction due to established hierarchies; 
and the alienation feeling in the group. Nevertheless we may also find, at the time of the meeting, disorganization, 
absence of objectives or agenda, non-conclusion of the solution, absence of individual leadership during 
the reunion, lack of efficiency in the decision making process and redundant solutions. In GIS environment 
it is necessary to emphasize that all the meeting argumentation should be georeferenced. Some proposals 
are found in literature to support group spatial analysis, as for example the system AR/GIS [3], GEO-WASA 
[11], SDSS [4], among others. These proposals fail in synchronizing the operational components. The GIS 
environment is not usually supported by an integrated workflow solution and EMS functionalities, creating 
additional complexities to the decision making process. These disintegrated solutions require extra effort 
by group members in order to get the correct work results executed in the different tools. This work 
presents the SPeCS solution, which was tested in the Atlantic Forest preservation Project of EMBRAPA, 
in the region of Porto Seguro, Brazil and its experience will continue in the new Project at São Gabriel 
do Oeste in the Amazon region. The next section presents the requirements for coordination and conflict 
management of a spatial decision support system; the third section presents the SPeCS solution proposal 
and its functionalities; the fourth section, the SPeCS architecture and the prototype, and at the fifth 
section this work`s final considerations.  2. REQUIREMENTS The SPeCS system must meet the requirements 
of coordination, rationale capture and conflict management (KLEIN, 1997) needed in all situations demanded 
by group work. A collaborative system to support spatial decision must offer a cooperative, common, flexible 
and easy to use work environment where the members of a group may be geographically distributed in heterogeneous 
environments, interacting during the decision making process. 2.1. Coordination Requirements in a GIS 
Environment The effective coordination of the activities in a GIS environment is critical to the project`s 
success since the resources must be correctly shared among the actions which have as main features the 
spatial distribution, complexity, integration and functional interdependency. These activities involve 
processes of different functional areas where participants have several perspectives throughout the time 
period [3]. The role of the collaboration, within this context, is vital due to the degree of automation 
that emerges to allow the operation of complex tasks forthcoming from this environment. Coordination 
becomes a focus to allow the process to be more efficient than the manual activity, which, in general, 
demands unnecessary and costly reworks, compromising the work quality and goals. The complexity of group 
activities and their interdependencies tend to induce this type of behavior, requiring efficient and 
effective coordination for the success of the work [10]. Often, automating some tasks will mask the problems 
emerging from low individual productivity that have in its essence the component of results obtained 
from processes repeated to exhaustion until they are right. The work coordination becomes essential to 
help the user community to build a geographical database and to perform the complex spatial analysis 
necessary to take the most appropriate decision of a problem resolution. The diversity of tools, sources 
and formats of information processed generates problems which may be better solved with the help of coordination 
theories, thus increasing the reliability and productivity of group activities. The task coordination 
process can be divided into three main categories: the process management, the conflict resolution and 
the rationale capture [8]. The first one, process management, is actually attended by workflow technologies, 
where some work in this context has been done recently [15][16]. For the latter two, there is still a 
great demand for new perspectives, since there is not yet a complete set of products to attend these 
requirements. Another work [13] classified Coordination of Internet Agents into three categories: Basic 
coordination infrastructure, Coordination frameworks and Logical coordination. The first category is 
the most primitive one and enables basic communication infrastructure for multi-agent systems. The second 
form of coordination is for developing models and languages for Internet agents where coordination is 
treated as a first class citizen. The last, one that is in a higher level, represents the organization 
of the cooperation behavior between members, where they were classified as Organizational Structuring, 
Contracting, Multi-Agent Planning and Negotiation. This framework can be of special interest when conceptualizing 
the coordination problem of distributed users, which is the dilemma dealt in our case of study. The conflicts 
within this context may be divided into two main types: those among members of a group and those among 
operational components. The conflicts arising from differences between the objectives (goals, interests) 
and suppositions (theories, beliefs, understandings, ways of performing business transactional operations) 
are included in the first group. For such conflicts we must use tools that aid the group members to achieve 
a consensual solution [2]. The detailing of the second type of conflict management will not be performed 
in this work. 2.2. Environmental Requirements Besides the coordination requirements and the conflict 
management in a GIS environment listed above, there are other desirable characteristics present in the 
Atlantic Forest Preservation Project that must be contemplated in order to meet the actual needs of the 
group of users. In this project there are different actors such as researchers, native population, farmers 
and land workers, that should be attended. This kind of project is usually developed in four phases as 
described below. During the first phase the basic goals for the whole work are decided with the participation 
of local communities, political representatives and the technical staff. The meetings take place in several 
different locations and some e-mails and some final reports are the only documents left afterwards. All 
the discussions and contributions that lead to the conclusions are lost. A specialized tool could definitely 
help the group to record them and aid in the decision process. In the second phase a cartographic base 
is created through the digital stereoplotter and the digitizing of existing maps. All the material is 
organized in a GIS database and sent to the researchers to do their survey work. In this case a workflow 
tool could be useful. In the third phase the soil type is surveyed, the meteorological data is collected 
and the socioeconomic diagnostic is made. The soil type identification generate some conflicts based 
on different technical interpretations of the laboratory exams. Most of the argumentation is based on 
laboratory exams and local observations that should all be georeferenced. In this phase the meteorological 
data is also analyzed and isoline maps of climate are elaborated. Finally, the socioeconomic diagnosis 
is produced based on local census including the native population, farmers and land workers. These activities 
also produce group discussion since different opinions arise as the results arrive from different sources. 
The forth phase which is called Agro-environmental Zoning, has special interest since it is where the 
discussion is more intense. At this time the groups have meetings to decide what should be done with 
each sub region and several conflicts of interest and technical opinions arise. In these four phases 
the researchers use a GIS environment in conjunction with other software like geostatistics solutions, 
word processors, and spreadsheet tools. When a final decision is accomplished, it is documented and the 
final report produced during this last phase is made available. There are several opportunities for collaborative 
decision making and workflow process management. Through a correct use of the land, the enviroment preservation 
should be accomplished satisfying all the conflicting opinions, interests and all technical issues involved. 
 3. COMPONENTS OF THE SPeCS ARCHITECTURE Coordinating the working processes is the center of the problem 
that will de addressed by the framework defined for this ar!icipan!ssystem.. The solution adopted consists 
in customizing Conmlic! Resolu!ion coordination tools to the characteristics of the GIS rocess anagem 
en! environment. Within this environment, the coordination ec!i es shall then meet three main requirements: 
i) work process Rationale Time Cap!ure coordination, ii) rationale Figure 1 Coordina!ion S!ruc!ure capture 
by recording the decision-making process and iii) conflict management existing within the scope of the 
performed activities. To meet these requirements the SPeCS architecture employs a workflow system in 
such a way as to assure the group s work and the collaboration within the GIS environment. Figure 1 describes 
the structural model that guided this perspective. 3.1. Workflow System within the GIS Environment The 
workflow system guarantees the logic of the processeswith their standards and the efficient management 
of the information flow, supporting the negotiation process, assuring that the right teams, within the 
proper time limits will execute the tasks and supporting individual task execution. Workflow systems 
automate the steps of the negotiation process, structured or not, managing the coordination activities 
by the individuals and groups in order to guarantee the objectives of the organization [9]. The solution 
proposed for the SPeCS extends the CooMan System [15], a system initially based on Speech Acts, which 
links traditional management techniques to new conversational ideas. The objects used as a base for the 
system are the Project, the Task, the Partner, the Group and the Conversation. These objects are structurally 
linked to form a consistent group of types to represent the current scenario where the decisions shall 
take place. The CooMan System presented in SOUZA [15] was extended to meet the requirements of GIS environments. 
This extension was based on an architecture to allow the different types of conversations, such as structured 
(group meetings) or semi­structured (documents, memos, messages) conversation. The objectives of this 
new version of CooMan were described in MEDEIROS [12]), but were limited to represent the communication 
within the scope of geographical analysis, without considering other types of interactions that occur 
in this environment. The evolution of CooMan´s conceptual model to the SpeCS design, in order to contemplate 
the above requirements and allow the dynamic creation of workflows, shall cause profound changes in its 
scope and concepts especially with the incorporation of geographical attributes and the georeferencing 
the workflow s data. In the extension herein proposed for the CooMan System we introduce two solutions 
for the conflict management among the group components in the distributed environment of SpeCS, described 
in the next sections. 3.2. Spatial Group Decision Support Tools of SPeCS The decision support tool adapted 
for the GIS environment must be able to balance the individual opinions obtained throughout the process 
of reaching a consensus in a discussion. Added to a EMS (Electronic Meeting System) tool there must be 
extensions to allow individual textual observation entries, statistical graphics and several assorted 
geographic forms, with visualization of all existing alternatives. A EMS, in general, does not possess 
interfaces to support the spatial components of the geographic data, nor methods to reference geographic 
objects to texts produced by the work group during its construction and analysis phase in the project 
context. Thus, the EMS for the GIS environment to be developed must allow the users to: Implement communication 
between argumentation features with spatial tools at the time of decision making;  Increase the interaction 
of the participants, introducing tools that helps the group discussion and argumentation.  Guarantee 
the availability of the different alternatives being discussed and information to aid the decision group 
members;  The decision tools must possess, among others, the following typical features of decision 
making in the GIS environment: ability to control voting, multiple choice, prioritization, and questionnaires 
to survey of group opinions and electronic brainstorm. Most of these should allow not only the georeferencing 
but also the introduction of geographic items as objects for the above operations.  4. SPeCS ARCHITECTURE 
The prototype herein presented has an interface whose main screen presents the components necessary for 
the work group. It shows the areas for the discussion and allows private or shared notes, which can be 
seen by the rest of the team. Besides these graphic interface areas, there is a menu with the operations 
of creation and alteration of the model entities. For example, a user may introduce a new climatic characteristic, 
not foreseen up to that moment or subdivide an area for having important details that must be studied 
by the group. The system supplies the user with the ability to make textual notes, with the use of his 
preferred word processor and to share this information with other members of the work group, optionally 
indicating the region or sub region of the cartographic basis, which in turn refers to the argumentation. 
Members of the group may present proposals at any time, and a historical list may aid in the argumentation. 
As in all argumentation systems, the SPeCS prototype allows positive or negative positions, with the 
related explanations and also the thoughts conceived as the proposal is being discussed. The system still 
allows open proposals, by anonymous authors for anonymity may be interesting for institutional political 
reasons. This feature may be turned off to attend the more rigid administrative structures, or in cases 
where this attribute is used unduly. The capacity for geographic expression must be made easy and the 
access to all kinds of heterogeneous data sources must be made feasible since this is the main characteristic 
of this environment. Decision Tools               Figure 2 - SPeCS Functional Modules 
The above figure details the main modules that composes the SpeCS solution, divided in Decision Tools, 
Knowledge tools, a Decision Meter, a Knowledge Repository and Security Services. A brief discussion on 
the Decision Tools can be seen in the next section while explaining the Decision interface. The Knowledge 
Repository guarantees that all group components share the same taxonomy and that they may enjoy the same 
standard of knowledge, thus encouraging consensus based on common premises. The absence of this type 
of perspective may lead to the failure of all effort put into the assembly of this argumentation structure, 
since the lack of common knowledge concerning the problem and the solution, makes it difficult for the 
group ideas and opinions to converge. The a-Chat (asynchronous Chat) of the Knowledge Tools encapsulates 
Chat, Forum and email facilities structuring. However, the basis of the conversation is a semantic framework, 
allows the reuse of decision argumentation. A Knowledge Search Engine is capable of browsing the Knowledge 
Repository, which at contains not only the information generated during the discussions but also other 
external sources. The Knowledge Repository encapsulates the mediation and integration of the service 
layer access to as describe in 4.2. A Workflow Engine is also in development to allow a smooth interaction 
with the GIS environment. Finally, a Dynamic Survey was implemented to help researchers cope with the 
constant changes in the GIS requirements enabling easy change of survey structure and attributes. This 
will also be used to capture the feedback from local actors to be compared with those from others regions 
where some kind of interference has been made in the past by group decisions, allowing a measure of decision 
efficiency. The Decision Meter tool can compare solutions proposed in the past and the actual results 
to improve the conceptual basis for future decision, so researchers can discover the success and failure 
factors to improve and make better decisions. 4.1. Functional Levels of the Prototype SPeCS supports 
efficient and effective group work through electronic exchange of information among members. SPeCS allows 
their users to: 1) understand and participate in the decision making process, 2) watch the balancing 
of the perspectives and opinions of all participants, and 3) increase the efficiency and effectiveness 
of group debates. It offers an environment where members of a group find the tools to prioritize issues, 
perform different types of voting (yes/no, multiple choice and weighed choice), evaluate different criteria, 
elaborate documents in group, perform brainstorming, analyze projects and questionnaire surveys. At the 
upper right corner of the figure 3, one can see the coordination menu and some numbered buttons. The 
menu represent the different stages of the decision making process and the buttons allow members to contribute 
independently on each phase. The numbers on the buttons represent the amount of events present at the 
given moment in each of the above stages. In order to achieve the group objectives the prototype was 
divided into 7 different phases as seen in the icons on the top of the rightmost windows of the figure. 
The first icon (a paper and a pen) represents the problem definition, where each one can contribute to 
the specification of the exact scope of the issue about to be discussed. The system allows this specification 
in different formats to help consensus to be achieved on the subject of discussion. The next phase, represented 
by the lamp icon, is where the partners can describe the advantages, disadvantages, laboratory exams 
and documents that are the support for some point of view. The uses can also describe who is against 
or share the same opinion, providing the group with all sorts of information to make a correct decision. 
This brainstorm phase allows the generation of new ideas, which can help the group in the analysis of 
the main subject. Some geographic consensus can be necessary, as regions, borders, and many other objects 
gain alternative shapes and the reasons for the modifications. When all the discussion is getting to 
a end, the group can analyze and organize the topics created in the last two phases. A stethoscope icon 
in the SPeCS menu represents this phase. Now that all the discussion have taken place, it is time to 
see the degree of consensus, where users should rank each of the conflicting propositions in order to 
get a general opinion of the group. Through the check list icon, each member of the group can vote on 
the ideas formalized in the latter phase and the tool can allow secret and open referendum. The scores 
are automatically calculated each time a user votes, and the ideas are ordered from high score to low 
ones. At this time ideas can be discarded and reordering can take place many times. A final list of the 
most important propositions should be the result of this phase. At this time the propositions should 
be placed in a hierarchy, represented by the next icon, from the most important to the least ones so 
possible solutions can be thought. For each idea a solution must be detailed in order to allow feasibility 
in the use of the proposition. It is important to notice that all this argumentation can be georeferenced 
to any geographic element. The element can be a point on the map, a polygon representing a region or 
even a complex structure like a river, lake, or coastline, which in our case corresponds to a layer in 
the GIS. This hierarchy can be changed through the implementation of different rating of the ideas by 
the group or by eliminating unimportant concepts. The last phase is the specification and documentation 
of all solutions created by the discussion and the responsibilities implied by the decisions made by 
the group members, which can also be all referenced to the geographic elements. This stage produces information 
for the creation of the final report to be produced by the group. Figure 3 - Components of SPeCS The 
georeferencing feature of this system should be a two way characteristic, since it is also important 
that the researchers should be able through a map search and find all the discussions that had any geographic 
element belonging to it, as a basis for the argumentation, fulfilling in this way the facility for capturing 
and using the group memory. In the above figure, the discussion is georeferenced and can be understood 
as another layer in the GIS environment. Any geographic attribute can have a discussion associated and 
all the argumentation is kept structured and accessible inside the GIS database. A zoom view of the collaborative 
panel is shown at the bottom of the figure. The user writes his opinion or idea and can support his thoughts 
with a file, an URL or any geographic object link. 4.2. The SpeCS Layers SPeCS is being developed under 
a client/server architecture using Java, MapCafé, XML technologies, which offers a common standard interface 
in order to obtain compatibility at the software component level. The modular schema described in the 
figures, contains the main modules of SPeCS. The interface chosen was a World Wide Web browser, which 
is becoming standard for the geographically distributed users. Additionally, this type of architecture 
does not require software installation at the client side and guarantees that the user will always have 
the most recent application version. The SPeCS layer encapsulates several tools such as the Workflow 
and GIS tools. These tools use the HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) over the TCP/IP (Transfer Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol) to Plugin communicate with the user interface and the ONDI Browser TCP/ 
P protocol to interact with the services layer. This last part of PeC the architecture, the tools access 
 the data within the databases in the local GIS environments, security systems and any other OND services 
of this lowest layer. er ices Data ecurit Others Figure 3 - OND 's architecture  5. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
A Spatial Group Decision Support Collaborative System in environmental projects was presented in this 
paper detailing its requirements and specifications which helped to understand the complexity of spatial 
decision making and the need for coordination among the distributed researchers. The SPeCS tool introduces 
new interaction perspectives within the work arena and provides the collaborative work environment with 
several facilities for remote GIS users. This tool aims at helping to establish selection criteria to 
obtain the solution that will represent the consensus of a group involved in the decision making process. 
The integration of GIS, DSS, EMS, workflow and Coordination concepts into a common architecture allows 
the interaction and exchange of information among decision-makers, without the need to shift between 
heterogeneous applications. The results of the evaluations may be presented as statistical graphics, 
text or as cartographic representations georeferenced in the GIS context. Another feature of this system 
is to allow mining the past decisions and assist users in new similar situations. The prototype used 
in Porto Seguro Environmental Project demonstrated the premises of this paper and opens new perspectives 
in studying the collaborative interaction among users in a GIS environment. The prototype shall be further 
developed to be used in Precision Farming projects. The services layer is being extended to allow data 
from remote and heterogeneous sources to be integrated. 6. REFERENCES [1] Baek, S., Liebowitz, J., Prasad, 
S., Granger, M., 1999. Intelligent Agents for Knowledge Management Toward Intelligent Web-Based Collaboration 
within Virtual Teams. Knowledge Management Handbook. CRC Press, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 1999. [2] Boru, 
D., Feng, X. Shaopei, L., 1997. A Study of the conflict detection strategy in Collaborative Design. Proceedings 
of Second International Workshop on CSCW in Design. Bangkok, Thailand. Nov, 1997. [3] Faber, G. W.; Wallace, 
K.; Croteau, V. &#38; Thomas, L. Small, 1997. Active Response GIS: An Architecture for Interactive Resource 
Modeling. Proceedings of the GIS 97 Annual Symposium on Geographic Information Systems. Vancouver, B.C, 
GIS World, Inc, 1997 [4] Jablonski, S. &#38; Bussler, C., 1996. Workflow Management Modeling Concepts, 
Architecture and Implementation. International Thompson Computer Press, London, UK, 1996. [5] Joosten 
S., 1995. "A method for analyzing workflow", ECSCW´95 Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, Sep, 1995. [6] Kaplan, 
S. M., Carrol, A. M. &#38; Mac Gregor, K.J., 1991. Supporting Collaborative Processes with Conversation 
Builder, Conference Organizational Computing Systems, ACM - SIGOIS, Atlanta, 1991. [7] KLEIN, M., 1995. 
IDCSS: Integrating Workflow, Conflict and Rationale-Based Concurrent Engineering Coordination Technologies.", 
Journal of Concurrent Engineering Research and Applications., Volume 3, Number 1, Jan, 1995. [8] KLEIN, 
M., 1997. "Capturing Geometry Rationale for Collaborative Design", Proceedings of IEEE Sixth International 
Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises (WET ICE '97), MIT, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. June 18-20, 1997. [9] KHOSHAFIAN, S. &#38; BUCKIEWICZ, M., 1995. Introduction to 
Groupware, Workflow and Workflow Computing, John Wiley &#38; Sons, USA, 1995. [10] Malone, T. W. &#38; 
Crowston, K. G., 1994, The interdisciplinary study of Coordination. ACM Computing Surveys, 26(1): 87-119, 
1994. [11] Medeiros, Claudia B.; Vossen, Gottfried; Wesk, Mathias, 1996. GEO-WASA - Combining GIS Technology 
with Workflow Management. 1-23p. February, 1996. [12] Medeiros, S., Souza J., Xexeo G., 1999. "Fuzzy 
Petri nets for Dynamic Workflow in GIS environment, XX International Conference on Application and Theory 
of Petri Nets, Williamsburg, June 1999. [13] Papadopoulos G. A., Models and Technologies for the Coordination 
of Internet Agents: A Survey , chapter in Coordination of Internet Agents, Springer Verlag, 2000 (to 
appear). [14] Souza J., Vaz, M., Medeiros S., 1997. Workflow Model and Architecture in GIS Environment. 
Proceedings of Second International Workshop on CSCW in Design. Bangkok, Thailand. Nov. 1997. [15] Souza 
J., Vaz, M., Medeiros S., 1997. "Collaborative perspectives in GIS environment: CooMan", CRIWG´97 - III 
International Workshop on Groupware, El Escorial, Spain, 1997. [16] Souza J., Vaz, M., Medeiros S., 1997. 
Workflow Model and Architecture in GIS Environment. Proceedings of Second International Workshop on CSCW 
in Design. Bangkok, Thailand. Nov 1997. [17] Tiwana, A., 2000, The Knowledge Management Toolkit Practical 
Techniques for Building a Knowledge Management System , Prentice Hall PTR, New Jersey, USA. 2000. [18] 
Winograd, T., 1988. A Language/Action Perspective on the Design of Cooperative Work, Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work: A Book of Readings, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc, California. 1988   
			