
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. COORDINATING ORDER PROCESSING IN DECENTRALIZED PRODUCTION UNITS USING HIERARCHICAL SIMULATION 
MODELS AND WEB-TECHNOLOGIES Dipl.-Ing. W. E. Lulay Prof. Dr.-Ing. G. Reinhart Institute for Machine Tools 
and Industrial Management (iwb), Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstrasse 15, 85748 Garching 
bei München, GERMANY  ABSTRACT Increased dynamics and flexibility of order processing are considered 
the potentials of decentralized production systems. To feed these potentials a certain degree of partial 
autonomy is admitted. Nevertheless this given partial autonomy must be aligned to global company-wide 
objectives. One approach is supporting and co-ordinating decision-taking by using a simulation-based 
assistance system. Hierarchical modeling facilitates the suitable configuration of the simulation models 
and allows faster examination of larger production areas. Web-technologies, such as easy-to-use web-clients 
together with capable simulation-servers, make it possible for simulation-laymen to be supported in decision-taking 
by the assistance­system. 1 COORDINATION OF DECISION-TAKING Efficient order processing in decentralized 
production units requires a great number of decisions, which have to be taken permanently and rapidly. 
Depending on the extent of partial autonomy admitted to the decentralized units, many of these decisions 
are token locally, such as decisions on the appropriate job-sequence-order or the right malfunction handling. 
These local decisions are driven by local objectives, e.g. the optimal utilization of the own machines 
or the optimal workload in the own unit. In addition to local decisions others are token from a global 
point of view, such as the adaption of the product spectrum or the machine spectrum. These global decisions 
are driven by global objectives, e.g. the Local objectives Co-ordination of Flexibility &#38; decision-taking 
Productivity Global objectives Figure 1: Coordination of Local and Global Decision-taking in Decentralized 
Units 1655 n production-accompanying­simulation Figure 2: Production-Accompanying-Simulation as anAssistance-Systemfor 
Decision-Support attainingof short times of delivery or a high schedule adherencyfor all orders. However 
the measure for partial autonomyandthus the equilibration between local and global decisions is selected, 
in any case both decision-taking-processes interact witheachother. To guarantee the flexibility of the 
decentralized units, bypermitting the local view, and to insure the productivityof the whole company, 
by considering theglobal view, coordination of decision­taking is affordable.  2 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
SUPPORT OF DECISION-TAKING Decison-takingisdominated by either local or global objectives -depending 
onwhere decisions are token.A real coordination and balancing of both sides ofobjectives often doesn´t 
take place. Another problem are the hidden effects of token decisions -because eveniflocal and global 
objectives are considered at the same time, due to the complexinteractions the true effects often are 
not recognized. Bothaspects, dominating objectives and hidden effects complicate decision-taking and 
even lead to false decisions -the primarily planned characteristic of rapid and appropriate decision-taking 
and thusflexible and efficient order processingdisappears. Toguarantee the positive characteristics of 
decentralized productionsystems and to support the local competence of employees, the decision-taking-process 
must be supported. An environmentfor experimentsis required, where employees are enabled to analyse alternative 
decisions. Employees must be enabled to formulate typical decisions easily, if possible just by pressing 
buttons. As a result, the quality of the decisions and their effects on local and global objectives should 
be shown. In this environment for experiments it shouldbe possible to oppose local and global objectivesand 
tosolve conflicts between them by the use ofsimplecoordination mechanisms.  3 APPROACH FOR THE PROBLEM 
SOLVING To meet these requirements the Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial Management (iwb), Technische 
Universität München, develops an assistance-system for production­accompanying-simulation,which gives 
the demanded supportindecision-taking. The project, inwhich the assistance-system is developed, is part 
ofthe german research networkForschungsverbund Simulationstechnik (ForSIM). The whole research network, 
aswell as the project described here, is joined by a number ofgerman enterprises. Basis of the described 
assistance-system is a simulation-model, where the production-process to be examined is modelled (Figure 
2). Employees can have themselves supported indecision­taking, by examining the quality and the effects 
of decisions. The assistance-system checks the decisions and verifies possible effects. The result of 
thisverification process is replied in form of logistic characteristic numbers, such as deliverytime, 
schedule adherency of jobs or workload ofmachines. Interfaces to the systems for productionplanningand 
control, which the enterprises already have, intitialize and actualize the simulation-model. Forimplementing 
this assistance-system, two important aspects have to be considered. Onthe one hand, Requirements on 
simulations models comprehensive comprehensive models detaillied modelling short simulation times de 
ta illed Properties of modelling techniques Figure 3: Requirements on and Properties of Modelling Techniques 
sophisticated models have to be built, in order that the simulation is able to produce the required results 
in the demanded quality and in reasonable time. On the other hand, the user interaction must be easy 
to use and has to run on simple as well as cheap hardware plattforms. The following article discusses 
both emphases - the development of suitable simulation-models (section 0) and the structure as well as 
the design of the user-interaction (section 0). Unit 1   Consistency 4 DEVELOPING HIERARCHICAL SIMULATION 
MODELS 4.1 Requirements on simulation models and properties of modelling techniques For production-accompanying 
use of simulation, special demands on the design of the simulation models are made. On the one hand comprehensive 
models are required, which cover extensive production areas and permit detailed questions. On the other 
hand the models should be rapid ... Unit n  Hierarchical Simulation Models R Hierarchy Regression model 
B Hierarchy Operating curve vertical modules W Hierarchy Queue model IN OUT IN OUT IN OUT Compatibility 
D Hierarchy Discrete event A1 A2 A3 horizontal modules Configurated Simulation Model IN OUT W A2 DR 
Figure 4: Horizontal and Vertical Modules of Hierarchical Simulation Models enough, to be able to use 
the responses actually accompanying to the production process. Using only one modelling technique, these 
requirements cannot be met at one time (Figure 3). Discrete event models for example allow detailled 
mapping of structure and dynamic behaviour of production systems. But if large production areas are concerned, 
they become complex and intransparent. Then they require simulations times, which are too long for a 
production­accompanying use of their results. Queue models as a more abstract modelling technique, as 
well as operating curves or regression models, require less simulation time even if large areas are modelled. 
Therefore the examinable questions are often not detailled enough to support decision-taking and coordination 
in decentralized production units efficiently. 4.2 Integrating modelling techniques into hierarchical 
models To solve the described dilemma between requirements on and properties of modelling, hierarchical 
simulation models where developed and different modelling techiques integrated. The basic structure of 
these hierarchical models are horizontal and vertical modules (Figure 4). The horizontal modules represent 
each production-unit by an own partial model. This facilitates the modelling and improves interpretation 
of the simulation results. The vertical modules in each partial model represent different abstract hierarchical 
levels. The differing abstraction is reached by the use of the different modelling techniques: the most 
detailled level is modelled by discrete event techniques - as said, this allows the most detailled questions 
but requires the longest simulation times. Queue models are used for a more abstract modelling of dynamic 
interconnections of certain charteristics (access rate, operating rate, system size). Operation curves 
are utilized for a static view on the interconnection between the logistical characteristic numbers. 
Regression models are appointed, when interconnections between other data are desired to be described. 
The decision, which hierarchical level is suitable, is taken by the user depending on the question to 
be exa­mined. Parameters for this decision are the recommended accuracy of the simulation results, the 
available time or the logical distance of the production area, which has to be covered. For areas at 
a short logical distance (e.g. the own organisational unit) a detailled hierarchical level has to be 
used (e.g. the discrete event level). Areas at a long logical distance (e.g. storage facilities) can 
be modelled more abstract (e.g. by the use of a queue model).  Figure 5: Transformation Functions for 
Consistency and Compatibility 1658 4.3 Achieving consistency and compatibility In order that the configuration 
of the hierarchical simulation models actually functions under run-time , consistency within and compatibility 
between the several partial models are necessary (Figure 4). Consistency between levels means, that model 
variations have to be mentioned in each level according to their specific modelling possibilities. Especially 
model levels with lower accuracy have to be adapted to alterations in model levels with higher accuracy: 
for example alterations in the discrete event level (or even in reality) must be considered in the queue-level 
etc. Compatibility between partial models means, that the configuration of the entire simulation model 
has to be a process of sticking together several partial models, no matter which hierarchical levels 
in the different partial models are activated at that time. Both, consistency and compatibility, are 
implemented by transformation matrices, which are assigned to each partial model. Every transformation 
matrix contains several transformation functions which translate the behaviour of one hierarchical level 
into another. Figure 5 shows in exemplary fashion the transformation of discrete event behaviour (D) 
into the behaviour of the other modelling techniques (W, B, R). The transformation function D.W (Figure 
5, left side, top) monitors the discrete event level and detects the distribution function and its parameters 
of the access rate, the operating rate and determines the size of the system. The transformation function 
D.B (Figure 5, left side, middle) monitors the discrete event level and approximates the operating curve 
out of characteristic numbers such as Information network (LAN/WAN) the maximum capacity, the minimum 
delivery time and the limiting workload. The transformation function D.R (Figure 5, left side, bottom) 
monitors the discrete event level and calculates the regression model of choosen events - as an extension 
to the queue model or the operating curve the events to be monitored can be choosen totaly free. Figure 
5 also shows the transformation of the queue model (W), the operating curve model (B) and the regression 
model (R) into the discrete event level (D) . The transformation function W.D generates events (such 
as creation of orders) - the basis therefore are the distribution functions of access rate and operating 
rate (Figure 5, right side, top). The transformation function B.D generates events too, but bases on 
the relationship between workload, utilization, delivery time and schedule adherency (Figure 5, right 
side, middle). So does the transformation function R.D, depending on the relation of the freely choosen 
numbers of the regression model (Figure 5, right side, bottom). Of course there is a loss of accuracy, 
when detailled levels are transformed into more abstract levels and therefore less detailled views. One 
instead receives levels of discription, which produce the desired simulation results more rapidly or 
on the basis of less detailed master data. It is important to mention, that the level of abstraction 
of the entire simulation model can be variated by the user individually and according to his needs. Thus 
the user is able to choose the qualities of the modelling technique very precisely: If there is enough 
time for the simulation experiment, the period for the forecast is short, the master data is accurate, 
the production unit to be modelled is at a WEB-Server cgi- programs Order Order Database Simulator Web-client 
Hierarchical simulation models M User Production-accompanying use by Continuous support by simulation-laymen 
simulation-experts Figure 6: Structure of the Web-based Assistance-system InterSIM short logical distance 
and the results have to be very explicit, more detailled modelling levels will be choosen If there is 
only little time, the period for the forecast is long, the master data are not very precise, the production 
unit to be modelled is at a long logical distance and if only basic statements are necessary, more abstract 
levels are sufficient USING WEB-TECHNOLOGIES FOR EASY USER INTERACTION With the described approach for 
hierarchical modelling it becomes possible to customize the properties of simulation-models as they are 
needed for production accompanying use. In addition to that capability, the assistance system must be 
applicable by employees during production process. Because of the fact, that the number of simulation 
experts in production areas is rather low, the user interaction must be orientated on the needs of simulation 
laymen. In particular the system-complexity, as described here in form of hierarchical models, must be 
concealed to them. To meet these requirements the web-based assistance­system InterSIM (=Internet Simulation) 
was developed, which is divided into two areas, one for simulation-laymen and one for simulation-experts 
(Figure 6). The simulation-expert-area contains the whole system-complexity. This is where the hierarchical­simulation-models 
are kept, as well as a database, a web­server and CGI-programs (=Common-Gateway-Interface). The web-server 
handles the whole communication between the database, the simulator and of course the HTML­interfaces, 
which are found in the simulation-laymen-area (see below). The web-server is addressed by a defined internet-adress 
(e.g. http://miro/InterSIM) and transmits the inquiries. For this purpose CGI-programs are used which 
operate the database and address the simulator. After the simulation run the web-server gathers the results, 
builds web-pages therefrom and transfers them to the users in the simulations-laymen-area. The simulation-laymen-area 
contains purposely only simple HTML-based user-interfaces (Figure 7). Due to their structure (Information 
> Configuration > Experiment > Analysis) and design, which is orientated on the special needs of employees 
in decentralized production areas, it is possible to define experiments and read the results, transferred 
by the web-server (see above), easily. 6 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE The assistance system for production-accompanying­simulation 
described in this article provides an environment for experiments. In this environment the quality and 
the effects of decisions can be analyzed and modified before they are implemented in the real production 
area. The support of decision-taking bases on a dynamic and therefore realistic model - the real production 
process does not get disturbed. The global view as well as the local view on the supplied characteristic 
logistic numbers facilitates coordination of decentralized production units onto a common enterprise-wide 
goal. The approach described in this paper enables to meet the competitive requests of comprehensive 
and detailled and rapid simulation models. The simulation models can be configurated under run-time and 
thus adapted to the momentary needs while decision taking. During the modelling process additional efforts 
are necessary of course, because different abstract and parallel valid levels have to be created. This 
additional effort is partially compensated by the developed modelling rules. Currently it is attempted 
to reduce the necessary efforts and, where possible, to partially automate the modelling process. The 
developed web-based assistance-system enables employees to formulate simulation-experiments easily. Especially 
the separation of the assistance-system into simulation-laymen-area and simulation-expert-area and their 
interconnection by information technology contains great benefits for small- and mid-size enterprises: 
this gives them the possibility to use simulation technology without having too high expenses on simulation-plattforms, 
-software and experts. Instead they can buy the needed simulation-competence from a simulation-service-center 
and can concentrate their own efforts on running their production efficiently.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The 
project described here is supported by the Bayerische Forschungsstiftung within the german research network 
Forschungsverbund Simulationstechnik (ForSIM).  REFERENCES Banks, J.; Carson, J. S.; Nelson, B. L.: 
Discrete-Event System Simulation. Prentice Hall, New Jersey 1996 Bosch, K.: Statistik Taschenbuch. Oldenbourg, 
Wien, 1993 Law, A. M.; Kelton, W. D.: Simulation, Modelling and Analysis. McGraw-Hill, New York 1991 
Lulay, W.: Hierarchische Simulationsmodelle verbessern die Auftragskoordination in dezentralen Produktionsstrukturen. 
In Mertins, K.; Rabe, M. (Hrsg.): Erfahrungen aus der Zukunft. 8. ASIM ­ Fachtagung Simulation in Produktion 
und Logistik, IPK Berlin Eigenverlag 1998 Martin, C.: Verfahren und Systeme zur simulationsbasierten 
Produktionsregelung bei komplexen Produktionsstrukturen. In: Kampe, G., Zeitz, M. (Hrsg.) 9. Symposium 
Simulationstechnik, Stuttgart 1994 Reinhart, G.; Decker, F.; Heitmann, K.: Möglichkeiten zur Integration 
der Simulation in das betriebliche Umfeld. Maschinenmarkt 101 (1995) 36, S. 48-53, Würzburg Reinhart, 
G.; Lulay, W.: Koordination dezentraler Produktionsstrukturen durch betriebsbegleitende Simulation. ZWF 
Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb. 1-2 (1998) , Carl Hanser München Wiechert, W.: Modellkonsistenz 
und Konfliktlösung bei Hybriden Modellansätzen. ASIM 97 - 11. Symposium Simulationstechnik, Dortmund 
1997 Wiendahl, H.-P.: Belastungsorientierte Fertigungs­steuerung -Grundlagen, Verfahrensaufbau, Reali­sierung. 
Carl Hanser München 1987 Zetlmayer, H.: Verfahren zur simulationsgestützten Produktionsregelung in der 
Einzel- und Kleinserien­produktion (iwb Forschungsberichte Nr. 74), Springer Berlin 1994 Zimmermann, 
H.-J.: Operations Research - Methoden und Modelle. Vieweg Braunschweig 1992  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES WERNER 
E. LULAY works as a researcher at the Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial Management (iwb) at 
the Technische Universität München. His research interests include simulation of production systems. 
In addition to this he is concerned with consulting projects in the area of business process reengineering. 
GUNTHER REINHART is head of the Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial Management (iwb) at the Technische 
Universität München. Before he became professor and head of the iwb he was senior plant manager at the 
BMW AG in Munich. Special recognition was given to the iwb for its work in the area of computer-integrated­production. 
  
			