
 COST EFFECTIVE METHODS FOR TEACHING INTRODUCTORY PROGRAMMING COURSES Thomas C. Richards University 
of Michigan-Dearborn ABSTRACT A number of experiments in teaching introductory programming courses 
in a cost effective manner have been conducted by the author using a per- sonalized system of instruction. 
Languages ex- perimented with included FORTRAN, COBOL AND PL/I. The problems of procrastination and non-comple- 
tion of course work were partly overcome by the author's unique solutions to these problems. Introduction 
 The purpose of this paper is to discuss several experiments which have been conducted by this author 
during the last five years using PSI (Personalized System of Instruction) in the pre- sentation of introductory 
programming courses. The concept of teaching the syntax of a computer programming language via Personalized 
System of Instruction is not new [2], [3], [4]. Particu- lar emphasis will be placed on the cost reduction 
techniques used in these experiments. Languages which have been used in these experiments have included 
FORTRAN, PL/I and COBOL. These efforts have been supported in part with grants from the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation and the Center for Re- search on Learning and Teaching, at the Univer- sity of Michigan. 
Objectives of the Study: The primary objective of these experiment was to determine if it was feasible 
to offer in- troductory programming courses using a minimum allocation of our very limited computer science 
faculty. We hoped to improve the productivity of our faculty in the computing area by not de- voting 
a large amount of our limited staff time to teaching elementary computer programming. The secondary objectives 
in offering these exper- imental computer programming courses included the evaluation of the feasibility 
of offering courses covering the syntax of a programming lan- guage using the PSI format of instruction. 
Pro- gramming style and program structure were not em- phasized in these courses since they were de- 
signed to provide an introduction to a particular programming language for the student with limited background 
in computing. We also hoped to Permission to copy without ~e all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed ~r divot commercial advantage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and i~ date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association ~r Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, ~qui~s a ~e and/or specific 
permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM0-89791-067-2/82/002/0128 $00.75 128 attract the non-traditional student 
for whom a regularly scheduled class meeting several days a week would prove to be an inconvenience if 
not an impossibility. Instructional Models Used in the Study In order to achieve this primary goal 
of im- proved computer science staff utilization and achieve a reduction in overall costs of offering 
introductory programming courses, a number of variations of the PSI model as defined by Boylan [i], 
were used in presenting these courses. Most of the experimental models used in this study in- corporated 
one or more of the common features found in PSI which include mastery learning, self- pacing, stress 
on the written word, use of proc- tors and lectures for motivational purposes. In all of the experimental 
courses, a de- tailed study guide played an improtant role. It was used to provide a precise outline 
of the course, a schedule for completing each learning activity, instructions for each programming prob- 
lem including data, office hours of the proctor and instructor, location of all computing facil- ities 
and the required procedures for completing the course. Proctors were provided during sched- uled hours 
and by appointment to assist the stu- dents with programming problems, act as turors, and provide general 
support to the students in- cluding a socializing function [14]. In later experiments instructor pacing 
[ii] was introduced in hope of improving completion rates and reducing procrastination. Motivational 
lectures were also introduced in later experimen- tal classes. These were designed to encourage the student 
to progress in the course at a reasonable rate and provide details regarding programming assignments. 
In one design, commercially pre- pared materials consisting of audio tapes and a comprehensive study 
guide were used [5]. In another version of the same course, instructor prepared audio tapes and supporting 
learning ma- terials were used with some success. In yet an- other version of these courses, audio materials 
were eliminated completely and students were asked simply to read the assigned material in the text and 
complete related programming problems. In order to improve the communication be- tween the instructor 
and the students enrolled in  the courses, a prerecorded i0 to 30 minute audio presentation was recorded 
each week and placed on a telephone dial access device which students could access from phones either 
on or off campus. These systems are explained in some detail by Rao [13]. The author also equipped his 
office with a telephone answering device enabling students to leave short messages requesting information 
or a request that the instructor return their call. With the one exception mentioned above, all courses 
used a standard commercially prepared pro- gramming language text. In all these experimental courses, 
the student usually worked at his or her own pace within cer- tain time constraints (one semester's completion 
time). They had very little direct interaction with the course instructor but had access to a course 
proctor and were given a detailed study guide. The student assumed responsibility for learning the syntax 
of a programming language by writing a number of programs and executing them on a computer. Students 
could work faster than the prescribed pace but no rewards were provided for early completion of the course 
or its units. As one often finds when teaching programming, students tend to lag behind when completing 
programming as- signments and early completion of assignments is unusual. Examinations and/or unit quizzes 
were in- corporated into all models. Mastery learning was not generally an element in th~se systems. 
It was incorporated into the early experiments but due to lack of administrative and clerical support 
was for all practical purposes discontinued. Experiments: In order to achieve better resdurce use 
and reduce overall costs, several variations of the above factors were tried during the last five years. 
The FORTRAN course has been offered both in a one semester hour and a three semester hour version. A 
set of materials sold by Westinghouse Learning Press titled, .Computer Programmin~ an Individualized 
Course in FORTRAN IV [5] as well as audio tapes an~-d-a--al~aarn-ing guid~e prepared by the author have 
been used in this course. The course covered introducuory FORTRAN through sub- routines. The student 
was required to complete eight to twelve programs and pass unit tests and examinations. Individual tutoring 
and debugging assistance was provided by computer center coun- selors and a course proctor. The course 
has been taught using both student pacing and instructor pacing. The COBOL course was of a similar nature 
to the FORTRAN course except the author's lec- ture notes were converted to textual form and printed 
for student use. Only a one credit hour version of this course has been offered with a three credit hour 
course now under development. Both a three credit hour section and a one, one credit hour section of 
PL/I has been offered to-date. The text, Problem Solving and the Com- 9uter: A Structured Concep!wit 
h PL/I-~I~ was used. These sections were taught using three moti- vational lectures to improve communication 
and en- courage students to make continual progress in the course. In all of these experiments the 
courses were  offered on an overload basis with the instructor receiving payment for teaching the course 
in ad- dition to his normal teaching load. The general format of the renumeration schedule appears in 
the Appendix. The approximate renumeration has been about $50.00 per student enrollment per se- mester. 
This is considerably less than the per head renumeration mentioned be!ow for regular classes but these 
rates have been found to be reasonable for the amount of effort required to teach these courses. Evaluation: 
 Over a five year period a total of fourteen sections of introductory programming courses with an approximate 
total enrollment of 200 have been offered using variations of the above model. The initial classes were 
offered in a self-paced for- mat with few constraints on student completion time even though students 
were encouraged to com- plete the courses within a one semester time- frame. The common problems [ii] 
of high withdrawal rates, student non-completion of the courses, students completing most of the required 
materi- al during the final weeks of the semester and procrastination became apparent during the first 
few semesters of these experiments. The pro- crastination and course completion during the final weeks 
of the semester were reduced by the introduction of pacin~ contingencies consisting of due dates for 
programs and deadlines for com- pletion of exams. The overall completion rate, the percentage of students 
who successfully complete a course, was 45% for all fourteen sections. This compares with a 68% completion 
rate when the same courses are taught using the lecture recitation mode of instruction. Both of these 
completion rates are significantly lower than those reported by Glick [6] and Kulik [i0]. The proportion 
of those completing the courses was increased from 45% to 62% by the implementation of instructor imposed 
contingencies. These results are contrary to the findings by Glick [6]. Another factor often used in 
measuring the  effectiveness of a PSI course is student achieve- ment. The average grade point assigned 
to stu- dents completing these twelve sections was 2.80. This compares with an average grade point 
for students eompleting the same courses taught in the normal lecture recitation mode of 2.21. This 
achievement level indicates that the use of PSI does not have a negative impact on student achievement 
and in fact may have a positive affect. A number of studies have shown this to be the case as reviewed 
by Kulik [9]. One of the primary goals in these experi- ments has been to reduce the costs of teaching 
introductory programming courses. Costs which were considered include the instructor's contact hours, 
instructor preparation hours and teach- ing assistant hours. The preparation of study guides and supporting 
audio tapes can be rather expensive. Development costs varied from the $500.00 paid for the Westinghouse 
materials [5] 129 to over 200 man-hours to record audio tapes and pre- pare a detailed cou1~se study 
guide. The current ver- sion of our PL/I course which we are now offering to our MBA students only required 
the preparation of a detailed study guide of ten or fifteen pages in length. Audio tapes are not used 
in this course. An estimated twenty man-hours were re- quired to prepare this study guide. The prepara- 
tion of unit and f~lal exams require approximately the same amount of time as those used in a lecture 
recitation class. Since mastery is not an element of this course, administrative support is reduced to 
a minimum. Assuming a twenty student enrollment per three credit hour section the cost of faculty would 
be $51.30 per student using the renumeration schedule appearing :in the Appendix. Further re- ductions 
in cost per student can be realized as the number of students per section increases as shown by the schedule 
appearing in the Appendix. Proctor time at ten hours per week would be $25.00 per student/per semester. 
Lecture recitation mode costs per student are estimated to be $208.00 based on a average faculty salary 
of $25,000.00 and a nine semester credit hour load. This as- sumes a direct faculty cost of $4,166.00 
per three hour class and an enrollment of twenty students. At an enrollment of thirty students costs 
are $138.00 per student and at forty stu- dents $104.00. To reach the $50.00 per student mentioned above 
for self instruction courses, an enrollment of 83 students would be required per lecture recitation section. 
Indirect or overhead costs have not been included in these estimates since they are assumed to be roughly 
equivalent for both systems. Others have found a similar 50% reduction in costs with PSI [4],[12],[16]. 
 The use of well trained and enthusiastic stu- dent proctors was found to be one of the most im- portant 
elements in course design. Overall com- pletion rates for all fourteen sections were 45%. Three of these 
fourteen sections were supported by proctors which the author judged to have the above attributes. The 
resulting average comple- tion rate was 70%. The importance of the role of the proctor has been documented 
by others [8], [14] , and is supported by this study. Proctors not only served as tutors, but also as 
adminis- trative assistants and as social facilitators [15] in these experiments. As pointed out above 
we are currently allocating ten hours per week of proctor time. During these hours the proc- tor is available 
for consultations in our com- puter center. These hours are scheduled ran- domly during the day and week 
to service the largest number of students. In addition to well trained proctors, these courses require 
administrative and cler- ical support. Cook [2] was able to use the ser- vices of the mathematics science 
learning center at Oregon State University during his experiments with teaching programming using PSI. 
Dickson [4] and Daly [3] report the availability of resources to support their own learning laboratories 
staffed by graduate teaching assistants. In our experi- ments we utilized the services of the Office 
of Individualized Learning, the Campus unit responsi- ble for the development of self-instruction  courses, 
as well as performing these activities on an adhoc basis. We have found the administrative efforts re- 
quired to support these courses can be reduced if a detailed week by week study guide is prepared and 
well trained proctors are used. Another ele- ment for reducing administrative overhead is the elimination 
of self-pacing and requiring that as- signments be completed and turned in on time. We find the motivated 
student will have little prob- lem completing a course in a timely manner where the less prepared student 
will have problems re- gardless of the course structure. Another major element which we were not able 
to implement in these experiments was a course maintenance system. Over time it is imperative to update 
the materials used in a PSI course. Since these experimental courses have been offered on less than a 
full commitment from the administra- tion, we have not factored into the work-load or time allocation 
the elements to support course maintenance. Our solution to this problem is to once again prepare a detailed 
study guide as ex- plained above which is keyed to a well written text. The study guide can be modified 
and kept up to date with little effort if it is properly or- ganized and formatted. Student evaluations 
were solicited during a semester in which a three semester hour FORTRAN course was offered using instructor 
prepared ma- terials. This was the semester that weekly pre- recorded audio tapes were placed on a 
telephone answering device for improved communication with the students. Some twenty students successfully 
 completed the course during this term. Students were asked to rate on a five point scale the text, 
the proctor, the telephone tapes and the instructor prepared audio tapes. For readers familar with the 
Kennedy and Solomon text [7] which was used during this semester, the stu- dent rating of 4.36 would 
seem appropriate. The only negative comments regarding the text were lack of complete programming examples. 
An ex- ceptional and experienced proctor was used during this experimental course offering, and he was 
given a rating of 4.55. The usefulness of the telephone tapes and instructor prepared audio tapes was 
questioned by a number of students and they were given ratings of 2.73 and 2.63 respec- tively. The average 
number of times the weekly telephone tapes were accessed per student was 10.2 times during the 14 week 
semester. The completion rate for this section was 66% which compares favorably with the completion 
rate of 68% we are currently experiencing when the same course is taught using the lecture recitation 
 mode of instruction. The cost for this section including the proctor assistant was about $1,300.00 
 compared to $2,150.00 when taught via lecture recitation. Per student these costs translate in- to 
about $65.00 and $ii0.00 respectively. The latter cost assumes that the course is being of- fered via 
our Extension Office which can offer a course at a lower cost than when the course is offered as a 
part of a regular faculty's teaching load. This cost would be about $4000.00 per  130 three hour course 
assuming a $25,000.00 salary and References a nine hour teaching load. On a per student basis this translates 
back to the $200.00 mention- ed above. One of the objectives of these course offer- ings was to attract 
the non-traditional student, the student who due to working hours or family ob- ligations can not meet 
with a regularly scheduled class. A survey of two sections containing some 35 students showed 66% were 
full-time students. Interestingly enough 14% were degreed, having de- grees in a large variety of disciplines 
including engineering and mathematics. The goal of servicing the non-traditional stu- dent in any significant 
numbers is a challenging objective. There are a number of reasons for this: first, there seems to be 
no convenient and econom- ical way to advertise the existence of the courses to these students and second 
these students need the reinforcement provided by the lecture recita- tion mode of instruction more than 
the full-time student who has ready access to an instructor during his regular office hours (usually 
during the day). Conc lu s ion : These experiments with the use of PSI as an instructional mode have 
shown that it is a fea- sible mode of instruction from both the student achievement and resource utilization 
standpoints. They have also shown that these courses can be offered in a cost affective manner while 
still offering an opportunity for the student to learn the syntax of a programming language. The goal 
of servicing the non-traditional student has only partially been achieved and is one of the most difficult 
to accomplish. The productivity of faculty has been increased and further increases will be realized 
as we become more experienced in offering these types of courses. The importance of adequate support 
systems can not be overemphasized in these systems. These include a well trained proctor, clerical assistance 
and trained personnel for continual maintenance of the ceurses. A mechanism for continual feedback from 
the students enrolled in the course must be built into these systems to insure that they are providing 
a meaningful learning experience for the students. These methods are evolu- tionary and must be designed 
for the particu- lar student population being serviced as well as the teaching modes and philosophy of 
the instructor involved. The model currently being used involves the use of a detailed student study 
guide which in- cludes all assignments, due dates and readings. The experiments have included most of 
the attri- butes of PSI except student pacing. i. Boylan, H., PSI: A survey of users and their implementation 
practices. Journal of Per- sonalized Instruction. 4,1,(1978), 40-43. 2. Cook, C., A self-paced introductory 
FORTRAN programming course, ACM SIGCSESymposium, Dayton,(1979).  3. Daly, C., Embley D. and Nagy G., 
A progress report on teaching programming to business students without lectures. ACM-SIGCSE Sym- posium, 
Dayton,(1979).  4. Dickson, G., Munro M. and Litecky C., Computer language instruction: a modular approach. 
Proceedinss of the 1972 Midwest AIDS Confer- ence, Columbus,(1972).  5. Game, C. and O'Donnell D., Computer 
Program- ming, ~ Individualized Course in FORTRAN IV. Westinghouse Learning Press, Sunnyvale,(1975). 
 6. Glick, D. and Semb G., Effect of pacing con- tingencies in personalized instruction: A re- view 
of the evidence. Journal of Personalized Instruction, 3,1,(1978), 36-42.  7. Kennedy, M. and Solomon, 
M., Structured PL/ ZERO plus PL/ONE. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.,(1977).  8. Kozma, R., Kulik 
J. and Smith, B., Development of a guide for PSI proctors, Journal of Per- sonalized Instruction, 2,4,(1977), 
221-225.  9. Kulik, C.~Kulik J. and Cohen A., Instructional technology and College teaching. Teaching 
of Psychology, 7,4,(1980), 199-205.   I0. Kulik, J., Kulik C. and Cohen A., Research on audio-tutorial 
instruction: a meta-analysis of comparative studies. Research in Hisher Edu- cation. 11,4,(1979), 322-341. 
 ii. Lloyd, E. and Jacobi D., Developing self-con- trol in self-paced classes. Journal of Per- sonalized 
Instruction, 4,2,(1980), 70-73. 12. Predebon, W., et al., An instructional center for self-paced programmed 
courses: an alter- native for reluctant faculty. Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference, Society for 
Engineering Education, British Columbia,(1978)  13. Rao, P., Telephone-based instructional sys- tems. 
Audiovisual Instruction, 17,4,(1972), 18-22.  14. Robin, A., Proctor training: snapshots, re- flections 
and suggestions. Journal of Per- sonalized Instruction, 2,4,(1977), 216-220.  15. Shortt, J. and Wilson 
T., Problem Solvin$ and the Computer: a Structured Concept with PL/I (PL/C). Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, Menlo Park,(1978).  16. Whitney, G. and Hammer M., Cost comparison of PSI v. lecture methods 
of teaching a manage-  131 ment course. Proceedinss of the Seventh Annual Western Regiqnal Conference, 
American Institute for Decision Sciences, San Diego, 1978. APPENDIX GUIDE LINES FOR FACULTY STIPEND 
 FOR OPERATING PSI COURSES After a course has been completely individualized, the Faculty-Author will 
receive a stipend and a "deferred development fee" each term for services of: (I) writing and grading 
assignments, tests, and examinations, (2) correcting or upgrading the recordings and study guide as required 
by student feedback, and (3) advising students. The stipend will depend on "base payment" which is defined 
as a percent of one-eighth (1/8) of the Faculty-Author's salary. For a three-hour course in which the 
Faculty-Author is required to spend no more than an average of 4-1/2 hours per week in the services enumerated 
above, the actual stipend will vary with the number of students in the course. PERCENT OF STUDEIiTS 
BASE PAYMENT I-i0 students 20 11-20 students 27 21-30 students 39 31-40 students 52 41-50 students 
64 51-75 students 77 76-100 students 89 101-125 students 95 126-150 students i00 151-200 students 
105 
			