
 Creating and Managing a Helpdesk in a Multicultural Environment Teresa Chipman Lead IT Consultant Texas 
A&#38;M University at Qatar Doha, Qatar 972-492-7604 or 972-514-3610 teresa.chipman@qatar.tamu.edu ABSTRACT 
In the Fall of 2003 a new campus for Texas A&#38;M University at Qatar (TAMUQ) was established in Doha, 
Qatar. This campus offers students a degree in either Electrical, Petroleum, Chemical or Mechanical Engineering 
fields just as if they were on our Main Campus. This paper will describe the history of how the Helpdesk 
within Information Technology Services (ITS) was created on the Qatar campus and how it is managed today 
in a multicultural environment. I will describe what happens to a problem ticket when it is submitted 
to the problem tracking system and the many challenges we encounter. Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.6.4 [Management of Computing Information Systems]: System Management - centralization/decentralization. 
 General Terms Management, Measurement, Documentation, Performance, Reliability, Human Factors, Standardization, 
Languages Keywords Helpdesk, Cultures, Documentation, Student Workers, Communication, Location 1. INTRODUCTION 
In 2003, Texas A&#38;M University realized there was an opportunity and need for educating students in 
Qatar in the field of engineering. In keeping with the University s mission, a new campus was developed. 
The new campus (TAMUQ) started in the Fall of 2003 in Doha, Qatar with seven faculty, eight staff, and 
a Freshman class of twenty-nine students. Today we offer four years of classes and a graduate school 
is in the near future. Starting with the Fall 2007 semester, we will have approximately 278-students 
and approximately 198 faculty/staff. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7-10, 2007, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2007 
ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010 $5.00. TAMUQ is a technology rich university. Each student receives their 
own personal laptop at the beginning of their Freshman year. If they graduate from TAMUQ, then the laptop 
is theirs to keep. At the beginning of the Fall semester each year, ITS asks the students to bring their 
laptops in to have software updated and file sharing programs cleaned up. Every year we see many instances 
of laptop misuse by the students. They leave them in hot cars, accidentally run over them, or download 
file sharing programs. In the classrooms and open access labs, the students get connected using an ethernet 
connection or wireless. There are wireless access points throughout the building. When connecting by 
wireless, users authenticate through a program called Blue Socket. Our classrooms and lecture halls are 
equipped with the latest audio and video technology (Digital Presenters (document camera), AirProjectors 
(Client) and Crestrons). The newest addition to our school is The Cave (visualization research project) 
which will be available in the Fall of 2007. There is a wide variety of Middle East cultures on campus 
making communication a challenge. Customs and traditions all depend on what part of the Middle East they 
are from. 2. CREATION OF THE HELPDESK As the University continued to grow, it became apparent to ITS 
that a problem tracking system was needed for managing the different technical problems that the users 
were encountering. The Chief Information Officer (CIO) contracted with the Computing Information Services 
Department located on Texas A&#38;M University s Main Campus in College Station, Texas to use the same 
problem tracking system they were using called Keystone. TAMUQ became a branch of the main Keystone program. 
In the beginning, Information Technology Services in Qatar was still very small so the staff would simply 
review the tickets and if they could resolve the problem, they would assign it to themselves. There has 
never been a ticket that could not be resolved by the ITS staff. After the first year, the CIO needed 
to generate monthly reports for upper management reporting on End User Satisfaction, Helpdesk Performance, 
Helpdesk Categories, and Admissions Processing. Because of programming issues, it was not possible for 
the Keystone programmers back on Main Campus to rewrite the code to create these reports. The CIO decided 
to write/develop his own problem tracking system for TAMUQ. The system was written using ASP.NET and 
C#. The campus had grown so much in the first two years that now there was a need for a dedicated person 
to manage the Helpdesk. I arrived in Doha in the summer of 2005; the new problem tracking system was 
already in place. It is very similar to Keystone except it can produce the reports needed each month 
for management. Below is a chart showing the volume of tickets received last year for each month. The 
green shows the number of tickets that were opened and closed in less than 24-hours. The yellow shows 
the number of tickets opened and closed between 24 and 72-hours. The red shows tickets that took longer 
than 72-hours to close. Figure 1: Helpdesk Volume by Month 2.1 Life of a Helpdesk Ticket Management 
expects the Helpdesk personnel to close at least 65% percent of the tickets each month. The other 35% 
are closed by either our Operations or Applications group. All the tickets come in assigned to me first. 
I read through the ticket and either resolve the problem by email, phone or in person. Because of communication 
problems, they are handled mostly in person. If the problem is more complicated and I cannot resolve 
it, I add a followup to the ticket documenting the steps I took and assign the ticket to another member 
of our group (USIT) who has more knowledge of the problem. If that member cannot resolve the problem, 
then another follow-up is added to the ticket and the ticket is assigned to the Operations or Applications 
group. To date, there are six of us in User Services who work on different tickets according to our areas 
of expertise. Below is a flowchart showing how a Helpdesk ticket is handled. 2.2 Helpdesk Categories 
Figure 3 shows different Helpdesk ticket categories and the percentage of requests received for that 
category in 2006. Accounts/Password received the most requests. The users have two accounts here at TAMUQ. 
All users have a TAMUQ account and a Neo email account from our Main Campus. The students primarily use 
their TAMUQ accounts and only need their Neo accounts when accessing My Record (student information system 
records), ordering transcripts, or checking on their grades. Having two email accounts is confusing for 
our users. The solution for this problem is more education for the users about each account. Figure 
2: Life of a Helpdesk Ticket Hardware Troubleshooting comes in second with Student Laptops next. Laptop 
problems are high because, in general, students are less knowledgeable about their computers in Qatar. 
They are not aware of the impact of viruses and the problems with malware. These topics are covered during 
student orientations, but students do not always understand everything because of the language barrier 
and the abundance of information given to them at this time. This category is also high because of the 
re-imaging done each fall. These monthly reports show problem areas and where we need to improve our 
services. Accounts/Passw ords Hardw are Troubleshooting Student Laptops General Consulting Hardw are 
Installation Email/Active Directory Software Troubleshooting OSA/SIMS/Imaging Support Printer Troubleshooting 
Home Computing Support Printer Toner Orientations Softw are Installation Access/Permissions Website/WebProgramming 
Not Defined Virus/Scanner Issues Warden/Crisis Mgmt. Tasks Supercomputing AVSetup/Support Netw ork Troubleshooting 
LAN/Server Infrastructure 0.0% 2.0% 4.0% 6.0% 8.0% 10.0% 12.0% 14.0% When a ticket comes in that does 
not have a complete description, we call the user and ask him/her to explain the problem. If we still 
cannot understand what the problem is, we will go in person to help the user. We soon discovered that 
certain words mean different things in different cultures. The accents, verbs, thought processes are 
all different depending on what part of the world you are from. One big advantage that we have is that 
several of our employees are from the Mid-East and speak Arabic. There have been situations where I would 
explain the resolution of a problem to a user in person and they did not understand me. When my Arabic 
co­worker explained it to them the same way, in Arabic, they understood. 3.2.2 Communicating with Co-Workers 
The employees within ITS are also from all parts of the world with different backgrounds and different 
languages. Understanding each other in our meetings has been very challenging at times. Different thought 
processes come in to play during meetings. We all exercise a lot of patience and listen very closely 
to each other. 3.3 Creating Documentation When creating documentation (How To/FAQ s) we identify a Figure 
3: Helpdesk Categories  3. CHALLENGES 3.1 Finding the Right Location The first challenge we faced when 
creating the Helpdesk at TAMYQ was finding the right location. When I arrived at TAMUQ, there was no 
space allocated for the Helpdesk within ITS where users could easily find us. After some searching, we 
finally found an open area set off a few inches from the center of the hallway. This was where we opened 
shop. In order to get the word out to the users about our existence and location, a statement was added 
at the close of each ticket as to where we were located. When users had a technical problem they wanted 
resolved immediately, or as their passwords started expiring, they soon found us. We also announce our 
location during the new student orientations each year. 3.2 Communication The Helpdesk is multi-lingual. 
Some employees are from the United States, others from Mid-Eastern countries and the majority of the 
users are from the Mid-East. Because of these language differences, communication with users and co-workers 
is one of our most difficult challenges. We have faculty/staff and students from many different cultures. 
Following are some of the ways we try to improve the communication gap with the users. 3.2.1 Communicating 
With Users When we are communicating with a user in person, we always look directly at the user and listen 
very closely to what he/she is saying. We ask many questions until we completely understand the problem. 
We have learned to communicate without speaking in complete sentences. Sometimes just speaking the important 
words is all that is necessary. American slang phrases are never used. common problem that the users 
are having, create a How To/FAQ and post it on our website (http://technology.qatar.tamu.edu). Most of 
these problems are identified through the Helpdesk tickets. The How To/FAQ s are created using just a 
simple Word template that we created with designated title, paragraph and body text font sizes. Figures 
and graphs all have a border around them and a caption. This template is stored on our shared (S:) drive 
where everyone in our service can access it. For the past two years we have been trying to inform users 
about the How To/FAQ pages on our website and how to get the users to start checking these pages before 
opening a Helpdesk ticket. Every time a Helpdesk ticket is opened and we (Helpdesk personnel) know that 
there is a How To or FAQ on the problem, we direct the user to the website and the name of the How To 
or FAQ first. If they have a problem using the handouts, we ask them to reply to our email and this will 
reopen the ticket. Another option that might be implemented this next year is to place the How To s and 
FAQ s in a knowledge base system that has internal and external access. Whenever the users click on the 
Requesting Assistance link from our website, they will be sent to another page that will have a list 
of category links. Once they click on the appropriate category link, they will be redirected to the How 
To or FAQ in the knowledge base. If they are not successful in solving their problem, they will then 
have the opportunity to send us an email stating that they did not find the answer to their problem. 
This email will open a new Helpdesk ticket. From this information we can then decide if we need a new 
How To/FAQ created. This idea is still in the discussion stage. 3.4 Hiring the Right Student Workers 
Hiring the right student workers is a challenge. Right now we have a student body of 187-students (around 
287 in the Fall 2007) who come from all over the Middle East. Many of the Middle Eastern students do 
not have the time to work because of their studies or they are not interested in working. This reduces 
our selection pool by half. Each department on campus is allowed to hire only eight student workers. 
Working in ITS requires multiple skill sets making it difficult to find student workers that have some 
knowledge of computers and the Microsoft Office products we are using. The ones that we do hire are eager 
to learn and catch on quickly. Another problem we have with using student workers is that they leave 
on summer break at the end of June and do not return until the day before classes start. This year we 
are going to ask that they be back and at work at least one week before classes start. The success of 
this new request will depend upon the student s family and their summer plans.  4. MOVING TO THE NEW 
ENGINEERING BUILDING As this paper is being written, TAMUQ is preparing for the move to our new Engineering 
Building. One issue the Helpdesk is facing is how to maintain the Helpdesk in two locations until everyone 
has been moved. 4.1 Maintaining the Helpdesk in Two Locations The Move Committee has scheduled two weeks 
to move faculty and staff. Classrooms, storage items and all but two labs will be moved a week before 
and a week after all the users have been moved. The Helpdesk and USIT personnel will move in two waves. 
Two Helpdesk personnel and two student workers will move the week before the users. The rest of USIT 
personnel will move the end of the last week. Breaking up our move this way will ensure that there is 
Helpdesk support in both buildings until the move is complete. The other student workers will be teamed 
up with an ITS staff member dissembling all the computers for the entire University and getting them 
ready for the movers. Once the computers have been moved to the new building, the student workers and 
the staff member they were teamed with will reassemble the computers in their new location. Once we are 
in the new building, there will be no difference in the way tickets are handled. We will follow the same 
procedure as in the flowchart shown in Figure 2. The first week of the move, problems in the old building 
will be assigned to the USIT staff that has not moved. Since we will still have a couple of labs that 
will not move until July, maybe even December 2007, an appointment will be made with the users that are 
left in the old building who are having computer problems. 4.2 The New Engineering Building In the new 
Engineering building, we will face many new issues when trying to help the users. We will have more space 
(595,000 square feet) to cover with no new employees. Some of the ways we are planning to help the users 
are: 4.2.1 Phones Since we were a small campus four years ago, when a user was having a problem, the 
ITS staff would go to the user and help them in person. We are planning on utilizing the phones more 
in the new building. One concern we do have with the use of phones is the language barrier and accents. 
The use of phones will require a large learning curve for the users and for the ITS Helpdesk staff. 
4.2.2 Remote Assistance We will provide remote assistance using Windows built-in remote assistance facility. 
This will become much more intuitive and user­friendly by the implementation of Office Communications 
Server and its client, Office Communicator. After the server has been set up,training for users will 
be conducted. 4.2.3 Student Workers With more space to cover and few Helpdesk employees, student workers 
will be a great resource in the new building. They are now being trained on our new printers and basic 
computer problems that the users have on a daily basis. We presently have eight student workers and we 
hope to keep that many in the fall. 4.2.3 First Line IT Support In order to create efficiency and effectiveness 
in delivering ITS support services, we submitted a proposal to management asking to have first line IT 
support personnel in each department (IT Champion). An IT Champion will be identified for each department 
and trained on some of the very basic things to look for when someone in their department is having a 
technical problem. If the problem is something that the IT Champion cannot resolve, then they will be 
responsible for opening a detailed Helpdesk ticket. This change will result in more satisfied users; 
an increase of personal computer knowledge for the IT Champion and greater efficiency in resolving computer 
problems. Conversely, this change will result in greater responsibility and work for the ITS Champion. 
 4.2.4 Satellite Helpdesk As the University grows, we are exploring the idea of establishing satellite 
Helpdesks on different floors of the building. Once we are in the new building, we will determine the 
busiest locations and establish the helpdesks in these spots. We will depend on student workers to operate 
these stations during the busy time of the day. This project will be proposed next year once we are in 
the new building.  5. CONCLUSION Developing the Helpdesk over the past two years has been challenging 
and rewarding. Communication is still our biggest challenge. The success of the Helpdesk process depends 
on clear communication. Listening to the user and asking questions until the problem is clear and documented 
is the most important task for all Helpdesk personnel. Moving into the new building will bring new challenges 
and questions. Training on the new IP phone system and new copiers is now in progress and documentation 
has been created for the users. The opportunity to come to the Middle East and work with students from 
this part of the world has been very rewarding. The students here at Texas A&#38;M University at Qatar 
are smart, eager to learn and a joy to work with. I am proud to be part of something that is positive 
for Texas A&#38;M and the world. 6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to those in the User Services and Operations 
sections of ITS who gave their input and support for this paper.  
			