
 CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS IN EXPERT SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT: A CASE STUDY David Millett Senior Consultant, 
Price Waterhouse, London, UK. Philip Powell ISRU, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry 
CV4 7AL, U.K. ABSTRACT After a flurry of early activity stemming from high expectations, organisations 
involved in building expert systems are becoming more reticent to invest. Part of this reticence stems 
from an inability or unwillingness to evaluate current systems. This paper presents an exploratory study 
in identi@ing measures for evaluating the success of expert systems in one organisation. The organisation 
is keen to compare its outcomes with those of others building exTert systems. So, for purposes of comparison, 
measures derived for the organisation are applied to a sample of other organisations all previously classed 
as successful users of expert systems. This research emphasises that successful development of expert 
systems is problematic. Analysis indicates that critical success factors include; the type of application, 
importance of the system to business strategy and an early, key, successful development. Also of benefit 
is a champion and the existence of an information technology strategy. Organisational culture may also 
have an effect. Similarly, factors contributing to failure include poor project control, instieient resources 
for maintenance, and financial constraints. The experiences of one organisation in relation to these 
is examined. INTRODUCTION Despite substantial investment, few organisations are able to demonstrate success 
in their use of expert systems (ES). This stems partly from an unwillingness or an inability to establish 
success factors. There were Permission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material for 
personal or clasaroom use is gmnted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage, the copy­ right notice, the title of the publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific permission and/or fee. SIGCPIU SIGMIS 
96, Denver Colorado USA Q 1996 ACM 0-89791-782-0/96/04. .$3.50 few early attempts at evaluation though 
one previous attempt to investigate ES success suggests as few as one in ten medium-to-large expert systems 
are successful (Keyes. 1989). Recently more work has been undertaken (see for example, Yoon et al. (1995), 
Gill (1995) and Ye and Johnson (1995)) in ES success. Yet much of this research focusses on success at 
a project level, determining factors which contribute to success or failure of individual expert systems. 
While this work is valuable, it is of less use at a firm level allowing organisations to assess their 
success in using the technology. Hence, this paper seeks to gain insight into the causes of success and 
failure in expert system development within one organisation. Millett and Powell (1993) report on an 
parallel inter­organisational comparison of expert system evaluation, while this paper takes the issues 
fiu-ther by focusing on applying measures of success to a single organisation. The paper first considers 
the nature of success and a sample of previously identified successfid companies is derived. Measures 
of success are applied to these and, more particularly, to a case organisation. This organisation prefers 
to remain anonymous and here is designated ABC. ABC and the other organisations with which it is compared 
are, however, public companies and ABC has long experience in ES development. Critical success and failure 
factors for ABC are derived. SUCCESS MEASUREMENT AND CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS Boynton and Zmud (1984) 
define critical success factors (CSF) as those things that must go well to ensure success for an organisation 
. In assessing the CSF method, the authors attribute two strengths to it. First, senior management accepts 
the notion of CSFS and, second, the method facilitates structured top-down analysis. Set against these 
are a set of criticisms. The CSF method is seen as difficult to use, prone to analyst bias and the CSFS 
derived may oversimple@ a more complex reality. Even so, the method is widely used in information systems. 
Previous research (see, for instance, Tyran and George, 1993) identifies a number of factors associated 
with ES success. These are issues such as user participation, senior management support, commitment to 
the project, and ease of use. In a comprehensive study Yoon et al. (1995) identify 8 independent variables 
and their components which impact on success: problem ditlkxdty, developer skill, end-user characteristics, 
impact on job, expert characteristics, shell characteristics, user involvement and management support. 
While these factors are useful, they may be less so to an individual organisation in assessing where 
it stands in relation to its competitors. Thus the stance of this paper is that of a reflective overview 
from a senior management perspective of one organisation s involvement with ES and as such the paper 
attempts to build on the individual project success factors outlined by others. As Millet and Powell 
point out, it is impossible to identi&#38; whether a project is worthwhile without benchmarks, though 
many benefits may be unanticipated (Farby et al. 1992). However, if the development process is to be 
anything than ad-hoc, there must be a mechanism for iden@ing success and failure. While any evaluation 
requires an appreciation of the original objectives of the project, a lack of quantitative measurements 
have contributed to a view that ES have failed, since projects without clear goals have no conclusion. 
Lack of evaluation also raises problems controlling projects while in progress (DeMarco, 1982), since 
poor projects should be abandoned as early as possible. Similarly, senior management are reluctant to 
fund projects if they cannot quant@ the gains. Also, the history of a technology or project team may 
colour expectations. Past failures may induce risk averse behaviour typitled by rapid termination of 
poor projects and resorting to accounting-oriented measurement of project proposals. Success Criteria 
Selection Factors influencing objectives may be placed into four broad categories: organisational strategy, 
the state of the technology, cutture and stakeholders. Organisations follow a number of strategic courses; 
a common one is gaining competitive advantage. Porter (1985) identifies three generic strategies for 
this: cost leadership. differentiation and niching. Any project should support company strategy and hence 
strategy should influence objectives. Thus, in a cost leadership strategy a project is likely to emphasise 
financial savings. while one in a differentiation strategy may reflect unique value-added features. For 
example, ICL S Configure ES is a product differentiator and Shearer from British Coal a cost reducer 
(Beerel, 1987). Hamilton (1990) suggests that emerging technologies provide limited opportunities due 
to their technical and commercial uncertainty. As they become commercialised they provide rapid performance 
improvement and technological successors offer reduced potential returns. It is unclear despite their 
numbers, however, if ES are still an emerging technology or if they have reached commercialisation. In 
an organisation, the progress of a technology will affect the objectives of individual projects. Progess 
may involve: creation of an appreciation of the technology s capabilities; obtaining skills to develop 
systems; developing operational systems; and developing systems for competitive advantage. Each provides 
a route to the next and can be a termination point for unsuccessful investments. As objectives for each 
vary, an outcome viewed as successfid at one stage may be deemed a failure in another. Issues of culture 
are complex, though it is clear that culture and strategy influence one another (Hickman and Silva, 1988). 
For instance, mature companies tend to favour evolutionary developments which minimise change (Johnson 
and Scholes, 1986), while defenders favour low risk and prospectors go for innovation and higher risk 
(Miles and Snow, 1978). The attitude of an organisation to risk will have a particular effwt on its uses 
of new technologies. Finally, stakeholders have different views of success (Hamilton and Chervany, 1990). 
Earl (1989), for example, identifies stakeholders in IS projects as users, customers, competitors, government, 
manufacturers, consumers and employees. To these can be added senior management, sponsoring manager, 
and developers, particularly if they are internal and not from the system provider. However, ultimately 
it is senior management who decide on a development or a technology s future, therefore satisfaction 
of their objectives is most significant in claiming success. OPERATIONAL SUCCESS MEASUREMENT Operational 
fimctioning is the first stage of ES success: if this cannot be achieved the system is unlikely to deliver 
other benefits. Operational success involves both validation and verification (Finlay et al. 1988). The 
area of validation in ES is more problematic than for conventional systems and covers: consistent, completeness, 
soundness. precision, and usability (Sell, 1985), to which may be added learnability and cognitive alignment. 
Ultimately the best judge will be the user, so the best measure of operational success may be whether 
the system continues to be used. Weak systems soon fall into disuse or there are demands for modification. 
However, dMerent rules apply to mandatory and discretionary systems; operational functionality is a precondition 
for use of discretionary systems but not mandatory ones. Use is a precondition for obtaining operational 
benefits which are, in turn, preconditions for achieving financial returns. Operational functioning and 
acceptance alone is, however, insufficient for a system to be termed a success; it is important how other 
stakeholders and particularly senior management perceive it. Measuring Bene$ts Little early research 
addresses the issue of measurement of the benefits of ES. It is often assumed that existence of the technology 
is the main reason for development. The lack of tangible benefits has been cited as a hindering factor 
in ES use, yet the necessity to concentrate on commercial needs is highlighted (Hewett et al., 1986). 
ES should be justified much as a conventional system and technology evaluation, training staff, and tackling 
a commercial need can all result in successful applications, but it is the latter which will determine 
the fate of ES. The need to demonstrate financial benefits is therefore paramount. ES development has 
often been a process of acquiring the technology and then trying to find a problem to solve, rather than 
encountering a problem and seeking the best solution. As will be shown, successful organisation have 
tackled problems the latter way by undertaking a major development as an early project, the success of 
which provides impetus for other work. Measuring Financial Impact Symons and Walsham (1991) argue that 
there is a pressing need to evaluate information systems, yet there is no commonly accepted framework. 
Nowak (1991) states that ES do not lend themselves to traditional cost/benefit analyses . Any measurement 
of ES success can take place at three levels: project, organisation or strategic business unit (SBU), 
and indus~, each with its own set of metrics. For example, has an individual project met its operational 
objectives, is it used after being developed, and has it repaid its costs? The final question is most 
important, since funds might have been employed more effectively elsewhere. Where there are no savings, 
but the work must be undertaken, then ES need to offer the lowest cost option. At SBU level the number 
of successful projects compared to industry averages and the overall return on the technology can be 
assessed. At indushy level the assessment must establish the overall success of developments compared 
to other technologies, that the total value of the ES market has grown as expected and that the market 
growth rate has been similar to other new technologies. This set of criteria is now used to assess ES 
success within ABC. SUCCESSFUL SYSTEMS AND ORGANISATIONS Millet and Powell (1993) derive a sample of 
12 ES using organisations, previously classified as successful by others; the concern in this paper is 
the results and the application of these to ABC. All these organisations are large and have received 
extensive publicity about their expert systems achievements. In providing a payback on ES investment, 
the results fi-om the sample organisations can be summarised as: positive payback (3 organisations), 
probable positive payback (3), operatioml success but no financial return (4), still at trial stage (l), 
failure (l). This categorisation of positive payback or successfu~ organisations (the first two groups) 
and unsuccessful (the final three groups) is used later to inform certain results. Though many projects 
and organisations are thought of as successful, they ftil when judged against harsh commercial criteria. 
Mowshowitz (1976) identifies, for general IT projects, 20% achieve intended benefits, 40 %. marginal 
benefit, while 40 XOfail outright. Hence, any organisation achieving a success rate of 200/0 for ES might 
have a claim for success. There is little specific evidence on ES, although a survey by Systems International 
reveals that only 117. of organisations have developed their ES to be operational and Beheshtian-Ardekani 
and Salchenberger (1988) claim only 5%. On this basis an organisation could be regarded a success if 
it has an operational system. However, a truly successtid system must also deliver benefits. ABC S EXPERIENCE 
WITH ES The methodology used in this paper is based upon semi-structured interviews with a set of developers, 
users and managers in each organisation. A questionnaire based on Kanter (1983) was employed to assess 
cultural aspects. The methods used in this paper are consistent with those used and described in Millet 
 and Powell (1993). A key measure of success is fit with organisational strategy. Of the generic strategies, 
ABC is pursuing one of cost leadership. The drive to reduce costs is evidenced by the sale of non-core 
subsidiaries, sub­contracting of work, cutbacks in capital expenditure and reduction in levels of management. 
Specifically, ABC s finance director set a criteria that all investments must obtain a payback in two 
years. Therefore, for ES in ABC to be viewed as a success, they should achieve this. Harmon and King 
(1985) classi&#38; organisations use of IT as cutting-edge, advanced and normal. Cutting­edge firms are 
early adopters and developers of technology. ABC is clearly a cutting-edge firm since it began working 
on ES in 1982; the technology has been evaluated and a significant number of staff trained. This should 
have provided a platform from which the organisation could proceed to developing systems providing competitive 
advantage. Of 35 ES developments reviewed in ABC, over one third were abandoned before completion. Although 
17 were completed and implemented, only 3 have achieved their stated aims. One has definitely achieved 
a positive payback. While much early ES literature suggested that the choice of domain is vital in achieving 
success, later work ( for instance, Yoon et al. (1995)) does not ident@ the domain as being paramount. 
The first test of ES in ABC investigates if the domain of the systems has an effect on success by looking 
at the results for different system types. Monitoring and Control systems: the only project was abandoned 
during development due to a lack of interest by management. The project was initiated by developers not 
users, and this, rather than the domain, may account for the failure. System Front Ends: Of three systems, 
one was abandoned during prototyping, another completed but no longer in use, while the third is still 
being developed. The two former systems suffered from a change in the environment. ES which are system 
front ends will inevitably become obsolete if linked to specific systems, particularly those designed 
for internal support functions. Diagnostic/Problem Solving: 75% of these systems have been completed, 
yet none achieved their expectations. In each system, the aim was to preserve scarce knowledge. However, 
the experts remained or new staff quickly overtook the knowledge in the system, and anticipated benefits 
were not realised. Design/Planning: This is the most successful domain with three of the four systems 
in use. System A works, although there have been problems in rolling it out nationally due to a budget 
dispute over the portable PCs necessary to operate it. However, this project has recouped its costs. 
System B is the only mainframe system which, whilst expensive to develop, started to realise statT savings 
in 1992 and may provide a return in the fhture. System C started as a development to prove ES technology, 
is still in use and making a contribution to costs. One reason for the success is that the ES has not 
attempted to undertake the whole task, merely a part of it that is time consuming for st@. This frees 
experts for more complex tasks not handled by the system. Replicating Complex Procedures: Systems built 
around simplif@g or advising on procedures enjoy mixed success. Since the systems replicate manual procedures, 
they need to be altered each time procedures change. Many Units have not been willing to invest in maintenance, 
consequently systems become obsolete. Others have been rewritten despite savings not being realised. 
For example, a business case claimed five statT would be saved and, although faster processing times 
were delivered, those staff were found alternative work on the same duty. The user describes the system 
as offering a better quality service ; effectively changing the definition of success. However, there 
has been no financial return. In this and similar cases, no consideration appears to have been given 
to whether the procedures could have been simplified, alleviating the need for an ES. Help Desks: Although 
many help desk projects were initially successtid there is a lack of long-term success. There are three 
reasons: help desk staH quickly outgrow the system, insufficient time is spent on maintenance; and the 
system or process supported disappears. This is a worrying trait as many texts and suppliers suggest 
this as a fruitfhl area for first ES projects. Advice Support: The majority of the systems reviewed failed, 
yet over half current developments are for advice support. The failures stem from the fact that the knowledge 
required is not recorded it is in people s head$ the outcomes may, therefore, be the result of poor elicitation 
techniques. EXTERNAL VIEW OF ABC Andrews (1989) claims ES success in many organisations is understated 
because they wish to keep progress a secret. However, if reports on A8C are typical then the reverse 
is true. Of seven systems highlighted publicly as being the best developed to date, five ceased to be 
operational shortly afterwards and some were barely at the prototype stage in 1989. Of greater concern 
were the seven projects highlighted as being the next major developments. Five were abandoned during 
or shortly after prototyping. One was completed and, although still operational, has yet to recover costs. 
The final project was still under development after two years. Other reports on one of ABC s subsidiaries 
claim that the system was one of the most advanced in the country and the development represented the 
most significant application of Expert System technology beyond the prototype and demonstrator stages 
. Compare this to the view of the manager responsible who suggested, in the end, technicians became faster 
because the problem is repetitive and run times, in some cases, are poor. The system has limited application, 
it has helped with learning and identif@g effects of changing the order of tests, but statistical trapping 
of faults may well be more frnitfid even if done on paper. Overall it is an expensive way of proving 
the technology, it is not a fill commercial application nor has it recovered costs. ABC EVALUATED ABC 
started ES development in 1982, at least a two years before the other organisations assessed. The company 
has had ample time to experiment with ES technology and develop working systems. However, the scale of 
investment in ES, indicates that there is no apparent correlation between spend and success, suggesting 
that success cannot be achieved merely by having large budgets. Indeed, ABC has spent at least as much 
as the leading organisation, yet is one of the least successful. According to Gremillion (1984) the intensiveness 
of IT use depends on the existence of a champion while Beath (1991) feels a champion is vital in ensuring 
IT projects are enacted. Nine of the organisations reviewed have champions, two in IT rather than on 
the operational side of the business. The seven with operational champions have achieved a degree of 
success, though not always a payback. Of the two with IT champions, one has abandoned ES, the other has 
disbanded. Of the two organisations with no champion one has succeeded, the other has failed. ABC did 
not have a champion for ES. ABC has initiated over 100 ES while none of the comparators has more than 
60 and most fewer than 15. However. two factors need to be considered, the percentage of starts which 
become operational, and the number of staff employed on development. ABC has greater success in getting 
systems to the development stage, although only the same proportion reach operational status. This may 
reflect a reluctance to abandon a project that is not working. Alternatively, other organisations use 
prototypes to evaluate more filly project feasibility, while ABC either does not or uses them only as 
cost estimators. Having reached the operational stage there are ditlerences in the long term success 
of ABC and other organisations. Over 55 %0of operational systems in ABC have been abandoned, compared 
to 30 %0elsewhere. This maybe because the problem tackled is not relevant to the business strategy or 
maintenance is not thought worthwhile. The range of results does not alter significantly if other unsuccessful 
organisations are excluded tlom the analysis, although successful organisations have a slightly lower 
percentage of systems still in operational use. This may suggest that the success rate of developments 
alone is not the key to overall success but, more important, is the impact of the successfid ones, and 
the ability to judge when a system is not achieving its aims. Finally, since all organisations considered 
here have been previously identified as successful, it is likely that their results are better than the 
industfy average. In addition to the 35 projects examined in ABC, up to 70 others have been started and 
abandoned at an early stage. Additionally, ABC, by virtue of its resources, should be aiming to be among 
the best. Of the operational systems in comparator organisations, 590/0 recovered their development costs. 
Since those abandoned early made no return, this equates to 32 %0 of all projects, including abandonments, 
making some return. The comparative figures for ABC are 5% and 3% respectively. ABC has performed poorly 
by comparison. ISSUES IN ES DEVELOPMENT Choice of technology atTects the chances of operational success. 
Overall, while nearly 70 %. of PC developments became operational, the figure fAls to 40% if a mini-computer 
is used and only 30 %0for a mainframe. If this is representative, then ABC should have achieved greater 
operational success than the sample suggests, since only one system developed by ABC is on a mainframe. 
One interviewee cited the lack of suitable mainframe packages as the main reason for concentration on 
PCs, as is their high cost. There is a difference in the domain of applications developed by successful 
organisations compared to the others. Of the projects started by successful organisations, 797. have 
been concerned with providing advice on procedures and supporting decisions. The failed organisations 
have only 56 XOof projects in this area. Least effort has been spent on help desks (less than 1%) and 
system front ends (2%). Both these areas have lower than average operational success. Comparatively, 
completed developments in ABC divide very differently. 21 %. have been help desks and 10 % system front 
ends, while less than 45% have been advisory. This may indicate a link between the type of application 
and overall success. Unsuccesstld organisations perceive greater problems from lack of finds and, more 
significantly, from an initial inappropriate application. ABC has suffered, in particular, from a changing 
environment. While, it could be argued that this shows a weakness in the initial selection of application, 
no ABC development suffered from lack of funds, suggesting that once a project has been approved, there 
is a reluctance to give up the budget. In terms of the users and managers reaction to ES, there is little 
difference initially. It is not surprising that, while opinions of ES have improved in successtid organisations, 
they have worsened in the others. Internal ABC interviews reveal an assessment of both the initial and 
current views of managers and users is signifmantly below that of successfid and unsuccessful comparators, 
and has been a key factor in ABC s slow progress. Just over half the organisations reviewed have a centralised 
team working on ES. However, two embarked on a technology transfer project as opposed to system development 
as a key objective. One has since abandoned the technology and shut down its development group, the other 
is ABC. This suggests that such a process is not conducive to overall success. Three organisations currently 
have no form of transfer charging of costs to users, although four are only now adopting it. The forms 
of charging vary considerably, from full payment at the outset to central funding for prototypes which 
the user pays if they progress, and sliding scales where the percent paid increases the further the project 
goes. The various methods do not appear to be correlated with success. Only one organisation admitted 
not having an IT strate~ and it has now abandoned ES. ABC has not had an IT strategy and has been less 
effective in employing ES than most. While no attempt was made to evaluate the quality of implementation 
of the strate~, without one an organisation is unlikely to achieve success. Specific mention of ES in 
the strategy neither guarantees success nor prevents failure. Those organisations unsuccessful with ES 
have slightly greater success overall with other new technologies such as neural networks. This does 
not a guarantee financial return, indeed the fhrther the development goes the larger the loss if it fails. 
In successful organisations reference was tlequently made to not adopting technologies until there is 
a proven need -the technology most frequently referred to is neural networks. Culture tiects levels of 
innovation (Kanter, 1983) and may have an impact on success (Deal and Kennedy, 1982). Here, successful 
organisations appear to benefit from greater communication between departments on a lateral rather than 
a hierarchical basis. This is particularly significant since most ES have an effect outside their origin. 
If barriers between departments exist then successfid development and implementation is harder to achieve. 
This is compatible with Kanter s finding that organisations where the information flow is free and horizontal 
are more innovative than those where it is constricted and vertical. Linked to the above, successful 
organisations are viewed as more receptive to technologies. This is largely a function of the attitude 
of senior management and the reaction that staff may expect when proposing new technologies. Similar 
attitudes prevail in successfid organisations among lower grade staff where change is more readily accepted. 
There is more project-related paperwork carried out in successful organisations. Interviewees suggested 
this reflects the greater effort involved in selecting and analysing a real business problem before development 
starts. Also, successfid organisations are less tolerant of mistakes, a reflection that they place more 
emphasis on getting things right rather than blaming failure on problems with new technology. However, 
this should not be interpreted as an attempt to compromise the measure of success to avoid failure, in 
fact, the reverse seems to be true. Foster (1986) comments that technology and culture are interwoven 
and that one cannot be changed without altering the other. Certainly if this is the case, then it maybe 
a key factor in the level of ABC s achievements. AIX s score on a culture questionnaire (based on Kanter, 
1982) is less than the mean score for unsuccessful organisations in nearly all aspects. ABC s culture 
is risk adverse and since ES is a risky technology, the two do not mix well. In summary, there are several 
factors that distinguish successful organisation from unsuccessful. All successfid organisations have 
a successful project which tackles a key business area as one of its first developments. Additionally, 
successfid organisations are less concerned with pushing the technology and more inclined to concentrate 
on the application. For individual projects, three measures of success were identified reflecting completion 
of development, becoming operational and recovering costs. Just over 60 %. of ABC s projects reach the 
first level, 27% the second and 7% the last. For the other organisations surveyed the figures are 46°/0, 
38°/0 and 320/.. Given the above, ABC cannot be judged a success, since its success rate is well below 
that for other organisations, particularly given its early start in ES. Other sources show ve~ few organisations 
have even one operational system, so ABC appears in a better light. However, the overall criteria is 
whether the organisation has made a return on its investment. ABC has failed in this and cannot claim 
to have made a success of the technology. The only comforting factor is that 45% of organisations identified 
as successful by other researchers have also failed to recover their costs. ES DEVELOPMENT PROBLEMS 
The ES development problems identified by Millett and Powell (1993) are; awareness of the technology 
culture; budgets; resistance of conventional system developers: track records; quality of project control; 
quality of applications; instilcient maintenance resource; and stability of the environment. These are 
now related to ABC s experiences. The first important issue is how users become aware of ES. Do they 
acquire it through personal interest, does an organisation educate its staiT, or do developers target 
potential users? ABC has relied on the first option and consequently there is little awareness of ES 
and, more crucially, less appreciation of possible applications. Other organisations have large scale 
awareness programmed and have widely promoted successful systems which, in turn, generated suggestions 
for tirther developments. Where ABC has attempted to transfer the technology, the aim has been to train 
developers rather than spread the word to those with power to commit resources. The other organisation 
that tried this approach has abandoned the technology. One major factor is a lack of systems requested 
by users. The technology needs to be pulled through the organisation by users rather than pushed through 
by developers. The discussion earlier highlighted the link between cultural issues and success. ABC is 
risk adverse. Unit managers are unwilling to explore new technologies or opportunities, being more concerned 
with achieving set objectives. As a consequence they are reluctant to sanction experiments when pay increments 
and bonuses are geared to achievement of objectives. It is not surprising that only those Units where 
there has been a champion has the technology been pursued. If senior management of a Unit do not offer 
support, it is difficult to obtain resources to develop systems. The next hurdle is obtaining finance 
to pursue a project. ABC s budgeting process spans six months prior to each financial year and constitutes 
a series of bottom-up and top-down conflicts. Recently there has been a shortage of fimds for new projects. 
If a new idea is identified after the budget process it is unlikely to get backing until the following 
year. All projects require a business case and, as discussed, it is ditlicult to quant~ the benefits 
of ES. Until 1991, some development groups did not charge for their services and developed prototypes 
free. This facility has disappeared and all development goups now charge. With restrictions due to cost 
cutting, this change compounds the ditliculty for speculative ventures. Other organisations raised the 
problems of tight financial control although none seem as inflexible. There are several examples of creative 
accounting among the successful ones. Despite attempts to convert developers to the technology, those 
working on ABC s core systems remained resistant to ES. Consequently ES are not considered as potential 
solutions to operational problems. The resistance, in part, stems from the lack of a corporate IT strateg. 
However, due to continued resistance by developers, early versions of ES were stand-alone developments 
which could not make use of existing data unless it was re-keyed. Users tiequently became disenchanted 
with this as the time taken exceeded the benefit. It remains almost impossible to develop an ES which 
writes information to an existing system. All organisations highlight a lack of support from IT departments, 
however in ABC it verges on positive resistance. ABC has a record of failing to deliver computer systems; 
many large systems have been substantially scaled down, failed to work or abandoned. This led to a negative 
climate in which failure became the expected outcome. There are several examples of poor project control, 
resulting in much rework. One user quoted the developer we ll give you a call when it s ready . This 
contrasts with the detailed control of conventionrd projects. Whilst this in itself is no guarantee of 
delivery, it creates an impression of professionalism. In ABC, too many projects are initiated by development 
units offering to build ES to prove the technology. Hence, less attention is paid to the quality of the 
application, some have been trivial and the benefits brief. This could be avoided by better initial vetting 
of ideas. Further, ES are no different from conventional systems in that they require maintenance. However, 
some groups are concerned solely with development and their remit does not cover maintemnce. It was expected 
that user groups would take on this role, but since they resist new technologies, Units have been unwilling 
to pursue developments where there is no guarantee of on-going support. Elsewhere, for example, a very 
successful project, ICL S Cordigurer, has a full time maintenance team of six. Several systems in ABC 
have been developed in areas vulnerable to policy change, thus increasing the risk of the project being 
aborted or failing to deliver expected returns. In some cases the whole basis for the system was removed. 
For example, shortly after a system to speed up the process of evaluating pay on promotion was introduced, 
a ban on recruitment and promotion was imposed. CONCLUSIONS Millett and Powell (1993) derive critical 
success factors for ES success at project and organisation level and these are found to be applicable 
to ABC. Further important factors are also identified which by themselves are not a guarantee of success. 
Of critical importance is that project tackles a major business problem at an early stage. This provides 
an example for senior managers and users. There should be an early success. On a project basis, the practicality 
of using ES should be evaluated at an early stage. Technology transfer as a process should be avoided, 
management education needs to concentrate on awareness of the technology amongst potential users. The 
environment within the project s domain should be stable; customer-facing activities offer longer timescales 
for systems to repay costs and are subject to less organisational or technological changes. ES should 
not be promoted as a technology. but for the applications they enable. Also important is the existence 
of a champion who is able to remove barriers; however they need to be in an operational rather than an 
IT department; and an IT strategy linked to corporate strategy to shape its activities. It can be seen 
that ABC s development of ES has been hindered in a number of these areas -lack of early success, awareness 
creation difficulties, unstable domains and lack of a champion and an IT strategy. This paper has attempted 
to apply success factors to expert system development in one large organisation. The process, though 
not easy and the conclusions tentative, has been shown to be possible and worthwhile. Far from shunning 
such evaluations, ES developers should encourage them so that their systems may be seen to be successfid 
to encourage similar developments and early abandonment of unpromising ones. REFERENCES Andrews B., 
Successful Expert Systems, Financial Times, London, 1989. Beath C., Supporting the IT Champion, MIS Quarterly, 
15 (3), Sept. 1991, pp. 293-311. Beerel A., Expert Systems -Strategic Implications and Applications, 
Ellis Horwood, Chichester, 1987. Beheshtian-Ardekani M. and Salchenberger L., An Empirical Study of The 
Use of Business Expert Systems, Information and Management, 15 (4). Boynton A. and Zmud R., An Assessment 
of Critical Success Factors, Sloan Management Review, 25(4), Summer 1984, pp.17-27. Deal T. and Kennedy 
A., Corporate Culture: The Rites and Rituals Of Corporate Life, Penguin, London, 1982. DeMarco T., Controlling 
Software Projects. Prentice Hall, New York, 1982. Earl M., Management Strategies For Information Technology, 
Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead, 1989. Farby B., Land F. and Targett D., Journal of Information Technology, 
July 1992. Finlay P., Forsey G. and Wilson J., The Validation of Expert Systems: Contrasts with Traditional 
Methods, Journal of Operational Research Society, 39 (10) pp. 933-938, 1988. Foster R., Innovation, MacMillan, 
London, 1986. Gill T., Early Expert Systems: Where are they now?, MIS Quarterly, 19 (l), 1995, pp.51-83. 
Gremillion L., Organisational Size and Information System Use: An Empirical Study, J. Man. Info. Sys., 
1 (2), Fall, 1984, pp. 4-17. Hamilton S. and Chervany N., Evaluating Information Systems Effectiveness: 
Company Evaluation Viewpoint, MIS Quarterly, 5 (3), 1981. Hamilton W., Dynamics of Technology and Strategy, 
European Journal Of Operational Research, 47 (2), pp.141-153, 1990. Hewett J., Timms S., and d Aumale 
G., Commercial Expert Systems in Europe, Ovum Ltd, London, 1986. Hickman C. and Silva M., Creating Excellence, 
George Allen and Unwin, 1988. Johnson G. and Scholes K., Exploring Corporate Strategy, Prentice Hall, 
New York, 1986. Kanter R., The Change Masters, Unwin, London, 1983. Millett D. and Powell P., Critical 
Success Factors in Expert System Development, in Avison, D., Kendall J., and DeGross J. (Eds), Human, 
Organisatioml and Miles R. and Snow C., Operational Strategy, Structure and Process, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1978. Social Dimensions of Information Systems Development. North-Holland. Amsterdam, 1993, pp. 
41-60. Mowshowitz A., The Conquest of Will: Information Processing, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass, 1976. 
Nowak P., Cost Benefit Analysis For MIS Expenditures Using Models Developed For Justifying R &#38; D 
Expenditures, in Veryard R. (cd), The Economics of Information Systems and Hardware, Buttterworth/ Heineman, 
Oxford, 1991. Porter M., Competitive Advantage -Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance, Free Press, 
New York, 1985. Symons V. and Walsham G., The Evaluation of IS: A Critique, in Veryard R. (cd), The Economics 
Of Information Systems and Hardware, ButtterworthlHeineman, Otiord, 1991. Systems International, Expert 
Trends Revealed, 17 (7). Tyran C and George J., The Implementation of Expert Systems: A Survey of Successful 
Implementations, Database, Winter 1993, pp.5-15. Ye L., The Impact of Explanation Facilities on User 
Acceptance of Expert Systems Advice, MIS Quarterly, 19 (l), 1995, pp.157-172. Yoon Y., Guimaraes T. and 
O Neal Q., Exploring the Factors Associated with Expert Systems Success, MIS Quarterly, 19 (l), 1995, 
PP.83-106. 
			