
 CSFs for decision-making support systems: An IS practitioner-researcher perspective Udo Richard Averweg 
eThekwini Municipality and University of KwaZulu-Natal Information Services, eThekwini Municipality, 
P O Box 828, Durban, 4000, Durban Telephone: +27 31 311 4935 averwegu@durban.gov.za ABSTRACT Organisations 
require the support of information systems (IS) to improve business performance and decision-making. 
Two popular IS implemented in organisations in South Africa are Decision Support Systems (DSS) and Executive 
Information Systems (EIS). Critical success factors (CSFs) are associated with the successful implementation 
of DSS and EIS in organisations. From an IS practitioner-researcher perspective, a review was made of 
the available literature during the period 1994-1998 of previously identified CSFs for the successful 
implementation of DSS and EIS in organisations in South Africa. With the advent of the Web and Web-based 
technologies, six pointers are suggested towards a future CSFs for DSS and EIS implementation practitioner-research 
agenda in South Africa. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.4.2 [Types of Systems]: Decision support 
 General Terms Management  Keywords Critical Success Factors (CSFs), Decision Support Systems (DSS), 
Executive Information Systems (EIS), Practitioner-research 1. INTRODUCTION Organisations require the 
assistance of information systems (IS) to collect, analyse and disseminate information so that knowledge 
workers are able to make informed decisions. In the discipline of IS, there are many decision-making 
support systems: two popular ones are Decision Support Systems (DSS) and Executive Information Systems 
(EIS). Organisations invest heavily in DSS and EIS to help users make better decisions. DSS are at the 
management level and EIS at the strategic level in organisations [2]. Both such IS have been implemented 
by IS practitioners in many organisations in South Africa. The author of this paper is an IS practitioner-researcher. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 
10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, South Africa. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 $10.00. 
 Critical factors influencing IS implementation have been one of the most actively researched topics 
in the IS field. Despite technical progress, a key challenge persists: how to reduce DSS and EIS implementation 
failures in organisations. The success of a well-designed IS can be seriously reduced by improper or 
inadequate attention to implementation issues. Organisational IS are often critical to the successful 
business performance and competitiveness of an organisation. With the advent of the Web and Web-based 
technologies, the question arises whether published critical success factors (CSFs) associated with the 
implementation of IS (such as DSS and EIS) in South Africa, are nowadays still critical (i.e. absolutely 
necessary) to improve business performance and decision-making in an organisation. From an IS practitioner-researcher 
perspective, an exploratory investigation of this question in organisations in South Africa is the objective 
of this paper. 2. CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS (CSFs) The CSFs concept was developed to help identify the 
information needs of managers. CSFs for the whole field of IS have been systematically explored. Rockart 
[4] defines CSFs as those few key areas of activity in which favourable results are absolutely necessary 
for a particular manager to reach his or her goals and the organisation as a whole to flourish [1]. 
 3. IS PRACTITIONER-RESEARCH Practitioner-research can be identified as a systematic form of enquiry 
that is collective, collaborative, self-reflective, critical and undertaken by the participants of the 
inquiry. In a practitioner-research culture, individual inquiry is encouraged. The underlying question 
on the mind of an IS practitioner researcher is: Given the continuing technological change in organisations, 
how can the IS practitioner-researcher improve what is happening in a selected environment? Research 
and development undertaken for practice-led IS research projects are often located within a real-life 
social and work-based organisational settings and gives tangible meaning rather than in a hypothetical 
or devised scenario -the focus is real-life research and a reflection on real-life practical and pragmatic 
activities which makes work meaningful to IS practitioner-researchers. A focal point of practitioner-based 
inquiry IS research is the identification of IS problems in organisations i.e. the discrepancy between 
an IS practice and the expectations in terms of which the practice was undertaken. It is contended that 
it is within each IS research practitioner s context that a pragmatic analysis and a synthesis of empirical 
and theoretical knowledge that a justification for the selected IS implementation approach should be 
made. 434 4. IT IN SOUTH AFRICA IT is more than just computer systems and it is rapidly changing and 
developing, especially due to the Web and Web-based technologies, altering the way in which ISs are built. 
It has changed the way in which organisations are doing business and plays an increasing important role 
in business performance and decision-making support. For example, nowadays information may be delivered 
to users in a plethora of ways (e.g. via portals, social networks and interactive video). There is thus 
a need from an IS practitioner-research perspective to revisit the (published) CSFs for DSS and EIS implementation 
so as to better exploit the available IT potential and current technologies to improve decision-making 
in organisations. In some organisations in South Africa, IT represents a significant ongoing capital 
expenditure. Furthermore DSS and EIS are still found in many organisations in South Africa. The existence 
of research on DSS and EIS in South African organisations during the pre-Internet area is contained in 
the literature. This paper specifically focuses on studies of CSFs for DSS and EIS implementation in 
the South African environment during the 1994-1998 period. The rationale for selecting this period is 
the availability of published DSS and EIS research findings. Furthermore from a scan of the literature 
it appears that no further and recent research has been undertaken in South Africa focusing on CSFs for 
DSS and EIS implementation. Such a discussion will therefore be useful to IS practitioners in organisations 
who intend embarking on DSS and EIS implementation in the age of the Internet, the Web and Web-based 
technologies. 5. DECISION SUPPORT FOR MANAGEMENT Information is one of the key inputs into the decision-making 
process. An important key to the success of IT is its ability to provide users with the right information 
at the right time. In today s competitive environment, organisations cannot afford to miss opportunities 
for better quality decision-making. DSS and EIS are examples of two such IS to assist managers and executives 
for improved decision-making. These IS are the focus of this paper. 5.1 DSS A DSS is an interactive computer-based 
system or subsystem intended to help decision makers use communications technologies, data, documents, 
knowledge and/or models to identify and solve problems, complete decision process tasks, and make decisions 
[3]. Despite all the rapid developments of the late 1980s, 1990s and 2000s, DSS as a field is now at 
a crossroads. Some functions that were once considered part of DSS now appear to be migrating to other 
IS areas. 5.2 EIS Williams and Sawyer [6] suggest that an EIS is an easy-to-use DSS made especially 
for strategic managers and it specifically supports strategic decision-making. By having the ability 
to access both internal and external data and information (as found on the Web), EIS applications are 
able to support executive information needs and decision-making activities. Watson, Houdeshel and Rainer 
[5] define an EIS as a computerized system that provides executives with easy access to internal and 
external information that is relevant to their critical success factors .  6. MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
From a review of the literature, the author contends that in South Africa not all previously identified 
CSFs for the successful implementation of DSS and EIS are critical . The existence of the other success 
factors is, however, recognised. The author suggests a contingency approach by labelling some of the 
identified CSFs for DSS and EIS implementation as of secondary importance but not essential for success 
. Furthermore since the Web and Web-based technologies are having a major impact on systems that support 
decision making [2] and since individual inquiry is encouraged, there is a need to revisit the CSFs for 
the successful implementation of DSS and EIS in South Africa. From an IS practitioner perspective, six 
pointers are suggested towards a future CSFs for DSS and EIS implementation practitioner-research agenda: 
 Personalisation;  Loci of focus;  Intranet and portals;  Enterprise systems;  Emergence of collaborative 
decision-making; and  Interactive video.  7. CONCLUDING REMARKS With the increasing amount of IT investment 
and substantial evidence of failures, IS implementation evaluation has become a key management issue. 
Special care is needed when implementing DSS and EIS by IS practitioners because of their major potential 
importance to an organisation s business performance. Failure can lead to long delays in attempts to 
use such IS effectively. The Internet, the Web, Web-based technologies and social networking have accelerated 
developments in decision-making support and provide a new practitioner-research focus area for CSFs for 
DSS and EIS implementation in South Africa. 8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT An earlier version of this paper appeared 
in the Journal of the Southern Africa Institute of Management Services (SAIMAS), 18(2): 3-6, September 
2009.  9. REFERENCES [1] Bocij, P., Greasley, A. and Hickie, S. 2008. Business Information Systems. 
Fourth Edition. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, Essex, England. [2] Laudon, K. C. and Laudon, J. P. 
2007. Management Information Systems. Managing the Digital Firm. Pearson Education, Inc, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, USA. [3] Power, D. J. 2007. A brief history of decision support systems. DOI= http://www.DSSResources.com/history/dsshistory.html 
[4] Rockart, J. F. 1979. Chief Executives Define their Own Data Needs. Harvard Business Review. 81-93. 
[5] Watson, H. J., Houdeshel, G. and Rainer, R. K. Jr. 1997. Building Executive Information Systems and 
other Decision Support Applications. John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc, NY, USA. [6] Williams, B. K. and Sawyer, 
S. 2007. Using Information Technology. Eighth Edition. McGraw-Hill, NY, USA. 435  
			