
 Data Communications in the Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum The importance of data communications 
in Computer Science is well illustrated by the growing number of computer networks that have appeared 
over the past decade and the demand from industry for computer graduates with a background in data communications. 
Both the growth in networks and the demand from industry has resulted in many two-year and four-year 
computer related programs offering courses in data communications. This panel examines some of the issues 
surrounding the establishment of an undergraduate data communications course. Topics to be covered include: 
 What are the costs associated with establishing a data communications course?  What is the impact of 
large classes on a data communications laboratory?  What should be covered in a data communications 
course and its laboratory?  How do different approaches to teaching data communications compare?  The 
panel is open to all instructors currently teaching or preparing to teach courses in data communications. 
Handouts including course outlines, sample assignments, and summaries of their teaching methodologies 
will be made available to participants. The panelists are: Dr. Ron C!lassen Associate Professor of Computer 
Science Northeast Louisiana University Monroe, Louisiana. (classen@hector.nlu.edu) Dr. Larry Hughes Associate 
Professor of Computing Science Saint Mary s University Halifax, Nova Scotia Canada. (lhughes@huskyl.stmarys.ca) 
Professor Elizabeth Leboffe Associate Professor of Computer Science St. John Fisher College Rochester, 
New York. (eml@sjfc.edu) Dr. Wayne Smith Professor of Computer Science Mississippi State University Mississippi 
State, Mississippi. (smith@ cs.msstate.edu) 390 Contents 1. Why teach Data Communications? Introduction 
of the panel subject matter  Introduction of the panel members  Structure of the panel  2. What should 
be covered in an undergraduate Data Communications course? Consensus statement prepared by all members 
 Justifications  3. Teaching Methodologies. Approaches taken by panel members  Subject material covered/not 
covered etc.  Course outlines  TypicaJ class sizes  Laboratories  Assignments  Quizzes etc.  Improvements 
from past experience  4. Discussion and questions from the floor Questions from audience to individual 
or all panelists  Discuss each teaching methodology  Problems encountered (student weaknesses, facilities, 
etc)  391
			