
 Data Management: Lasting Impact of the Wild, Wild, Web Reed M. Meseck Consultant Irvine, CA (949) 854-2172 
 rmeseck@attglobal.net ABSTRACT This paper describes some of the ways the Internet and World Wide Web 
have affected databases and data warehousing and the lasting impact in these areas.  General Terms Management, 
Performance, Design. Keywords Data Management, Data Warehousing, Database, Internet, WWW. 1. INTRODUCTION 
The Internet has changed the time dimension and scale dimension of databases and data warehouses in a 
manner from which there will be little retreat. Two significant expectations have been set: for customers 
the expectation of immediacy, and for business and marketing executives the expectation of detail. The 
impact on databases is twofold: the frequency of transactions has increased and the number of updates 
or inserts has increased, as well. 2. THE TIME DIMENSION A lasting influence of the Internet is the 
concept of Net Time , a world in which timeliness is everything and where change is both rapid and constant. 
Where opportunity abounds, competition is fierce, and because of the fundamentally low barriers to entry 
the Internet presented in many areas, velocity and surefooted execution often became the key differentiators 
between winners and losers in the marketplace. Another legacy of the Internet is that the life cycle 
of designs and software in general has become far more dynamic. Business models evolved rapidly and sometimes 
completely, leading to an environment where legacy data and applications were anything more than a week 
old. Often software was not modified but discarded and rewritten completely. Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ACM SIGMOD 2001 May 21-24, 
Santa Barbara, California, USA Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-332-4/01/05 $5.00. The challenge to data modelers 
and data warehouse designers is to produce designs that both meet the business requirements and which 
are malleable and can quickly adapt to changes in the business model. Database and data modeling tools 
vendors need to assist database architects and developers by providing tools that better support round-trip 
design, development and deployment. 2.1 Customer Expectations and Immediacy Customers of web sites have 
become accustomed to the immediacy of the Internet. With a few clicks of the mouse you can order a book 
from Amazon.com [1] or check your account balance at WellsFargo.com [2]. If you have a question about 
your bank account at Wells Fargo at 2 AM, you can view the history of your account and see when a transaction 
cleared. These transactions occur with near instantaneous access. The customer has come to expect near 
instant access with up-to-date data across a variety of industries. 2.1.1 Banking ATMs and Customer Expectations 
When banking ATMs first appeared on the scene many years ago, transactions performed at ATMs were not 
connected in real-time to the account databases, but were batch processed at the end of the day. Running 
update transactions against a large accounts database was unheard of. This worked and was acceptable 
to customers for a couple of reasons. First, ATMs represented the same transaction and processing model 
as the teller inside the bank: walk inside and the balance from the teller was the same. Second, there 
was an end of day and thereby a batch processing window. The batch model could be understood by the customer 
and was tolerated. 2.1.2 Real-time Updates The 24x7x365 global model of the Internet and the customer 
expectation of immediacy pushes us closer to where updates to a database occur in real-time or near-time, 
and where a batch processing window is narrow or nonexistent. While databases and systems have been evolving 
in this direction, the customer expectations fostered by the Internet make real-time or near-time updates 
a requirement. The architectural, operational and computational impact of this shift is non-trivial and 
the costs potentially substantial.  3. THE SCALE DIMENSION Another lasting impact of the Internet is 
the volume, detail and frequency of data. A major website can record in excess of 500 million page events 
per day, providing significant information about the site and its visitors. As Kimball [3] points out, 
The Web presents us with a new and unprecedented data source. At the macro level, one can obtain statistics 
about what types of pages were visited, how many of each page type were visited, etc. At the micro level, 
the objects served to assemble a page may be available as well. In addition, all of the pages a visitor 
accessed and the order in which they were visited may be available, as well. 3.1 Scale But at What Cost? 
Scale is also potentially unpredictable and more than one web site has been caught without adequate processing 
power in place. The Internet presents a unique elasticity with respect to scale since the number of users 
accessing a site at any moment is largely unpredictable, with the only guidance being prior site statistics. 
We have witnessed that a major event, such as a press release, can cause spikes large enough to effectively 
deny access to a web site. The fear of such outages has led companies to stockpile capacity, perhaps 
to the point of excess. Companies need to consider the ongoing cost of carrying excess capacity. Vendors, 
ISPs and researchers need to come up with innovative ways to provide incremental capacity on demand, 
to pool excess capacity in a shared reserve or to utilize the idle capacity for productive purposes. 
 3.2 The Problem with Detailed Data Terabyte data warehouses has been in existence for some time; however, 
they have generally consisted of customer activity over some relatively long span of time, in most cases 
years and in others decades. The rate of growth is relatively slow. By contrast, if data is collected 
and warehoused for a high volume web site at the detail level, the data warehouse expands to multi­terabyte 
proportions very quickly. For example, if the grain of the fact table is the page event, and the fact 
table is a modest 40 bytes wide, the fact table alone contributes 600 gigabytes of data to the database 
in one month. For many corporations simple summarization of page events, page types and the like is adequate. 
However, for activities such as data mining or user behavior modeling, summary data is of limited use 
and so detailed data must be used. Once detailed data is required, the scale of the data increases tremendously. 
3.2.1 Scalability Through Parallelism Processing power, I/O bandwidth and storage all have to scale accordingly 
to meet the task, and as a result so does the cost. Parallel processing and clustered database environments 
quickly become necessary to handle the requirements of processing detailed data at the rate of 500M records 
per day. A significant challenge is that while today s databases may leverage parallel processing, the 
processes that feed these very large databases often do not adequately leverage parallelism since this 
activity takes place outside of the database. Database vendors need to consider extending the benefits 
of parallel processing to tasks outside of the database or at the edge of the database.  3.3 Examining 
the Business Case While the influences of the Internet may be lasting in terms of immediacy and detailed 
data, it is prudent to examine whether a business case exists to support such immediacy and detail. One 
could argue that the demise of the dotcoms [4] has proved otherwise. While business owners may desire 
detailed data they must be prepared to justify the investment required to support such efforts and show 
an adequate return on that investment. Customers may demand instantaneous response and up-to-the-second 
data but may be unwilling to bear the cost. Real-time updates against a primary production database may 
be technically possible, however, it may not be economically feasible. Likewise, processing and warehousing 
500M records per day may not be cost effective. However, cost effective alternatives may exist which 
provide the desired results in an approximated manner. 3.3.1 Alternatives If, for instance, it is desired 
to track the behaviors and nuances of a community of users over time, it may be possible to identify 
a representative set of users, collect, retain and process highly detailed data for that subset of users, 
and produce statistically accurate results. With respect to immediacy, introducing a messaging layer 
may allow update requests to be processed in near-time as opposed to real-time and provide a more cost 
effective solution while still providing the illusion of immediacy to the customer. By using creative 
alternatives, we can provide solutions that meet the requirement and do so in a cost effective manner. 
  4. CONCLUSION The Internet changed the time and scale dimensions of data management in significant 
ways, and the challenge is managing these dimensions. The dotcom era often produced solutions that worked 
where an unlimited budget was available. Perhaps the most valuable lesson to learn in the aftermath of 
the dotcom era is that being cost effective is as important in the solution as any technical criteria. 
Cost matters. 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank the many individuals at IBM Silicon Valley Lab 
and Toronto Lab. My thanks also to Ralph Kimball for his pioneering work in the area of the Data Webhouse. 
 6. REFERENCES [1] Amazon.com Home Page. http://www.amazon.com [2] Wells Fargo Bank Home Page. http://www.wellsfargo.com 
[3] Kimball, Ralph, and Merz, Richard. The Data Webhouse Toolkit. John Wiley&#38; Sons, Inc. 2000. [4] 
Dotcom Demise and Layoffs. http://www.idg.net/english/channel_content/channel_dotdem ise_news.html. 
 
			