
 Data-Driven Diffuse-Specular Separation of Spherical Gradient Illumination Tongbo Chen Abhijeet Ghosh 
Paul Debevec USC Institute for Creative Technologies  (a) true albedo (b) initial separation (c) .nal 
albedo (d) true normals (e) separated normals Figure 1: Diffuse-specular separation of a plastic orange 
captured under spherical gradient illumination. Top-row: specular separation. Bottom-row: diffuse separation. 
(a) &#38; (d): Polarization-based separation. (c) &#38; (e): Data-driven separation. 1 Introduction Separation 
of the diffuse and specular components of observed re­.ectance has been an active area of research in 
computer graph­ics and vision, with major applications in re.ectance modeling and scene analysis. Traditionally, 
researchers have investigated diffuse­specular separation under point or directional illumination condi­tions 
while employing polarization and, in the case of dielectric ma­terials, color space analysis techniques. 
Recently, Ma et al. [2007] introduced a technique for estimating high quality diffuse and spec­ular normals 
and albedo maps (see Fig. 1, (a) &#38; (d)) of a specular object using polarized spherical gradient illumination. 
However, the employed polarization technique imposes view-point restric­tion, and results in insuf.cient 
light levels for performance capture with high speed acquisition. Hence, in this work, we look into an 
al­ternate diffuse-specular separation technique for spherical gradients based on a data-driven re.ectance 
model. Traditional separation techniques based on color space analysis focus on removing specu­lar re.ections 
from the observation for scene analysis [Mallick et al. 2005]. In contrast, we focus on obtaining high 
quality estimates of both the diffuse and the specular re.ectance components. 2 Method We propose a 
diffuse-specular separation technique based on a data­driven model of diffuse and specular re.ectance 
of spherical gra­dient illumination. We build this model from example data with known ground truth diffuse-specular 
separation. We use polariza­tion based separation as ground truth data in this work. Note that we do 
not require observation of the exact same object to build our re.ectance model, only an object with similar 
diffuse and specu­lar relectance characteristics. Our separation algorithm proceeds in two stages: First, 
we employ the example data with known ground truth separation to build orientation-based re.ectance pro.les 
for diffuse and specular re.ectance under the uniform spherical illu­mination condition. Thereafter, 
we employ the diffuse and specu­lar re.ectance pro.les to split the uniform illumination observation 
into diffuse and specular albedos (Fig. 1, (b)). Note that these re­.ectance pro.les capture the increased 
specular re.ection at graz­ing angles due to Fresnel re.ectance. We use the unseparated gra­dients to 
compute the surface normals for this initial separation. The above separation (b) serves as an intial 
guess for the following iterative optimization: We relight the separated diffuse and spec­ular albedo 
into the X, Y and Z gradient illumination conditions, sum them up and then compare to the observed unseparated 
gra­dients. The error in the relit conditions are attributed alternatingly to the specular normal estimate 
and to the specular albedo estimate in subsequent iterations. We repeat the above normal and albedo update 
for a few iterations until convergence. 3 Acquisition and Results Our measurement setup consists of 
an LED sphere with approxi­mately 150 individually controllable lights. Each light is covered with a 
linear polarizer in the pattern of [Ma et al. 2007]. Using this setup, we record an object s response 
to the spherical gradient illu­mination patterns in both cross and parallel polarization conditions in 
order to obtain what we consider to be the ground-truth diffuse­specular separation of albedo and surface 
normals. We then employ our example based data-driven separation on the parallel polarized images in 
order to compare the proposed separation technique (see Fig. 1, (c) &#38; (e)) with the polarization-based 
result. References MA, W.-C., HAWKINS, T., PEERS, P., CHABERT, C.-F., WEISS, M., AND DEBEVEC, P. 2007. 
Rapid acquisition of specular and diffuse nor­mal maps from polarized spherical gradient illumination. 
In Rendering Techniques, 183 194. MALLICK, S. P., ZICKLER, T. E., KRIEGMAN, D. J., AND BELHUMEUR, P. 
N. 2005. Beyond lambert: Reconstructing specular surfaces using color. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2009, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
August 3 7, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-726-4/09/0008  
			