
 DBMiner: Interactive Mining of Multiple-Level Knowledge in Relational Databases* Jiawei Han Yongjian 
Fu Wei Wang Jenny Chiang Osmar R. ZaIane Krzysztof Koperski Data Mining Research Group, Database Systems 
Research Laboratory School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, Canada V5A 
1S6 E-mail: {ban, yongjian, weiw, ychiang, zaiane, koperski}~cs.sfu. ca Abstract Based on our years-of-research, 
a data minmg system, DB- Miner, has been developed for interactive mining of multiple­ level knowledge 
in large relational databases. The system implements a wide spectrum of data mining functions, in­ cluding 
generalization, characterization, association, classi­ fication, and prediction. By incorporation of 
several inter­ esting data mining techniques, including attribute-oriented induction, progressive deepening 
for mining multiple-level rules, and meta-rule guided knowledge mining, the system provides a user-friendly, 
interactive data mining environ­ ment with good performance. Introduction A data mining system, DBMiner, 
has been developed based on our studies of data mining techniques [1, 3, 2] and our experience in the 
development of an early system prototype, DBLearn [I]. The system integrates data mining techniques with 
database technologies and discovers knowledge at multiple concept levels from large relational databases 
efficiently and effectively. The system has the following distinct features: 1. It incorporates several 
interesting data mining tech­niques, including attribute-oriented induction [1], progressive deepening 
for mining multiple-level rules [2, 3] and meta-rule guided knowledge mining [3], and implements a wide 
spectrum of data mining functions including generalization, characterization, association, classification, 
and prediction.  2. It performs interactive data mining at multiple con­cept levels on any user-specified 
set of data in a  *Research was supported in part by the grant NSERC-A3723 from the Natural Sciences 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the grant NCE:IRIS/PRECARN-HMI-5 from the Networks of Centres 
of Excellence of Canada, and grants from the MPR Teltech Ltd., and the Hughes Research Laboratories. 
 Permission to make digitabhard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the 
copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of ACM, Inc. To capy otherwise, to republish, to post on servem, or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission andlor a fee. SIGMOD 96 6/96 Montreal, Canada 01996 ACM 
0-89791 -794-4/96/0006,..$3 50 database using an SQL-like Data Mining Query Language, DMQL, or a graphical 
user interface. Users may interactively set and adjust various thresholds, control a data mining process, 
perform roll-up or drzll-do wn at multiple concept levels, and generate different forms of outputs, including 
gen­eralized relations, generalized feature tables, multi­ple forms of generalized rules, visual presentation 
of rules, charts, curves, etc. 3. Efficient implementation techniques have been ex­plored using different, 
data structures, including generalized relations and multiple-dimensional data cubes, and being integrated 
with relational database techniques. The data mining process may utilize user-or expert-defined concept 
hierarchies which can be specified flexibly, adjusted dynamically based on data distribution, and generated 
automatically for numerical attributes, 4. Both UNIX and PC (Windows/NT) versions of the system adopt 
a client/server architecture. The latter communicates with various commercial database systems in data 
mining using the ODBC technology.  The system has been tested on several large relational databases 
with satisfactory performance. Additional data mining functionalities are being designed and will be 
added incrementally to the system along with the progress of our research. Detailed information about 
the D BMiner system is accessible with the Internet address: http://db.cs.sfu. ca/DBMiner. References 
[1] J. Han, Y. Cai, and N. Cercone. Data-driven discovery of quantitative rules in relational databases. 
IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Eng~neering, 5:29-40, 1993. [2] J. Han and Y. Fu. Discovery of multiple-level 
association rules from large databases. In Proc, VLDB 95, pp. 420 431, Zurich, Switzerland, Sept. 1995. 
[3] J. Han and Y. Fu. Exploration of the power of attribute­oriented induction in data mining. In U.M. 
Fayyad, et al. (eds. ), Advances in Knowledge Dtscovery and Data Minzng, pp. 399-421. AAAI/MIT Press, 
1996. 550 
			