
 DESIGNINGINTENTIONAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS Margaret h&#38;rtinez Performance Dimensions IvlAMARTINEZ@COMPUSERVE.COM 
 ABSTRACT l i$is study contributes to the discussion about self-managed learning in a computer-based 
environment, The result was the &#38;sign for ajirst- generation intentional learning environment for 
instru&#38;onat multimedia. The final product was an instructional &#38;sign model for an interactive 
CD- ROM-delivered Sales and Product Training program for resellers. The model, called a System for Intentional 
Learning and Progress Assessment (SILPA), features six intentional learning design principles. The SILPA 
fosters intentional performance by focusing on three key learning processes: goal setting, task sequencing, 
and progress monitoring. Many theorists argue in support of self-managed learning saying that humans 
have an innate need to control the events in their lives. This need highly correlates with conceptions 
about learning and directly influences success@l intentional learning performance. In this manner, the 
SILPA, integrated with assessment and intentional learning components, supports an ina7vidual s intentional 
achievement of learning goals. INTRODUCTION E!ducators face the challenge of creating computer instruction 
with high-quality attributes similar to those offered by one-on-one instruction. Unfortunately, one-on-one 
instruction is a costly standard for a common instructional paradigm. The task of the instructional designer, 
then, is to provide high-impact instruction that approaches the Pcm~~&#38;~ LO m&#38;e di&#38;dhd copies 
of.711 or pna ofcllis umlerinl for penonnl or cl~ XOOm Use is grnntcd without fee provided illal 11,~ 
copis xc not made or diehad for profit or conuuercinl ad\rr,uLqge, u,e cop,,- ridltnotk Ibe title Ofthe 
publicntion nnd its date appear, nnd llotie is Eivetl ht coPYright is by pernkion of the ACM, IIIC.To 
copy olilevise. to republish to Post on wvers orto redistribute to lists, requira specificpwmissionand/or 
fee, SKXOC 37 Snowbird Ut&#38; I/,yA CoPYridlt1997 ACM 0-89791-861-4~~7~~o..$3.~0 achievement levels 
offered by one-on-one instruction without the higher costs. One useful solution is to create an intentional 
leeming environment that increases learner control and improves learning performance. The intentional 
learning solution has many benefits, including the development of successful lifelong learning skills, 
beliefs in personal learning success, and motivation for long-term academic achievement. The intentional 
leaming approach does not suggest massive changes to curricuhnn or course content. Instead, the ideal 
solution should provide supportive entionments that positively influence learning ability and help students 
take responsibility for improving their own learning performance. The purpose of this study is to create 
an innovative, computer-based environment that encourages learners to use key intentional learning strategies, 
such as goal setting, task sequencing, and progress monitoring. To accomplish this purpose, the researcher 
has designed a model for an interactive Sales and Product Training course for resellers. BACKGROUND This 
section provides empirical and theoretical evidence to support the conclusion that the improvement of 
learning performance in an intentional learning environment is a viable educational goal, Psychological 
Learning Processes During the past fifteen years, the educational research focus has often shifted to 
an examination of the s&#38;al, cognitive, conative, and affective processes that affect learning. Much 
of this research examines the strategic role played by a 1camefs awareness of personal learning processes. 
This recent wave of interest typically centers on identifying self-regulatory mechanisms (what learners 
do to learn) and observing how they use strategies to learn. This research often highlights cognitive 
processes such as learning styles, skills, and strategies. Other researchers are investigating the differences 
between poor and excellent learners. Much of this research shows that successful learners have an awareness 
and understanding to varying degree of how to use skills and strategies (Brown, 1987). These learners 
succeed by using self-regulated conative, affective, social, and cognitive strategies to solve problems, 
monitor progress, and attain learning goals. Intentional Leaning Bereiter and Scardamalia (1993) state 
that reasoning and capacity to acquire expertise is uniquely human-determined by intentionality. Both 
researchers (1989) define intentional learning as cognitive processes that have learning as a goal rather 
than an incidental outcome @. 363). This learning occurs when individuals actively and intentionally 
use strategies to achieve learning goals beyond the given requirements of the task This research particularly 
shows the underlying importance of the role played by learning goals. It also examines if learners purposely 
orient goals toward knowledge construction, learning achievement, and expertise building. Scardamalia 
and Bereiter (1993/ 1994) further defined intentional learners as motivated learners who actively and 
intentionally achieve learning in an environment that supports learning. In other words, intentional 
learners in supportive environments have high levels of self-efficacy and use learning as a primary transformative 
force (Bereiter &#38; Scardamalia, 1989). In recent years, Bereiter and Scardamalia have worked on a 
project called Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environment (CSILE). CSILE, features eleven design 
principles for intentional learning and provides a unique enviromnent where mms of North American students 
engage in knowledge-or skill-transforming classroom activities. (Scardamalia, Bereiter, McLean, Swallow, 
&#38; Woodruff, 1989). Models for Intentional Learning My own ongoing investigation examines the psychological 
and developmental factors that affect intentional learning. This study describes intentional learning 
as a highly motivated, agentive approach. It is how learners of varying ability choose to empower and 
transfomr themselves by making wise decisions, setting goals, and using strategies and processes to ensure 
lcaming. This definition creates a specific vision for designing intentional learning environments by 
exploring the combined effect of conativc, cognitive, affective, and social processes on learning performance. 
Intentional learning is how learners of varying ability choose to empower and transform themselves by 
maklng wise decisions, setting goals, and using strategies and processes to ensure learning.  Figure 
1. Definition of Intentional Learning Successful Intentional Learners Professionals use a variety of 
adjectives to describe intentional learners, such as successful. serious, committed, self-regulated, 
self-directed, self-managed, or lifelong learners. These learners have similar characteristics in that 
they understand and know to varying degrees how to Commit attention to continuous, persistent learning 
0 Determine and manage what they already know Decide what they do not know and acquire relevant new knowledge 
0 Plan and commit resources before learning 0 Provide conflict trials and counter examples to improve 
learning Mix and match strategies and skills to adapt to the learning situation Extend goals that lead 
to greater challenges Monitor and evaluate learning progress Assess and improve cognitive strengths and 
weaknesses Intentional learners take responsibility and control of their own learning and become actively 
involved in managing the learning process. Believing in the transformative power of learning, intentional 
learners deliberately direct themselves to acquire knowledge, elaborate and give it meaning, and use 
it to achieve long-term goals. Greater progress occurs as the learner understands how intentional learning 
work and the learner increasingly self-manages and monitors his or her learning performance.  Computer-Based 
Intentional Leaning Instructional designers are changing the way they design tomorrow s instruction. 
They are developing multidimensional systems that adapt to individual needs and encourage learners to 
manage their own learning. Computers make changes possible by allowing more flexibility in learning and 
greater capability in designing instruction. In computer-based learning environments, learners have new 
opportunities to learn key strategies for self-managed learning. The key questions are: how do we provide 
interactive instructional environments that duplicate real life and encourage intentional learning? How 
do we design innovative environments that provide a judicious mix of compatible and conflicting experience 
(Brown, 1987)? The answers should lead designers to computer- based instruction that encourage learners 
to internalize intentional learning strategies, such as goal setting, task sequencing, problem solving, 
note taking, and progress monitoring. To support this view, Scardamalia and Hereiter (1989) offer an 
interesting metaknowledge model (see Table 1) that describes basic needs for intentionaI learning environments. 
They defme metaknowledge as knowledge about knowledge. Nevertheless, creating an environment that effectively 
supports the intersection of constructs for social, conative, cognitive, and affective processes is a 
formidable task (Snow &#38; Farr, 1987). Research about computer-based instruction abounds. Most studies 
show that computers influence and support kaming, but results show that the degree of success varies. 
However, few studies truly examine how computers enable individuals to use key learning strategies, such 
as goal setting, task sequencing, and progress monitoring. Mdaknowledge Needs for Intentional Jkaming 
1. A Problrmsdving J?mmework for Approachbg btng I-taming should be approached within an exetive structure 
that makes it possible to apply effort effectively, insofar as it is needed to pursue a le3ming goal, 
to contend with obstacles, and to ahate mental resources appropriately. 2. Awareness of the Functional 
Potential of Knowledge Awareness that knowledge can enable the aquisition of other knowledge can bring 
about the revision of other lmowledge, and can be conjoined in various ways to play various critical 
roles for iatenticnal leamiag.  3. Strategies for Identiryfng Defldts in Knowkdge When learning is approached 
within a problem-solving framework, identifying what cme does not know becomes a variety of problem-fmdiag 
(Get~ls, 1979). As such, it is an active, sIrategically guided-pn~~ss and not simply a matter of spontaneous 
auicksity.  able 1. Bereiter and Scardamalia s Model for inconsistent because the constructs are too 
broad to measure accurately.  Intentional Lean&#38;g Environments This study uses a well-defined intentional 
learning construct to identify design principles for intentional learning environment. The study will 
produce an instructional model that highlights the use and measures the impact of specific intentional 
learning strategies. The results of this and subsequent studies will explore how individuals use key 
strategies to manage learning performance in an intemional learning environment. Important assumptions 
guide the development of intentional learning environments, including the importance of different levels 
of multidisciplinary knowledge, strategies for expertise building, authentic problem solving (from a 
student s perspective), feedback and reflection, progress monitoring, and intentional learning strategies. 
PURPOSE The purpose of this project was to design a first-generation intentional learning environment 
for instructional multimedia. The final product was a model for developing an interactive Sales and Product 
Training CD-ROM course for resellers. The model, called a System for Intentional Learning and Progress 
Assessment (SILPA), features six design principles that support intentional learning. The SILPA fosters 
intentional performance by focusing on three key learning processes: goal setting, task sequencing, and 
progress monitoring. The goal of the reseller course was to enhance the product selling skills, productivity, 
support services, and sales opportunities for resellers. As a result, the instruction empowered resellers 
to become responsible channel partners, increase sales, and meet long-term business needs. METHOD Conducted 
in the context of a Reseller Sales and Product Training, this study used a formative evaluation approach 
that relied on opportunities to (1) investigate the principles for designing intentional learning environments, 
(2) make adjustments or improvements during the investigation, and (3) review and evaluate intended and 
unintended outcomes. Subsequent studies will focus on investigating and measuring the relationship between 
learning outcomes, strategies, and intentional learning environments. Instrumentation The insa-uments 
created in this study were a set of assessment tools, including a pretest, integrated practice exercises 
for each instructional section, and a final assessment for the entire course. A Test Analysis and Test 
Blueprint provided specific information about the individual assessment instruments. 1. The pretest contained 
items to determine a learner s knowledge about the domain (selling, implementing, operating, and servicing 
the product). Individuals received an achievement score at the end of the pretest. Learners viewed score 
cards for the pretest achievement scores. 2. The integrated practice exercises (1) judged achievement 
as the learners progressed through the instruction and (2) provided feedback and information to help 
learners monitor progress and sequence tasks. Individuals received an achievement score at the end of 
each instructional section. Learners viewed score cards for the achievement scores. 3. The post-test 
measured immediate knowledge retention of the domain. Items put learners in the role of sales person 
to teachback general concepts and strategies in the domain. Lcamers received a post-test achievement 
score. Learners viewed score cards for final achievement scores.  Stimulus Material The stimulus material 
is a CD-ROM-delivered course for competency-based sales, product, and technical training. The training 
provided the reseller with learning tools to improve product sales and business success. The interactive, 
self-managed training program included seven sections, topics, and tests, all of which learners accessed 
by using the menus or site map. Each section consisted of two to five key topics. Each topic highlighted 
objectives and included an introduction, discussion, practice with feedback, summary, and items on the 
final assessment.  Course Development Team Members The members of the course development team were varied. 
The project manager scheduled events, communicated with the client, and managed product development and 
production. The team consisted of programmers, graphic artists, technicians, and animators. The head 
instructional designer managed the design of the product. This course writing team consisted of insa-uctional 
designers, technical writers, editors, and typists. Procedure Phase One: The course designer used the 
Instructional System Design QSD) process to develop the competency-based instruction. The designers also 
used a variation of Gag&#38;s i~tructional events for the course design The initial course design included 
the following steps . Audience, Customer, and Domain Analysis . Expected Competencies for Resellers . 
Instructional and Assessment Strategies . Performance Objectives . Formative and Summative Evaluation 
Strategies Phase Two: The cmrse writing team wrote the instruction, practice exercises, and assessments 
based on the instructional design information and documents. Designers wrote the completed lessons in 
the form of scripts, similar to a video or screen play script. The programmers and specialists used the 
scripts to develop the multimedia instruction This phase also included development of a media integration 
plan and ongoing formative evaluation of the product Subject matter specialists played an important part 
in the collection, creation, and evaluation of relevant tools and materials. Phase Three: Programmers 
and the animation team implemented the course design to create the instructional product. Subject matter 
specialists continued to evaluate the instructional materials. Phase Four: The evaluation team and learners 
evaluated the tinal product and made recommendations accordingly. RESULTS The first-generation intentional 
learning environment provided a self-directed, performance- based reseller product and sales training 
in seven instructional modules. The design followed a competency-driven framework that supports professional 
sales training objectives. To create the SILPA, instructional designers worked with top salesmen and 
key managers who were subject matter specialists. The subject matter specialists helped the designers 
to define and prioritize the key sales competencies and strategies, suggest and evaluate methods to present 
instruction, identity measures to assess performance, and evaluate the finished instructional product. 
Laming Progress Map The heart of the SILPA model is a learning management and assessment framework called 
a Learning Progress Map (LPM). The LPM is a new le.aming paradigm that provides learning resources and 
encourages learners to model and then internalize intentional learning processes. It visually represents 
the combination of the domain of expertise and an individual s (1) self-directed learning path through 
the domain, (2) use of learning strategies, and (3) assessed progress during the instruction. LPMs also 
helped researchers report and measure the use and impact of intentional strategies onlearning. The assessment 
of learning and validation of the use of LPMs lead to important implications for instructional designers 
in the twenty-first century, especially those who work with web- or computer-based environments. Unfortuuately, 
the LPM portion of this model was temporarily postponed for the first version of this project. The programming 
time for this element would have delayed the scheduled product delivery. The LPM will appear in the next 
version If available, LPM results will appear at the SIGDOC conference in October 1997. SILPA Design 
Principles The plan for an intentional learning environment containing expert-building instruction was 
not fully formed when the project began. Ideas began to take shape as the team implemented the instructional 
design. During this process, a set of design principles evolved to guide development of intentional learning 
environments. Implementing and evaluating all aspects of these design principles will require additional 
time and study. 1. Domains of knowledge represent what the experts know and epitomize what they can do. 
Designers use analysis and subject matter specialists to identify key competencies and related knowledge. 
The tasks within the domains may be simple ones or a sequence of D increasingly complex tasks leading 
up to an advanced state of expert knowledge or perfomnnce. 2. Multidisciplinary lessons plans encourage 
problem solving and idea synthesis related to the domain of knowledge. The multidisciplinary lessons 
use different levels of knowledge that build toward what experts know and keep doing to build their expertise 
beyond the boundaries of the domain. 3. Role differentiation puts the learner in alternating roles of 
learner, researcher, and teacher. The computer begins by performing aspects of the domain tasks that 
demonstrate expertise while the learner observes. Next, the instruction provides practice, feedback, 
and tips that guide individuals to greater levels of expertise. As individuals practice the domain tasks, 
they independently examine ways to expand their growing expertise. Eventually, the learner teaches the 
increasingly difficult levels of expertise to others. 4. Practice and feedback allows learners to become 
expert using repeated trials and coaching in authentic domains of expertise. Practice and feedback supports 
the entire intentional learning process and attainment of learning goals.  With sufficient practice, 
learners can use personal mental resources, knowledge, and experience to improve learning. Also, as individuals 
practice and continue to learn, they improve how well they learn. 5. Progress assessment gives learners 
more autonomy and control in the learning process and can significantly increase the quality of learning. 
Progress assessment offers a systematic approach or framework that gives measurement and progress information 
as learners control learning and master each predefined skill level of the domain. 6. Multidimensional 
interaction is important for implementing intentional learning environments because it allows learners 
to manage key learning processes. such as goal setting, task sequencing, progress monitoring, and problem- 
solving to achieve learning goals.  Interactive activities include note taking, using authentic performance 
tools, and practice with feedback. If the performance is insufficient to increase expertise, the instruction 
offers additional levels of practice to improve skills and performance. This study also resulted in the 
creatiotl of several design products, including Multidisciplinary Lesson Plans, Course Summary Plan, 
Lesson Summary Plans for each module, Lesson Templates, and Course Scripts. These documents were helpful 
in guiding the development and production of the product. These products are generic and useful for similar 
instructional multimedia products.  SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION Today s rapidly changing computer technology 
offers tremendous opportunities to create intentional learning environments. Thii study s results describe 
how to use six principles to design innovative environments that support intentional learning strategies. 
The instructional model, called a System for Intentional Learning and Progress Assessment, answers many 
questions about implementing intentional learning elements into an instructional design that supports 
self-managed learning. Important to thii study is the recognition of the mutual interdependence, or interaction, 
between intentions and learning. Learning systems with assessment components, such as pretesting, self-assessment, 
or progress assessment, give learners more autonomy and control in the learning process, and can significantly 
enhance or improve the quality of learning. Traditional forms of assessment hive typically assessed learners 
in relation to how much knowledge they have memorized compared to other learners. Fewer assessments review 
or evaluate performance and mastery of the domain of knowledge. The unfortunate delay of the LPM stills 
leaves an important question open in this investigation. What is the impact of using LPMs in self-managing 
learning rather than relying on random learning, unintentional learning, or linear learning strategies? 
 LPMs will receive greater attention in upcoming studies. The purpose is to increase learner control 
in the intentional learning environment substantially. The strength of the project is that it (1) encouraged 
self-managed learning through goal setting, task sequencing, and progress monitoring, (2) identified 
competencies required at each level of study, (3) provided practice and feedback as learners learned 
to learn, and (4) gave progress information as learners mastered each predefmed skill level of the domain. 
Future experimental studies will further examine how intentional learning environments influence these 
important issues. Evaluation studies should also determine if resellers, after using this product, achieve 
higher sales then previously. Higher results in sales, achievement, and retention and lower results in 
frustration and time will demonstrate that there is an excellent interaction between intentional learning 
and the effect on achievement and retention. We expect that learners who use key strategies in intentional 
kaming environments effectively will show better performance than learners that do not. It makes sense 
to think that if individuals improve learning ability, then they may achieve and enjoy learning more. 
The final project report will present information about the instructional system design, features of 
the new knowledge-building architecture, and the intentional learning design principles. This information 
will guide future development projects aimed at building expertise in intentional learning environments. 
 REFERENCES 1. Bandura, A., &#38; &#38;hunk, D. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic 
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personalitv and Social Psvchology, 4l, 586598. 
 2. Bandura, A., &#38; Wood, R. (1989). Effect of perceived controllability and performance standards 
on self-regulation of complex decision-making. Journal of Personalitv and Social Psvcholopv, 56- 805-814. 
 3. Bereiter, C. (1993). Surnassin~ ourselves: Inquh-v into the nature and imulications of emertise. 
Chicago: Open Court.  4. Bereiter, C., &#38; Scardamalia, M. (1989). Intentional learning as a goal 
of instruction. III L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowina. learning, and instruction: Essavs in honor of Robert 
Glaser. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum Associates. 5. Brown, A. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, 
self-regulation, and other more mysterious mechanisms. In I?. Weinert $ R. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacosnition. 
motivation, and understanding; (pp. 65-116). Hillsdale, New Jersey; Erlbaum Associates. 6. Brown, A. 
Campione, J., Reeve, R., Fermra, R, &#38; Palincsar, A. (1991). Interactive learning and individual understanding. 
In L. T. Landsmann (Ed.), Culture. schoolinp, and psvchological develoument (pp. 136170). Hillsdale, 
New Jersey; Erlbaum Associates.  7. Bunderson, C. V. (1996). Building an Expert Learning Community in 
a Preservice Tecbnologv for Teachers Course. Paper presented at Northern Rocky Mountain Educational Research 
Association Conference, Fargo, SD, Ott 4, 1996. 8. Derry, S. (1992). Metacognitive models of learning 
and instmctional system design In M. Jones &#38; P. H. Wiie (Eds.), Adautive learning environments (p. 
267). Berlin: Springer Verlag.  9. English, E., &#38; Reigeluth, C. (1996). Formative research on sequencing 
instruction with the elaboration theory. Educational Technology Research and Develoument, &#38;4(l), 
23-42. 10. Flavell, J. (1971). First discussant!s comments: What is memory development. Human Development, 
I4- 272-278. 11. Flavell, J. (1979). Metacognition. American Psychologist, &#38; 906911 12. Flavell, 
J. (1987). Speculations about the nature and development of metacognition. In F. Weinert &#38; R Kluwe 
(Eds.). Metacognition, motivation. and understanding (pp. 21-29). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum Associates. 
 13. Flavell, J., Friedrichs, A., &#38; Hoyt, J. (1970) Development changes in memorization processes. 
Cormitive Psvchologv, ll- 324 340.  14. Frederiksen, N., Glass, R., Lesgold, A., &#38; Shafto, M. (Eds.). 
Diagnostic monitorinP of skill and knowledge accmisition (pp. 407- 432). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum 
Associates.  15. Gag&#38;, R. M., Briggs, L., &#38; Wager, W. (1992). Principles of Instructional Desian 
(4th. ed.). New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers. 16. Glaser, R. (1984). Education 
and Thinking: The role of knowledge. American Psvchologist, 2, 93-104. 17. Lesh, R., Lamon, S., Gong, 
B., &#38; Post, T. (1993). Using learning progress maps to improve instructional decision making In R. 
Lesh &#38; S. iamon (Ed.), Assessments of Authentic Performance in School Mathematics American Association 
for the Advancement of Sciences. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum Associates. 18. Mandinach, E. (1987). 
Clarifying the A in CA1 for learners of different abilities. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 
3, 113-128. 19. Merrill, D., Li, Z., &#38; Jones, M. (1990). Second generation instructional design 
(ID,). Educational Technology, 2, 7- 13. 20. Messick, S. (1995). Validity of Psychological Assessment. 
American Psychologist, 50(g), 741-49. 21. Scardamalia, M., &#38; Bereiter, C. (1996). Student communities 
for the advancement of knowledge. Communications of the ACM,  S(4), 36(2). 22. S&#38;raw, G. (1994). 
The effect of metacognitivc knowledge on local and global monitoring. ContemDorarv Educational Psychology, 
19, 143-154. 23. Snow, R. (1989). Toward A.ssessmcnt of Cognitive and Conative Structures in Learning. 
Educational Researcher, l8(9), 8- 14. 24. Snow, R. &#38; Fat-r, M. (1987). Cognitive-conative-affective 
processes in aptitude, learning, and instruction: An introduction. In R. Snow &#38; M. Far-r (Eds.), 
Conative and Affective Process Analysis. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum. 25. Snow, R., &#38; Mandinach, 
E. (1989). Integrating assessment and instruction: A research and development agenda. Unpublished paper 
presented to Princeton, New Jersey: Educational Testing Center. 26. Snow, R., Mandinach, E., &#38; McVey, 
M. (1990). The topographv of mastery assessment in instructional domains. Princeton, New Jersey: Educational 
Testing Center. 27. Stemberg, R. (1996). Successful intelligence: how practical and creative intclligencc 
determine success in life. New York: Simon &#38; Schuster. 28. Weiner, R. (1972). Attribution theory, 
achievement motivation, and the educational process. Review of Educational Research, 42, 203-2 15. 29. 
Zimmerman, B., &#38; Martinez-Pots, M. (1986). Development of a structured interview for assessing student 
use of self-regulated learning strategies. American Educational Research Journal, 3, 614-628. 30. Zimmerman, 
B., &#38; Martinez-Potts, M. (1988). Construct validation of a strategy model of student self-regulated 
learning. Journalof Educational Psychology, @, 284-290.   
			