
 Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference ed. .J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, 
and A. F. Seila DETERMINING THE UTILITY OF AI) VANCED DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION TO TEST AND EVALUATION Mark 
E. Smilh JADS JFS AFOTEC/DIS 8S00 Gibson Blvd SE Kirlland AFB, Ncw Mexico 87117-5558, U.S.A. ABSTRACT 
This paper summarizes efforts MUM to date by the Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation (JADS) Joint Feasibility 
Study (JFS) team in determining the utility of Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) to lest and evaluation 
(T&#38;E). The top-rated of the many T&#38;E requirements that nmy be s:]lisfied by ADS are reviewed, 
as well as eight applicnlions of ADS identified by the team. The study team has concluded that ADS is 
a viable tool, but knows that the T&#38;E community needs qwm[itative datn on ADS performance. Thus, 
specific tests are planned by the team, two of which arc discussed here. The Systems Integration Test 
involves linking traditional hardwarc­in-the-loop simulation with live open-air aircmft. The End-to-End 
Test replicates n thread of the batllcficld process, from target detection to target dcslruction, using 
a combination of actual hardware, simulations and models. Finally, some of the proposed JADS joint test 
and evaluation (JT&#38;E) legacy products are discussed, in light of their importance to members of the 
T&#38;E community accepling ADS as a creditable tool. 1 INTRODUCTION In this paper, I discuss some of 
(hc efforts that (I1c JADS JFS tesm has taken to d:~te. JADS JFS is n year­long technical study chartcrcd 
by OSD S Director of Test and Evaluation. The team s charter was to assess whelher it is neces,wuy and 
fcm.ible 10 conduct a joint test to determine the utility of ADS to support T&#38;E. Actual quantitative 
data on the pcrfornmnce of ADS as a mclhodology, or test 100I, would need 10 come from [cst performance. 
The sludy [cam, thcrcforc, is also responsible for preparing ini[ial plans for a JT&#38;E (hat would 
measure ADS performance in several m-cas of T&#38;E activities. As used by the study team, the term ADS 
refers to the technologies of distributed interactive simulation (DIS), but not limited to the DIS architecture 
and protocol standards established by the Univcrsi(y of Central Florida (UCF). Advanced refers to means 
or concepts not done previously, encompassing both existing and erncrging capabilities. Thus, existing 
models, simulations, Iaboratorics, test range facilities, hardware, etc. as WC1l as emerging capabilities 
are included in the term ADS. The proposed joint test of ADS is a timely analysis of a new test tool 
that can potentially enhance the T&#38;E process. Senior Defense leaders have long called for a streamlining 
of the acquisition process in light of austere budgets and perceived inefficiencies. Likewise, conventional 
methods of T&#38;E have come under scrutiny. New weapons systems can no longer be satisfactorily tested 
using conventional means, while tight budgets ~nd limited resources challenge members of the T&#38;E 
community to come up wilh innovative ways to test realistically and thoroughly. Many sce ADS as the answer, 
but litllc quantitative d:ita on the performance of this potential methodology exists. Members of the 
T&#38;E community, as well as acquisition program offices, are not likely to invest lhcir time, effort 
and resources on an unknown quantity. The utility of ADS as a T&#38;E methodology must bc proved -­where 
it works well, and where it docsn t. The JADS JFS team has determined that such a test of ADS is nccdcd 
and, in most cases, technically feasible. This paper is organized as follows. First, the top­rankcd T&#38;E 
requircmcnls that may bc salisficd through the use of ADS arc rcvicwcd. Next, eight applications of ADS 
methodology identified by the [cam are summarized. A brief description of (WO of the team s proposed 
ADS lest plans follows. Finally, recognizing the difficulties involved in convincing a communily 10 embrace 
a ncw concept, legacy products designed to case the paradigm shift arc discussed. 805 806 Smith 2 TES 
~ AND EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS The first step in delcrrnining ADS ulility to support T&#38;E was to look 
where the need for improvements 10 T&#38;E methodologies had been documcn[cd. To do this, an assessment 
of limi[a[ions, or shortfalls, to past and planned testing was made. If there were no desired improvements 
documented which ADS might resolve, then adding ADS as a T&#38;E mc[hodology would bc a costly and unneeded 
duplication of capabili(ics. The sources of the identified shortfalls, or limitations, were Test and 
Evaluation Master Plans, test plans, test reports, interviews and lessons learned documents. Some 361 
sepm-atc shortfalls were identified, then rank ordered by members of the three Services opcratiomd and 
developmental test (OT and DT) communities. These shortfalls in turn became requirements for the investigation 
of ADS in [hc hopes that ADS could ovcrcomc some podion of lhcsc historic limitations. The top-ranked 
OT and DT limi{alions or shortfalls are summarized in Tnblc 1. Table 1: Top-Ranked OT and DT Test Limitations 
TOP OT LIMITATIONS Inadequate Quantity and Types of Targets Inadequate Quantity and Types of Threat Systems 
Inadequate Quanlity and Types of Friendly Systems Electronic Combat Testing Not Allowed, is Limited or 
Restricted Non-Representative Force Levels Human Interaction Not Rcnrcsentcd Insufficient Test Articles 
Unrealistic Test Scenarios Insufficient Number of Test Events TOP DT LIMITATIONS Inability to Integrate 
Avionics Tcsling Limitations to Testing Special Access programs Incompatibility of Collcctcd Data Human 
Interaction Not Rcprcscntcd Non-Represcntalive Force Levels Inadequalc Quantity and Types of Threat Sysicms 
Electronic Combat Testing Not Allowed, is Limited or Restricted Lack of Systems for Compnlihilily Testing 
Real-Time Modeling/Simulation Not Availahlc In addition to studying where ADS might overcome historical 
T&#38;E shortfalls and limitolioos. the team idcnt ified innovat ivc uscs of ADS, to allow rcsulls not 
previously attainable. These innovative uscs arc described below. Electronically integrate threats and 
Time-Spacc­Position-Indication (TSPI). When testing a weapon systcm, enemy thrcals must be simulated 
in most cases either in type, numbers, or both. Threat simulators are located throughout the country, 
and ADS may provide a means of linking these simulators to provide an integrated threat environment which 
can then bc linked to the test system for a more realistic Im[llcspace. Flexible Command, Control, Communications, 
Computers, Intelligence (C41) testing. ADS may provide a means of adding friendly forces in the bat(lespace 
such as robust and flexible C41 networks, and high-value assets in limited supply. Portions of a C41 
network can be represented by ADS to provide more robust C41 either to augment a system in test or as 
a support. Linking of range capabilities. ADS may be used to increase the number of supporting test assets 
by linking several ranges together. This could provide a more robust operational environment for electronic 
combat testing, or allow the use of limited range assets at another location without the expense of doing 
the testing at multiple loca[ions. Interoperabilit y. Single Service tests of systems that play in a 
joint Imttlespace ,arena routinely have the problem of testing interoperability with o(her Service assets, 
particularly high-value assets in limiled supply. ADS may provide a means of testing interopcrability 
with a much larger population of other Service systems through the use of distributed simulations. Test 
concept validation. ADS technology may have applications as a better, more cost cfficicnt method of structuring 
a test when used for advanced planning and test planning. Testers may be able to use it for scnsitivit 
y and pararnclric analyses, dctcrmin ing data requirements and lest concept validation long before any 
major portions of the systems are built. Real time casualty assessment/removol. ADS technology shows 
promise for allowing real time, human interactive casualty assessment. The problems of casualty fissessrnent 
and kill removal have always been a problcm in live tests because a Iivc system may not know that it 
has been killed and will continue to fight for some period of tirnc, impacting the actions of other sys[cms. 
Flexible test environment with innovation. ADS may provide a way of using virtual proto(ypcs. wilh open 
architecture software, to permit quicker component capability changes in order to obtain the final system 
design or configuration during developmental testing. ADS my also provide a means of changing test environments 
to operational environments not readily available using existing test facilities.  Utility of Advanced 
Distributed Simulation Test rehearsal. This application of ADS is rckilcd to the use of ADS for test 
planning. It mny provide a more efficient method of maximizing live (CS[ time by wringing out the systcm 
prior to ac[ual Iivc tcslhg, and by focusing the live test time on spccitic problcm areas. Live/virtual 
mix. This is lhc basic application where ADS appears to have large benefits in lhicken ing the battlespace 
for the fcw live players in a test. It also nmy provide an opportunity for evaluating human factor and 
live response/reactions in those situations where safety or environmental rcslriclions limit testing. 
 3 ADS T&#38;E METHODOLOGIES By using both these historical T&#38;E shortfalls and innovative uses as 
requirements, ADS technology could now be cx.amined to dctcrminc how (hcsc rcquircmcnls might be satisfied. 
The study team idcnlificd eight applications, or mclhodologics of ADS [hat might sa[isfy many of these 
requircmcnls. These eight methodologies are dcscribcd below: 3.1 Add Assets ADS may be used to increase 
[he number of test assets, increase [he number of supporting assets, and add assets (e.g. t,argets, threats, 
integ,mtcd air defense systems [IADS], communication networks, etc.) that (are not available. Major subcategories 
include: 3.1.1 ADS Representation of Foe Targets, Threats and LADS When testing wcapoo systems, foc forces 
and systems must be simulated io most cases either in type, numbers or both. ADS may provide a technology 
to simulate the necessmy capabilities and ch.aracteris(ics and link that presentation with the systcm 
under test. The simulations may be a mix of live, virtual and/or constructive and include human interaction 
where neccss.ary. This application is an alternative to using friendly systems to represent foc systems. 
It also includes connecting systems from scpm-atc ranges together to get more types and numbers. For 
ex~mplc, it may now be possible to intcroct scvcml electronic combat (EC) test ranges to get a more rcprcscn[a(ivc 
mix of threat systems. 3.1.2 ADS Representation of Friends, Systems and C41 ADS may provide a means of 
adding additional friendly forces in a ba[tlcspacc. including robust communications networks and high 
value/limiled supply friendly systems. It appears possible to link production articles wi(h simulators 
of the sys(cm [o provide a more representative fighting unit to test. Portions of a C41 network can bc 
rcprcscntcd by ADS to provide more rcalislic, more interactive, and more robust C41 cilhcr to augment 
a system in test or as a support systcm. In EC testing, safct y and environmental/security considerations 
often restrict the testing of radiating systems, both for the systcm under test and for supporting systems. 
ADS may provide a mc.ans of linking live systems and open air ranges with threat simulations and EC hardware 
in anechoic chambers to evaluate system capabilities and ch.aracterist ics including real-time operator 
responses. In weapons testiog, ADS may provide a means of using interactive simulations with hardw.arc-in-the-loop 
to test features that are difficult to operate live due to restrictions, such as firing Iascrs, launching 
multiple missiles, and expending countcrmcasurcs. ADS may also have the capability to link multiple Service 
simulations and systems to provide assets for interoperability testing.  3.2 Increase Test Length, Events 
and Repetitions With ADS it may be possible to perform more test events, do multiple repetitions of particular 
events, or decrease the lenglh of a test. In this application it usually will be necessav to replicate 
the actual test event, or events [hot one wishes to study further. It also will be necessary to either 
connect the test systcm to an ADS network, or in some cases to simulate the itcm under test when additional 
tests are performed. For example, a tester may shoot a small number of live missiles and then simulate 
the shooting of many more missiles using a validated simulation. This simulation may consist of actual 
hardware in the loop with only simulated firings, or it may be a computer simulation of the missile itself, 
depending on the measures being evaluated. 3.3 Real-Time Endgarne Anillysis/Damage Assessment As mcnt 
ioncd before, ADS shows promise for allowing real-time, human intcmciive endgame analysis. It also helps 
solve some of the problems of damngc assessment usually found in Iivc testing seen.arios. Currently in 
live testing, results of combat interactions bctwceo fighting entities prove to be either inconclusive 
or misleading. For example, in a mock battle bclween live [finks, the only result known is [hat 8 tank 
rcccivcd a simulated hit. Dalo is not available instantaneously to Smith determine where it was hit, 
whether it was a to[al kill, or whether damage OI1OWSit to conlinue moving but not firing (or to continue 
firing but not moving). ADS may provide a method of determining what part of he vehicle was hit and what 
class of damage occurred. 3.4 Human Factors/Live Response It is sometimes difficult 10 provide and test 
humfin responses and reactions because of safety or environmental restrictions. ADS may provide a test 
capability to s,afely inject a human in the loop to add more realism and determine responses and reactions 
that otherwise could not bc tes[cd. For example, reactions and responses when ilying at very low altitude, 
when under combat fkc, or in nuclc m-, biological or chemical (NBC) environments could be tested in an 
interactive scenario tied to other systems and live players connected through ADS. This application considers 
human responses and rcaclions associated with the test article, human responses and reactions from other 
systems to the test article, or a combination of both. 3.5 Test Planning ADS may provide a better, more 
cost cfficicnt test of a system if it can be used to improve advanced planning, test planning and test 
rehearsal. This applies bolh for DT and OT. It may aid sensitivity and parametric analyses, test design, 
data requirements determination, and problem idcntificntion through test rchcorsal. In the past, constructive 
simulations have been used both in support of DT and OT. The advantage gained by using ADS is that the 
artificial decision tables inherent in most constructive simulations are rcplaccd by decisions made by 
the human participants. 3.6 System Development There are several possible uses of ADS technology in 
the systcm development process all the way from early requirements development [hrough cvalua[ion of 
possible future product improvements. The major subcategories include: 3.6.1 Use of ADS in Requirements 
Development By using a virtual prototype or constructive simulation of a proposed systcm in[crac(ing 
with a nc[work in realistic battle scenarios in real time, users and dcvclopcrs may be able to derive 
bctlcr opcra(ional requirements that produce the desired battlefield effectiveness. This would also aid 
in identifying and establishing the minimum acceptable requirements and !icy systcm pmanetcrs, and may 
at the same time identify interopembility issues with other systems. 3.6.2 Use of ADS in Performing Cost 
and Operational Effectiveness Analyses (COEAS) By using ADS, users and developers may be able to evaluate 
operational effectiveness of proposed alternatives and design approaches against parameters using a network 
that includes most likely scenarios, friendly systems, validated threats, environmental factors, and 
other constraints or assumptions. With ADS, it may be possible to quantify the operational impact of 
employing each altcrnat ive under consideration.  3.6.3 Use of ADS in Trade Study Support ADS may provide 
a way of using virtu~l prototypes, with open architecture software, to perform studies trading systcrn 
performance parameter wtlucs in rcalislic batllc sccn,arios, and also permit quicker component capability 
changes in order to obtain the final system design or configuration. This could lead to n reduction in 
number and time span of design-test-fix cycles. These virtual prototypes could also be used for operational 
evaluation of the system prior to source select ion. 3.6.4 Use of ADS in System Specification Validation 
By using hardware-in-the-loop simulations tied to realistic synthetic bal[lespaces, it may be possible 
to validate specification compliance while demonstrating operational capability or even exploring expmsion 
of the systcm s performance covelope prior to moving the system into operational tesling. 3.6.5 Use 
of ADS to Evaluate Product Improvements Following live testing of a system, the virlual model of the 
system could be wdidatcd using real pcrfornmnce data, and then used in an ADS environment to quantify 
the value of future planned product improvements.  3.7 Environmental Robustness ADS may provide the 
means to test a system in opera[iona] enviromncnts that are not readily availflblc using existing test 
ranges. This application includes (he broad range of environments of atmospheric (both air and spocc), 
sca and kmd across [hc varying climatic zones. Robust environments also include situations Utility of 
Advanced Distributed Simulation such as NBC, which are never available for testers. This is the one ma 
of ADS applications that the shrdy team feels is not suftlcicnlly mature to examine during the life span 
of the proposed JT&#38;E. 3.8 End-To-End Testing and/or Post-Test Evaluation During test execution, wilh 
ADS it appears feasible to connect a system with a rcprcscntative suite of friendly assets in an end-to-end 
test for evaluation of the contribution of a system to the baltlespace destruction of a t,arget. In addition, 
ADS may provide an arialysis tool, once live testing is complete, to evaluate the system by taking the 
live data and using it in a distributed simulation to generalize [he results and determine the operational 
effectiveness of the systcm. This would be a case of the model-test-model methodology. If the thickening 
of the baltlespacc and interoperabilit y between systems is sufficiently representative of a thea[er 
conflict, ADS may also help support an evaluation of a system at a ba[[lc outcome level. This application 
primarily deals with [he possibility of using ADS as an evaluation tool once (he live test data has been 
collecled.  4 ADS TESTS The preceding ideas on T&#38;E rcquircmcnts and ADS applications are just that 
--good ideas. However, they will do little to enhance the cffectivcncss of T&#38;E activities unless 
ADS is used, effcctivcly, as a T&#38;E tool. Before the T&#38;E community is going to embrace ADS, however, 
they need hard data about the technology --where it works WC1l, where it doesn t, and how best to use 
it when appropriate. The proposed JADS JT&#38;E is designed to provide both the analytical data on ADS 
performance, m well as a cookbook on how to use ADS tools. Rccogniziog the enormity off the spectrum 
of T&#38;E activities, and the limitations of performing a three or four yc.ar joint test, specific areas 
were chosen for examination. These areas represent significant portions of T&#38;E activities. Additionally, 
broader exmninnlion nnd conclusions will be drawn, when possible, on areas of T&#38;E activity not specifically 
tested by the JADS JT&#38;E. There are currently three tests proposed by the JADS team for usc in determining 
the utility of ADS as a T&#38;E methodology --the Systcm Inlegra[ioo Test, lhc Electronic Combat Test, 
and the End-To-End Test. The End-To-End Test also has a Iargc excursion examining the utility of ADS 
in supporting EC testing of a communications link. Due to space, the Electronic Combat Test and EC excursion 
of the End-To-End Test will not bc covered here. 4.1 System Integration Test This is a two-phased test 
involving the application of six of the eight T&#38;E methodologies to the T&#38;E of a precision guided 
weapon. The Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (AMRAAM) was chosen as the system under test by 
which to evaluate ADS utility, due to the wealth of lmeline T&#38;E data from conventional testing. The 
goal is to replicate AMRAAM fight test; using ADS-with a combination of actual hardware, hardware-in-the-loop 
(HWIL), digital simulations, and an open air range with live aircraft. A summ,ary of ADS methodologies 
examined by phase is in Table 2. Table 2: Systcm Integration Test Summary Test Resource ADS Phase Methodology 
1 -Live Aircraft Test Planning -HWIL Simulation 1 -Live Aircraft -Add Assets -Increase Test Repetitions 
-Real-Time End-Game Analysis -Human Factors -System Development 2 -Live Aircraft -Add z%.SCtS -HWIL Simulation 
-Increase Test -Aircraft Simulator Repetitions -Real-Time End-Game Analysis -Human Factors -Systcm Development 
In Phase 1 of this test scenario, a launch aircraft with an AMRAAM Captive Equipment (ACE) pod flies 
against a live maneuvering target aircl-aft. Spatial position data from both the launch and target aircraft 
and telcmchy data between the launch aircraft and the ACE pod are downlinked to the range Cen[ral Control 
Facility (CCF). When the launch aircraft rcachcs firing parameters, rather than fire a live AMRAAM at 
a drone resulting io the expenditure of bo(h, [he fwe signal and subsequent midcourse guidance update 
signals arc downlinkcd to the CCF and passed to an ancchoic chamber, where an AMRAAM missile is 810 Smith 
installed in a HWIL simulator. The missile performs a Both locations and the associated data streams 
will Ix flyout tow,ard the target using actual midcourse networked cross-country. guidance updates and 
completes its intercept using a The potentiat benefits include cost savings of background target scene 
simulation driven by the missiles and drones, being able to simulate multiple position updates of the 
actual maneuvering target targets including electronic countermeasures, multiple aircraft. launches per 
sortie vice a single live shot, operationally Phase 2 of the test will incorporate the same realistic 
target aircraft and maneuvering, the ability to elements, except the live flying will be relocated cross-utilize 
geographically separated test facilities, test country from the HWIL simulator and CCF. rehearsal and 
problem identification prior to shots, and Additionally, a manned aircraft simulator at a third integrated 
avionics system testing. A graphic of Phase location will also be used, providing an additional 2 of 
the System Integration Testis in Figure 1. t,arget and examining a mix of live and virtual entities. 
TELEMETRY H MID-COURSE CM AMRAAM POSITION LAUNCH DATA &#38; TELEMETRY TARGET POSITION A:T ECM DMID-COURSE 
CMDS ........... FLIGHT M ! ~&#38;$ j~$ .... . .. . SIMULATOR AIRCRAFT DATA ~  ; $ : . TARGET POSITI 
 ;~d... ,i#!!llj 4 i!!i!nCENTRAL ~~ y.$??$?f? &#38;#yj%# LINK ; ,.,:,,,, LINK$CONTROL * ~ x  ~ SIMULATORFACILITY 
RANGE POSITION AMRAAM POSITION CONTROL CENTER Figure 1: Phose 2 of the System Integration Test 4,2 
End-To-End Test This is a four-phased test to evaluate the utility of ADS T&#38;E methodologies to support 
end-to-end analysis in a theater-level test scenario. The scen,ario will use a combination of actual 
weapon systems linked to HWIL and man-in-the-loop simulators and constructive digital simulations. The 
primary systems of interest are the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) E-SC 
aircraft and Ground Station Module (GSM). Supporting systems include a model of the Army Tactical Missile 
System (ATACMS), Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) model, HSWL C41 nodes such as Fire Detection Center (FDC), 
Fire Coordination Element (FCE), All-Source Analysis System (ASAS), tactical fire (TACFIRE) message traffic 
via Single Channel Ground and Airborne Radio System (SINCGARS), etc. These systems were chosen as representative 
examples of C41 and weapons systems for all four Services. The test examines five of the ADS me~hodologies, 
as shown in Table 3. The overall scenario, which will be constructed and tested in phases using ADS T&#38;E 
methodologies, will link an E-SC and a UAV to the GSM to provide surveillance targets data which will 
be p,assed through appropriate decision-making nodes and then to ATACMS for missile launch and t,arget 
destruction. Utility of Advanced Distributed Simulation This will provide a rcprcscnlative thread from 
target detection to target destruction for an end-to-end evaluation. Traditional test data and Operation 
DESERT STORM data on the Joint STARS E-8 and GSM will be used for baseline comparison to determine ADS 
utility. Table 3: End-To-End Test Summary Test Resource ADS Phase Methodology 1 -E-8C Replicator Add 
Assets -Constructive ModcI -GSM Replicator 2 -E-8C Replicator -Add Assets -Constructive Model -Endgame 
-GSM Rcplicntor Analysis -DIS Network -Human Factors, -C41 &#38; Weapons Live Response Nodes -Test Planning 
-End-To-End Test 3 -E-8C Aircraft -Add Assets -Constructive Model -Test Planning -GSM -DIS Network -C41 
&#38; Weapons Nodes 4 -E-8C Aircraft -Add Assets -Constructive Model -Endgame -GSM Analysis -DIS Network 
-Human Factors, -C41 &#38; Weapons Live Response Nodes -End-To-End -Ground Excrcisc Test Potenlial ADS 
benefits include lhc ability to add operational realism through theater-rcprcscntative quantities of 
interacting ground targets for the E-8C and GSM, human intcrac[ion in both systems including representative 
C41 threads, test mhcarsal identification of potential problems, cost savings from using virtual simulations 
of UAV and ATACMS systems as well as bolstc[-ing the limited number of live ground forces using constructive 
entities, and the capability for an end-to-end evaluation from target identification through destruction. 
A graphic of Phase 4 of the End­To-End Test is in Figure 2.  5 LEGACY PRODUCTS What the T&#38;E community 
dots not need is another test report collecting dust in someone s libriuy. If ADS methodologies me going 
to bc incorporated into T&#38;E effectively, then there must bc a wide selection of legacy products available 
to encourage the process. The JADS team recognizes this, and has made legacy products a major objective 
of the proposed JT&#38;E. A partial list follows: ADS test tools, actual pieces of hordware dcvclopcd 
for the JT&#38;E, will be available to the T&#38;E community for use in other programs. Examples include 
ncw PDUS, instrumentation, interface units, cnhanccd models and simulations, and upgraded E-8C and GSM 
replicators. A roadmap will be provided by JADS to the ADS/DIS communities, providing guidance in shaping 
fur[her technological development and allowing the needs of the T&#38;E community to be better met. During 
the JT&#38;E, JADS will use the most cffectivc of DOD and Service direction on Verification and Validation 
(V&#38;V). A recommendation will be made based on JADS experience in this area on the most effective 
V&#38;V procedures. Additionally, two libraries will be left as Icgacy products of the JT&#38;E. One 
is the reference library, containing all ADS-related nmtcrial collcctcd during the JFS and JT&#38;E. 
The other will be the data library, containing all data collected during the JT&#38;E. Whichcvcr organization 
or orgtmizat ions t:]ke responsibility for the institutionalization of ADS would be the recipients of 
these libraries. Information briefings will be provided throughout the lifecycle of the JT&#38;E, bolh 
face-to-face and via video. The importance of educating the T&#38;E community cannot be undcrcstinmted, 
and must not wait until [he end of the JT&#38;E. Frequent and widespread briefings will inform the T&#38;E 
cornmuni[y where the technology INS shown cost benefit or value added. Periodic newsletters, TECHNET 
bulletin boards and articles will also help spread, the word. Anticipating the wide availability of CD-ROM 
in [hrce to four years, an interactive training module will be distributed throughout the T&#38;E community. 
It will serve as on exccllcnt cookbook by which potential ADS users can educate themselves, learn what 
ADS applications are germane to their program, determine what components they should incorporate into 
their program, and find the right experts to contact for detailed assistance. A resource list of simulations 
and facilities available with their usefulness to T&#38;E, strengths and weoknesscs, cost, etc., is esscn[ial 
[o the project. Network architecture design exmnplcs could provide case in developing a test concept 
for using ADS methodologies. 812 Smith CONSTRUCTIVE MODEL .-:.: / D *­ ~­ --* AIRBORNE LIVE GND E-SC 
&#38; TGTS C41 UAV ATACMS Fi~urc 2: phase 4 of (hc End.To-End Test 6. CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMEN1 lATIONS 
The JADS [cam has quantified [hc nccessily and feasibility of performing a JT&#38;E of ADS in order to 
determine its utility as o T&#38;E methodology. Many historical shortfalls could perhaps hc rcctificd 
through ADS, and innovative uses of ADS may provide T&#38;E results not previously attainable. ADS holds 
grcot promise, but factuol d:lta must kc obtained on ADS performance in T&#38;E applications to clearly 
determine where ADS can provide value added. Therefore, the JADS JT&#38;E should bc conducted at the 
earliest opportunity in order to start s[ripping away the mystique and providing testers ;md cvoluxors 
with new, yet solid, tools of lhc trade. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The au[hor dedicates this paper to Ihc year-kmg 
cffor[s of [he JADS JFS team, and has tried to do some smell juslicc to the frui[s of their labor in 
this short p:lpcr. The author [hanks Coloncl Ch:u-lcs Director; Mr. Eric Keck, Tcchnica] members Mr. 
Dick Frank, Mr. Gary Larry McKee and Mr. John Rccvcs; our em Ms. Peggy Hancock; and the many Griffin, 
Study Advisor; (cam Morclmnd, Dr. administmt ivc members of (Iw JADS JFS Working Group. These are the 
real brains behind the contents-of this-paper. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY LIEUTENANT COLONEL MARK E. SMITH is the 
Air Force Dcput y Director for the JADS JFS, and has been involved in the study s efforts for the past 
year. He received a B.S. from the US Air Force Academy in 1974 and an MA from Emtxy Riddle Aeronautical 
University in 1987. A fighter pilot by trade, Colonel Smith llCW a variety of fighters, culminating as 
squadron comnxmdcr of the 27(I1 Fighter Squadron. Despite this handicap, hc has been learning quickly 
about the field of ADS. 
			