
 0-7803-5897-X/99/$10.00 Copyright 1999 IEEE In this paper we will apply the same idea to 3-d vector 
.elds. The problem is more complex because the local prop­erties of a vector .eld don t immediately reveal 
information about a large scale vortical pattern. In order to .nd some way to deduce information about 
the shape of a vortex from a point-wise local analysis of the vector .eld, some restrict­ing assumptions 
about the vortex are needed. For a proof of concept we have implemented to alternative procedures. In 
one case we assume that a signi.cant portion of the vor­tex we are after, behaves like a rotating rigid 
body. The rota­tion vector or curl is constant and pointing parallel to the axis of the vortex everywhere. 
However, an arbitrary axial component of the velocity vector may be superposed. In the second case we 
have assumed that the circumferential velocity of the vortex behaves like a so-called potential vor­tex. 
The circumferential speed decreases inversely propor­tional to the radius. An arbitrary axial velocity 
component is acceptable for each layer of constant radius. While the potential vortex produces a rotation 
or curl of zero length, the axial component results in a shear which produces a rotation perpendicular 
to the vortex axis. These generic vortex models appear to cover a range of vor­tices occurring in practical 
cases. For each model the result­ing Curvature Center Density will be different. In practice this means 
that the methods proposed here will not extract a vortex in general but will rather produce a correlation 
with the selected generic model. This, however, is not a disadvan­tage. It allows to tune the method 
to optimize the detection of speci.c types of vortices. Obviously, one can think of more generic vortices 
than the two suggested above. 3 Extracting the Local Information The mathematics for extracting the necessary 
local informa­tion from the vector .eld follows the concepts described for the .ow probe earlier (see 
de Leeuw [8] for a detailed expla­ nation). In order to obtain the local curvature of a streamline or 
trajectory line of the velocity vector .eld u in steady case. T u= uvw) ,, we need the velocity gradient 
tensor or Jacobian matrix uuu xyz J= .u= vvv xyz www xyz Then the curvature vector normal to that streamline 
may be found as: Juu u) uu( Ju ( ) c= ------------------------------------------------------­ 4 u Now 
one can construct a local coordinate frame (index l) from the normalized velocity vector which points 
in stream­wise direction everywhere, the curvature vector which points towards the center of rotation 
and the bi-normal of the .rst two vectors: uc × . uc. M = ------,-----,--------------­ . . u c uc × 
In a two-dimensional case the curvature c could be immedi­ately used to calculate the position of the 
center of curvature or the center point of an osculating circle. The distance to the center point would 
be equal to the radius of the circle or inverse of the curvature. However, in a three-dimensional vortex 
.eld the trajectory lines or streamlines are practically always spiralling. As a result of this spiralling 
motion the curvature is signi.cantly less because the lines are elon­gated. While the curvature vector 
by its de.nition still points towards the center point the distance from this point is much less. In 
fact, very near to the center the streamlines will be almost straight. The small curvature would result 
in huge radius where a small radius would be correct. In order to correct for this spiralling effect 
we need to make assump­tions about the velocity distribution in the vortex.  4 De.ning a Generic Vortex 
We will now de.ne a generic vortex, which is the model or feature we want to locate within the discrete 
data later. This vortex will be de.ned in his own coordinate system which we will denote with index g: 
T u= (u,,w v) g ggg The three velocity components will later be speci.ed by some parametric function 
of the distance from the vortex 22 axis r = xg + yg . In case the generic vortex is assumed to be derived 
from the potential vortex these velocity compo­nents will be given by: Gy GxET .. u= -------, -------,----­ 
g .2 22. r rr G and T being the parameters which de.ne the actual shape of the vortex. These will later 
be evaluated when the generic vortex is .tted to the discrete data. In the alternative case the generic 
vortex is derived from a rigid body rotation as explained earlier a different set of par­ametric functions 
is used:. T u= (gry, grx,e) g Again g and t are parameters which will later be determined. Obviously, 
these are intuitive choices which simplify the concept of a vortex to an extreme degree. One can easily 
think of more elaborate concepts. Until now, we have imple­mented these two approaches and used them 
successfully. Work on more complex concepts is on-going and probably will improve the results even further. 
In order to .t the generic vortex to the discrete data at a given point in space we need to derive equations 
for the parameters (G,E or g,e in the cases above) as well as for the position of the vortex, that is 
the coordinate transform between the xg,yg,zg coordinate system and the xl,yl,zl coor­dinate system which 
is aligned locally with the velocity vec­tor. In order to do this we create a coordinate transform analo­gously 
to the procedure described in section 3. This can be performed algebraically. The components of the curl 
or rota­tion vector are used to .t the generic vortex to the data. The vector components of the curl 
of the generic vortex .g transformed to the local coordinate should be equal to the components of the 
curl calculated from the discrete data. From this we obtain three equations which allow to express the 
unknown position of the generic vortex xg,yg,zg as well as the parameters G and E (g,e respectively) 
with the known components of the vector .l . To close the set of equations we require, of course, that 
the velocity of the generic vortex is equal to the velocity in the discrete data and the stream­line 
curvature is equal as well. The resulting equations are easily obtained. They depend on the generic vortex 
chosen. We will skip the mathematics here, because it would consume a lot of space in the paper while 
the result turns out to be rather trivial for the two examples chosen here. This is because the generic 
vortices don t depend on the coordinate zg, the local coordinate sys­tem always points towards the vortex 
axis and the curl is either purely representing the shear or is independent of the radius depending on 
which concept was chosen. We obtain simple relations for locating the center of curva­ture. In a sense, 
the two selected options represent two extremes of the possible choices. For the .rst case, that is if 
the circumfrential velocity decreases with 1/r as in a poten­tial vortex the distance of the curvature 
center is given by: u . c . u This is equivalent to requiring that the axis of the vortex is perpendicular 
to a plane spun by the curvature vector and the curl vector. For the second case, in which the circumfrential 
velocity is proportional to the distance from the center, the distance to the curvature center is given 
by: 3 t r = tJt × u . . .. with t = u -------------------­ . .. . This is equivalent to require that 
the axis of the vortex is within a plane spun by the curvature vector and the curl vec­tor. Any more 
complex generic model would lead to a value between these two extremes. Evaluation of the Center of Curvature 
Distribution Once we went through the mathematics described above one may easily run through the discrete 
data and for any point where the curvature is signi.cantly different from zero obtain a position for 
the center of curvature by simply multi­plying one of the alternative distant measures r with the nor­malized 
curvature vector. This will give clouds of points which are dense near the centers of vortices. A weight 
func­tion f(x) for a center point i is de.ned as: Vi ; if ((xi x)=r) max fi x= () 0; if ((xi x)>r) 
max Here x=(x,y,z) is the position where the weight is evaluated, xi is the position of a center of curvature 
pi in space, Vi is the volume of the computational cell from which the point pi is derived because points 
from larger cells represent more .ow volume in irregular grids and rmax is the outer limit of the medium 
scale correlation to be calculated. rmax should be chosen according to the radius of the vortical structures 
which are to be detected in the data. The distribution of the centers of curvature may be represented 
by a scalar given by CCD = fi() x . i The curvature center distribution CCD may be evaluated anywhere 
in space, in particular at the nodes of the computa­tional grid. This allows to visualized the scalar 
as an indicator for vortex cores. 6 Implementation The calculation of curvature center points for the 
two simple test vortex types was implemented within our in-house visu­alization system called HighEnd. 
This allows to visualize the point clouds along with isosurfaces of the resulting cur­vature center density 
function and streamribbons in order to verify the results. Whenever operators such as gradient or curl 
are needed, the system relies on Gaussian integral for­mulations. This allowed for an easy implementation 
both for structured and unstructured grids. Aside of testing the algo­rithm against algebraic test data 
which naturally provides exact .ts, the method was successfully applied to a range of CFD results. We 
will show only two case studies here. Work on further generic test vortices allowing more free parame­ters 
is on-going. 7 Lambda Vortex in Transitional Flow A vector .eld extracted from a timestep of a 3d-transitional 
.ow exhibits a weak lambda-shaped vortex. Fig. 1 shows the cores of the vortex nicely visualized as iso-surfaces 
of the curvature center density. Streamribbons selected to pass through those regions verify the roll-shaped 
vortex due to their S-shaped behaviour. The distortion of the streamlines is indeed con.ned to the vincinity 
of the isosurface. The image, which is also available from different view points provides a strong proof 
of the concept. In this case the generic vortex used for the test was of the type with increas­ing circumferential 
velocity when the radius increases. Fig. 1 Isosurfaces of the curvature center density precisely denote 
the shape of the lambda vortex in a simulation of a transitional .ow. Due to the space constraints of 
the paper we show only a single image here. We supply images with different view­points in the color 
section revealing even more details. The curvature center density makes it really easy to select starting 
points for meaningful streamribbons, such as the blue ribbon in the center which splits into two diverging 
traces.  8 Vortices separating from an Ellipsoid The .ow .eld around an ellipsoid exhibits conical vortices 
with strong axial .ow (Fig. 2). Once the curvature density function is visualized, the coincidence of 
the vortical motion with the CCD signal is easily veri.ed using streamlines . Fig. 2 Isosurface of the 
curvature center density visualizing cores of separating vortices. This data also reveals a problem of 
the traditional way of representing vortices by streamribbons. Fig. 3 combines the iso-surface with a 
stream ribbon. The highly curled portion of the ribbon ahead of the iso-surface appears to suggest strong 
vortical motion there.However, the coloring of the ribbon which visualizes the magnitude of the velocity 
vector proves, that the total motion rapidly decays at that position. Obviously the vector .eld has a 
vortical shape there leading to highly curled streamlines. However, there is hardly any motion and streamline 
integration is trapped in a dead­zone . Only where axial velocity picks up the vortex gains strength. 
This is correctly visualized by the curvature center density  Fig. 3 A close-up of the same isosurface 
combined with a curly streamribbon. The streamribbon suggests a wrong strong vortex ahead of the isosurface. 
 9 Conclusion The extension of the existing curvature center density con­cept to 3d-space becomes possible 
after introducing a con­cept of various simple vortex types. So far, two vortex types were implemented 
and tested on various CFD-data with good results. Only results from two data sets are shown here. The 
concept is presently being extended to more com­plex vortex de.nitions and to time-dependant data [1] 
D.C.Banks, B.A.Singer, Vortex tubes in turbulent .ows; identi.cation, representation reconstruction, 
Visualization 94 pp132-139, 1994 [2] D.Kenwright, R. Haimes, Vortex identi.cation ­application in aerodynamics, 
Visualization 97, 1997 [3] M.Roth R.Peikert, Flow visualization for turbomachinery design. Visualization 
96, pp 381-384, 1996 [4] J.Jeong, F.Hussain, On identi.cation of a vortex , Journal of Fluid Mechanics 
(1995) vol. 285, pp. 69-94 [5] W.C. de Leeuw, J.J. van Wijk, A probe for local .ow .eld visualization. 
Visualization (1993), pp. 39--45 [6] I.A.Sadarjoen, F.H.Post, B.Ma, D.C.Banks, H.­G.Pagendarm "Selective 
Visualization of Vortices in Hydrodynamic Flows , Visualization 98, pp. 419-423, 1998 [7] I.A.Sadarjoen, 
F.H.Post, Geometric methods for Vortex Extraction , VisSym 99, May 26-28, Vienna, Austria, 1999 [8] W.C. 
de Leeuw, Presentation and Exploaration of Flow Data , dissertation, TU Delft, 1997 Color Page for Case 
Study Paper Detecting Vortical Phe­nomena in Vector Data by Medium-Scale Correlation     
			