
 Determining the User Pro.lefor an Adaptable Training Platform Mardé Greeff, Quentin Williams, Ronéll 
Alberts and Harriet Pretorius CSIR Meraka Institute P.O. Box 395 Pretoria, 0001{mgreeff, qwilliams, 
ralbers, heaston}@csir.co.za ABSTRACT Adaptive computer-based training systems aim to enhance the learning 
experience by personalising the presentation and content delivery according to the preferences of each 
particular user. The complexity of humans -the many factors in.uencing learning, from learning styles 
to physi­cal abilities; and the proliferation of human-computer in­terface modalities -proves di.cult 
for a system to fully determine when modelling diverse user pro.les. There­fore most research has only 
focussed on the user s learning preferences and training via the normal auditory-visual channels. In 
this paper it is shown how a user model can be determined that includes the learning style, learn­ing 
preference, abilities and the various available comput­ing modalities. The model further incorporates 
how each of the elements in.uence each other. Such a model can be trained and expanded to allow for di.erent 
training paradigms. Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Computer-managed 
instruction (CMI); H.1.2 [User Machine Systems ]: Human information processing; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: 
Evaluation/methodology; D.2.2 [Design Tools and Tech­niques]: User interfaces GeneralTerms User Pro.le 
 Keywords User pro.le, learning style, perceptual learning preference, abilities, training 1. INTRODUCTION 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the .rst page.To copyotherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 
10, October 11-13, Bela Bela, South Africa Copyright 2010ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 ...$10.00. People 
perceive and process information through di.er­ent means based on their preferred learning style, learning 
preferences, literacy level and physical disabilities [13][16]. Human-computer interaction (HCI) systems 
must there­fore take into account this plethora of human factors that in.uence user interaction, as well 
as the speci.c capabil­ities of the computing system. Cassell [2] shows that an intelligent system has 
to represent: (1) the input and out­put modalities of the computing system; (2) the order and medium 
or modality in which information is presented; (3) the user s pro.le/characteristics; and (4) how each 
factor in.uences the interaction between human and computer. To determine all of these factors and subsequently 
model them, is a challenging task and most research has opted to determine one aspect while keeping the 
other factors constant or the same for each user. In this paper it is shown how to determine a user pro­.le 
that consists of various individual traits, including a user s learning style, learning preference/cognitive 
style, literacy level and physical disabilities. Included in the pro.le is the causal relationship each 
one of these factors has on the adaptation of the user interaction by model­ing the impact on the system 
input and output modalities. This user pro.le is then used in a computer based training application to 
adapt the medium through which interac­tion takes place; what type of content is best suited for a particular 
user; and the navigation structure through the content. Adaptation can happen dynamically as the user 
s preferences or circumstances change ensuring that training is always e.ective. The application is an 
adaptive computer based training platform developed for experi­mental purposes in Adult-based training 
domains where low-literacy and disabilities are prevalent. The next section describes the research project 
and the various individual traits that make up the user pro.le are presented in Section 3. Section 4 
provides an overview on the training material used, while Section 5 highlights the user evaluations conducted, 
as well as lessons learned.  2. ABTI PROJECT The Ability Based Technology Interventions (AbTi) pro­ject 
aimed to research how the acquisition of new know­ledge and skills could be facilitated and improved 
through the use of multiple modalities. Based on the results of this research the ultimate project vision 
is to develop a fully functional ability-based training platform that will facilitate training, through 
technology interventions and di.erent modalities, based on the abilities, learning style, preferences 
and literacy level of a trainee. This project is particularly relevant to a developing eco­nomy (i.e. 
South Africa) where the transfer of skills and associated training is of critical importance. This is 
of im­portance not only to everyday learners that have di.erent learning preferences, but also to the 
large number of peo­ple living with disabilities (physical, visual, intellectual, hearing, etc.) and 
illiterate people in such economies. For these persons, becoming economically self sustainable is di.cult 
due to the lack of adequate and e.ective training that matches their unique training needs. The activities 
within the AbTi project were based on the action research methodology and included research on how to 
combine various input and output ICT modalities (as appropriate for a speci.c ability) with a smart reasoning 
engine (which facilitates the extraction of the most appro­priate con.guration and combination of modalities) 
and an adaptive user interface. Thus, the determination of an appropriate user pro.le that faciliated 
e.ective train­ing was an important part of the AbTi project and is the basis of this paper.  3. TRAINEE 
PROFILE The AbTi project aims to enhance the training experience of the trainees by adapting the material 
according to the trainee pro.le, determined by the trainee s: Abilities, e.g. whether the user can see, 
hear or speak.  Perceptual Learning Preference as de.ned by the VARK system [8] and represents the medium 
or modal­ity that is used to present the material, such as ima­ges, video, audio and text.  Learning 
Style as de.ned by Honey and Mumford and Kolb [11, 12], which in.uences the order in which the material 
is presented to the trainee, such as the theory, summary, questions, examples, etc.  Below, each of 
these elements that determine the trainee pro.le, is discussed in more detail. 3.1 Abilities The International 
Classi.cation of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), de.ned by the World Health Organi­sation (WHO) 
[18], has the following classi.cations: (i) body functions; (ii) body structures; (iii) activities; (iv) 
participation; and (v) environmental factors. The follow­ing body functions from the ICF are relevant 
to the AbTi project: mental-, sensory-, speech-, neuromusculoskeletal­and movement-related functions; 
as well as functions of the skin and related structures. The AbTi team decided to focus on a limited 
list of abili­ties, based on the ICF, namely: 1. Seeing -The ability to see; 2. Hearing -The ability 
to hear sound;  3. Tactile perception -The ability to feel or touch; 4. Gross arm control and movement 
-The ability to perform controlled gross movement with the arms, e.g. making circular movements with 
the arms; 5. Fine hand control and movement -The ability to perform controlled .ne movement with the 
hands, e.g. typing with a keyboard or moving the mouse; 6. Speech -The ability to speak.  3.2 Perceptual 
Learning Preference The di.erent learning styles as de.ned in the VARK model [8] are: (i) Visual learners; 
(ii) Aural learners; (iii) Read/write learners; and (iv) Kinaesthetic learners. Visual learners learn 
most e.ectively through the use of their eyes and memorise facts best when they see the in­formation 
[15], e.g. when the information is presented through the use of graphics and pictures [1, 6]. The aural 
learner, also known as the auditory learner [5], likes to read out loud to themselves, is not afraid 
to speak in class and likes oral reports. Read/Write learners prefer material and information dis­played 
as words, with the emphasis on text-based input and output that is supported through reading, writing 
and/or typing [8]. Kinaesthetic learners learn through experience or doing things and prefer to use their 
sense of touch and movement of the whole body for e.ective learning [4, 15]. It is important to note 
that most learners have a combi­nation of these styles with one or two styles more domi­nant than the 
others. For the purpose of this project we focussed on the most dominant learning style of the trainee. 
To optimise the e.ectiveness of the learning or training e.ort, the four learning styles of VARK has 
been mapped to a speci.c collection of modalities that are used to present the training material. Dunn 
et al. found that by teaching individuals initially through their most pre­ferred modality and then later 
through their secondary or tertiary modality, proved to increase the e.ectiveness of learning [4]. Therefore, 
understanding the di.erent learn­ing styles and their needs in terms of training, is an impor­tant requirement 
to deduce the most e.ective modalities in which the training material should be presented for op­timum 
learning.  3.3 Learning Style The AbTi project used a variation of the learning styles of Kolb [12] 
that was introduced by Peter Honey and Alan Mumford [10]. The Honey and Mumford model de.nes the following 
four learning styles: activist, re.ector, theorist and pragmatist. Challenge and immediate experience 
are preferred by the activists. The re.ectors are thoughtful, listen to others before they speak and 
prefer to .rst gather data, analyse it, and to delay reaching conclusions. Theo­rists prefer to think 
things through in logical steps, putting together disparate facts into coherent theories, and be­ing 
rationally objective. Pragmatists are practical, like to seek and try out new ideas, enjoy problem-solving, 
prefer to make decisions quickly and are bored with long discus­sions. In order to increase the e.ectiveness 
of the training experience, the sequence in which training material is pre­sented to the trainee, should 
be adjusted according to the trainee s learning style.  4. TRAINING MATERIAL Most training systems 
present the material in a speci.c way to all users and do not adapt the order in which the material is 
presented to the user. Since each person has a unique way of learning, as well as unique abilities (whether 
the person can speak, see, hear, feel with his/her hands, and gross-or .ne-motor control), the way in 
which the material is presented should cater for these di.erences. 4.1 Training Material Units The training 
material is divided into the following units or sections: 1. Introduction that provides a step-by-step 
outline of what will be/have been covered; 2. Theory Presentation that includes de.nitions, de­scriptions 
and the actual theory of the concept; 3. Questions that assess whether the trainee has mas­tered the 
material; 4. Examples that provide concrete instantiations of con­cepts or examples that illustrate 
how the material is applied; 5. Activities such as case studies, computer simulations or explorative 
activities that enable the trainee to learn while doing something concrete; 6. Exercises that provide 
the trainee with the opportu­nity to practise what s/he has learned; 7. Links to other resources that 
can provide additional information; 8. Summary that provides an overview of what has been presented. 
 The abilities of the trainee in.uences the modalities or me­dia that are used to present the material 
to the trainee, as well as the method of interaction that the trainee uses to interact with the system. 
The perceptual learning pre­ference of the trainee determines how the material is pre­sented to him/her, 
e.g. if the trainee has a visual and audio preference, the material will be presented through images, 
video and audio. The in.uence of the perceptual learning preference and learning style of the trainee 
on the order in which the material is presented, is discussed in the next section. 4.2 Training Material 
Order The order of these elements are determined by the trai­nee s learning style and perceptual learning 
preference. It is important to have all the training material units avail­able to all users, but the 
order through which the material is navigated or presented does in.uence the learning expe­rience [17]. 
According to research conducted on the VARK learning preference model [6, 7] visual users process infor­mation 
best when they can envision a topic and thus start­ing with a summary of the content will suit them. 
Simi­larly aural users will bene.t if you begin new material with a brief explanation of what is coming 
(an introduction), and conclude with a summary of what has been covered. Read/Write learners learn more 
e.ectively when there is enough opportunity to read and re-read the information presented, while kinaesthetic 
learners want to experience the content. Literature in the domain of learning styles was further used 
to determine how best to order content based on a user pro.le. Papanikolaou et al. [14] showed that for 
re.ectors who are example-orientated these types of material must be presented .rst to optimise the train­ing 
strategy. Activists who are activity-orientated must be presented with material through which they can 
expe­rience the content and learn in thus manner. Theorist pre­fer to obtain a lot of information about 
the subject .rst, before doing anything active, while Pragmatist are keen on understanding the techniques 
associated with the training material. Given these preference and learning styles, the material units 
was ordered as shown in Table 1. 4.3 Modelling the User Pro.le The link between a user s pro.le (i.e. 
characteristics and preferences) and the format of information is a vital ele­ment in providing the most 
e.ective means of communi­cating and gaining knowledge. The user s pro.le consists of his/her abilities, 
learning styles, learning preferences and literacy level. On the other hand, information can be stored 
in various data formats (e.g. text, images, au­dio, etc.), while the input and presentation of information 
can happen through a range of computing modalities (e.g. screen, audio, braille, etc.). This situation 
presents a host of dimensions, variables, features and parameters with dif­fering levels of in.uence 
on each other. In this space, the decision must be made as to the optimal input modality, output modality 
and processing of information (e.g. ad­justing for navigation through material) for a speci.c user in 
any given circumstance. In order to model the user pro.le all the variables that forms part of the pro.le 
(refer to Section 3) were extracted and represented (both in a mathematical mapping model and visual 
manner) using a Bayesian network. Bayesian networks [9] are machine learning models that can take the 
user pro.le as an input and infer, as output, the most suitable computing modalities (ex. voice, images, 
text, etc.) and navigation order (e.g. summary -examples ­exercises, etc.) to use. At the same time, 
as more data is added to the model, it can learn and adjust the output to suit the current circumstances 
of the user. The Bayesian network was initiated using the mappings between spe­ci.c user pro.les and 
the required interaction modalities known from literature, as well as utilising cost-based ex­periments 
[3] conducted during this project.  5. USER TESTING User testing was conducted to test whether the 
way in which the presentation of the material, and the order in which the material is presented, provide 
a more e.cient way of presenting training material to a trainee. This Table 1: Order of Training Material 
Units Pro.le Material Order Visual Activitst Summary -Activities -Examples -Theory -Exercises -Questions 
-Links -Introduction Visual Re.ector Summary -Examples -Theory -Exercises -Links -Activities -Questions 
-Introduction Visual Pragmatist Summary -Exercises -Examples -Theory -Activities -Questions -Links -Introduction 
Visual Theorist Summary -Theory -Links -Examples -Questions -Exercises -Activities -Introduction Aural 
Activist Introduction -Activities -Examples -Theory -Exercises -Questions -Links -Summary Aural Re.ector 
Introduction -Examples -Theory -Exercises -Links -Activities -Questions -Summary Aural Pragmatist Introduction 
-Exercises -Examples -Theory -Activities -Questions -Links -Summary Aural Theorist Introduction -Theory 
-Links -Examples -Questions -Exercises -Activities -Summary section presents the process that has been 
followed, as well as lessons learned from the user testing. 5.1 UserTestingProcess A request for volunteers 
was sent out to Meraka sta. to complete questionnaires to determine their abilities, per­ceptual learning 
preference and learning style. From the volunteers, those with a visual perceptual learning prefer­ence 
were selected to participate in the user testing. The pro.les of the participants are presented in Table 
2. In Table 2, V refers to a Visual, A to an Aural, R to a Read/Write and K to a Kinaesthetic perceptual 
learning preference. The selected participants were invited to participate in the user testing. The facilitator 
provided background in­formation about the AbTi project and explained what was contained in the consent 
form. The participant then had the opportunity to read through the consent form and to ask any questions 
or raise any issues that s/he was unclear about. If the participant agreed, s/he signed the consent form 
and the user testing process began. The training application was set up according to the trainee pro.le 
that was determined for the speci.c parti-cipant through questionnaires. The participant then navi-gated 
through the training material that was adapted according to the trainee pro.le of the participant. After 
working through the training material, the participant was asked to .ll out a questionnaire that asked 
questions to deter­mine the ease of use of the system, as well as a question­naire that asked questions 
to determine the e.ectiveness of the training system. 5.2 Lesssons Learned Determining a trainee s pro.le 
through questionnaires pro­vides a good starting point. However, to truely adapt the material to the 
trainee s pro.le, some continuous learning as the trainee is using the system, is still required. For 
ex­ample, a read/write trainee may get tired of reading text and prefers to graphically view or listen 
to content for a short while. One way of ensuring that the system conti­nously learns and provides a 
better .t for speci.c pro.les, is through the use of a Bayesian network as discussed in Section 4.3. 
All participants preferred to have many modalities avail­able. However, presenting text, images and video 
on one screen, at the same time, causes confusion. Therefore, a better solution will be to display the 
information in the modality that is most important for the trainee s pro.le and then to have additional 
links to provide more informa­tion through other modalities. In this way the trainee can activate the 
additional information at his/her own time.  6. CONCLUSION This paper described a method to determine 
a trainee pro.le, taking into account abilities, learning style and perceptual learning preference. This 
pro.le was used to determine the order and the way in which the training ma­terial was presented to the 
trainee. User testing showed that as humans are dynamic creatures, it is important for such a system 
to be able to adapt on the .y to changing circumstances. One cannot just rely on static pro.les de­termined 
via questionnaires done at the beginning of the training process. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would 
like to thank the whole AbTi team, as well as the sta. of the Meraka Institute that were willing to complete 
the questionnaires and to participate in the user testing.  8. REFERENCES [1] Learning resource center 
of polk county inc. Last accessed on: 30 May 2010. Available online at: http://www.lrcpolk.com/. [2] 
J. Cassell. Embodied conversational agents representation and intelligence in user interfaces. AI Magazine, 
22(4):67 84, 2001. [3] L. Coetzee, I. Viviers, and E. Barnard. Model based estimation for multi-modal 
user interface component selection. In F. Nicholls, editor, Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Symposium 
of the Pattern Recognition Association of South Africa (PRASA2009), 2009. [4] R. Dunn, J. S. Beaudry, 
and A. Klavas. Survey of research and learning styles. Educational leadership, 46(6):50 58, 1989. [5] 
R. M. Felder and L. K. Silverman. Learning and teaching styles in engineering education. Engineering 
Education, 78(7):674 681, 1988. [6] G. Fleming. Learning styles: Know and use your personal learning 
style. About.com Guide. Last accessed on: 30 May 2010. Available online at: http://homeworktips.about.com/od/homeworkhelp/a/ 
learningstyle.htm. [7] N. D. Fleming. I m di.erent not dumb. modes of presentation (vark) in the tertiary 
classroom. In Research Table 2: Pro.les of Participants Pro.le Participant A Participant B Participant 
C Participant D Participant E Participant F Learning Style Re.ector Re.ector Re.ector Pragmatist Pragmatist/ 
Theorist Re.ector Perceptual Learning Preference VARK VARK VR VARK VARK V and Development in Higher 
Education, Proceedings of the 1995 Annual Conference of the Higher Education and Research Development 
Society of Australasia (HERDSA), 1995. [8] N. D. Fleming and C. Mills. Vark a guide to learning styles, 
2001. Last accessed on: 30 May 2010. Available online at: http://www.vark-learn.com/english/index.asp. 
[9] Z. Ghahramani and M. Beal. Propagation algorithms for variational bayesian learning. In Proc Neural 
Information Processing systems, pages 507 513, 2000. [10] P. Honey and A. Mumford. The manual of learning 
styles. Peter Honey, 1986. [11] P. Honey and A. Mumford. The Manual of Learning Styles. Maidenhead, 3rd 
edition, 1992. [12] D. Kolb. Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. 
Prentice-Hall, Eaglewood Cli.s, N.J., 1984. [13] T. Mroczek, J. Grzymala-Busse, and Z. Hippe. Rough sets 
and current trends in Computing, chapter Rules from belief networks: a rough set approach, pages 483 
487. Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg, 2004. [14] K. A. Papanikolaou, M. Grigoriadou, H. Kornilakis, 
and G. D. magoulas. Personalizing the interaction in a web-based educational hypermedia system: the case 
of inspire. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 13(3):213 267, August 2004. [15] ReadingMaster. 
Learning styles. Last accessed on: 30 May 2010. Available online at: http://www.readingmaster.com/WebPages/ 
Learning Styles.htm. [16] S. Vosniadou. Towards a revised cognitive psychology for new advances in learning 
and instruction. Learning and Instruction, 6(2):95 109, 1996. [17] E. Wenger. AI and Tutoring Systems. 
Computational and Cognitive Approaches to the Communication Knowledge. M. Kaufmann Publishers, California, 
1987. [18] WHO. International classi.cation of functioning, disability, and health. Last accessed on: 
30 May 2010. Available online at: http://www.who.int/classi.cations/icf/en/.   
			