
 DEVELOPING A USER SERVICES PROFESSIONAL Lois J. Secrist Georgia State University Atlanta INTRODUCTION 
 It is scarcely possible to develop a new professional category without determining just what this new 
profession is to deliver. Given a User Services professional, what is he or she expected to accomplish? 
To examine the need for a new profession and to determine what technical expertise might he needed, we 
first must set some goals for the User Services function in a university computer center. SETTING GOALS 
FOR USER SERVICES Just what does the university computer center want to accomplish through its User 
Services function? Better rapport with its users, whether faculty, staff or student, is going to help 
any computer center. More concentration on planned work and less on putting out fires due to past jobs 
not working properly is the direction towards which we should be heading. Better rapport comes from helping 
the user beaome more successful in his use of the computer, and this is obviously something User Services 
should be trying to deliver as effectively as possible. User Services can also work to attract more 
users to the Computer Center. The daily consulting contacts, key university people met through user education 
activities, and readers of User Services newsletters and other publications all provide a valuable source 
of new computer users or expanded computer activity. A careful reading of university policy regarding 
use of its computer facilities is needed. Should use of new packages and procedures be encouraged - and 
particularly directed toward university schools or departments making little or no use of the computer? 
Or is the university satisfied with a more specialized use of its computer? Is it interested in getting 
its students widely exposed to the computer, or will the usual com- puter science, mathematical and engineering 
applications suffice? DEVELOPING RESOURCES TO MEET GOALS Computer Center resources must be allocated 
to address the goals set for User Services. At Georgia State University, and at many other uni- versities 
and colleges, the User Services function is separated from other Computer Center functions, and exists 
as a separate department within the Computer Center. Increasingly, a greater pro- portion of the Computer 
Center budget is being devoted to User Services. Setting aside an obvious bias in this matter, it remains 
that an expensive tool which is poorly utilized, or under-utilized, is largely wasted. User Services 
can make a big difference in how effectively a computer is used. STAFFING A particular advantage of 
setting up a separate User Services staff is that individuals who relate well to people can be attracted 
to the staff. Since helping the user is their primary task, they are not put off by requests that might 
be viewed as nuisance interruptions by other Computer Center staff. TALENT. There is no better word 
for it than "talent." Some people just have a talent for working with others, and this resource is sorely 
needed by the staff which services the varied problems that crop up in a university computer center. 
Another talent well worth looking for is intuition. An individual's intuitive approach to locating a 
programming bug or the source of an operating system problem often produces the best results. ADAPTABILITY. 
People who can operate effectively in one role are plentiful. But User Services requires so much more: 
a versatile programmer, a solid communicator (both verbal and written), a relaxed, well-informed instructor, 
someone with strong leadership skills, who can work easily as a team member. A person capable of taking 
charge in a difficult situation, but able also to work in a low-keyed, tactful way under most circumstances. 
 TRAINING. Training needs to be conducted within a learning environment. Staff members must be motivated 
to learn new things constantly, to remain current with the constantly changing university computer center 
activities. Training also must be conducted in a highly professional manner, which gets the attention 
of the staff member receiving the training and draws from him or her a concerted effort to master the 
materials being presented. Frequently the User Services 22 training sessions at Georgia State University 
are attended by other Computer Center staff, and at times by users. Both formal and informal group training 
is used. Formal training sessions are presented through the GSU public services division for continuing 
education, and continuing education units are awarded for completion of the training course. FACILITIES 
 Sufficient user consulting areas and pro- gramming office areas are needed for a productive User Services 
staff. No one can work well in the midst of activity when concentration is required. Audio visual equipment 
is needed to enhance user education activities and training efforts. A small conference and training 
room is highly desirable for ready access. Textbooks and reference manuals must be available in sufficient 
quantities. The encroachment of users into the User Services programming office areas must be guarded 
against. This can be countered by keeping the programming area door closed with a "user services personnel 
only" sign, and by arranging the pro- gramming area into individual programmer cubicles, rather than 
common desk space. MANAGING USER SERVICES RESOURCES The User Services manager must be prepared to manage 
the available resources effectively. Probably the single greatest challenge is to create a climate under 
which the User Services staff will perform at their best. Discovering and developing talent is an urgent 
requirement for managing the User Services function. The manager also must allocate his staff budget 
to each of the three basic functions: consulting, user education, and publications. The manager must 
insure that consulting does not unduly encroach upon the resources allocated to other activities. RECOGNITION 
OF A USER SERVICES COMPUTER SPECIALTY Until the computer community recognizes that a new computer specialty 
is required to properly service the timesharing and data communications user, m@ny such users will receive 
short shift at their computer ~enter. The commercial program- mer, the scientific programmer, systems 
analyst, etc., are unable to meet the widely-based needs of the university computer center user, who 
ranges from a true novice user to a very sophisticated FORTRAN programmer and scientific researcher. 
 The User Services profession requires a technical generalist, a good communicator and educator. Extensive 
training programs must now provide this generalist. Hopefully the computer professions will include the 
generalist in the future, so that an individual with this background may be hired into the User Services 
function. DEVELOPMENT OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS Before a professional specialty can emerge, standards 
for this specialty must be developed. Detailed standards need definition in several services offered 
by User Services. USER-ORIENTED STANCE. Standards should require a user-oriented stance from the User 
Services function. User Services provide the interface between users and the university computer center 
for the most part. Thus good public relations is a necessary consideration in the development of standards. 
 USER EDUCATION. Standards for user education short courses, seminars and workshops should specify that 
these offerings be professionally taught. Information should be selectively presented on a need-to-know 
basis -the user is often overwhelmed with too much information. It is far better to offer a select few 
courses which are highly beneficial to the users, than a hodge-podge of poorly prepared offerings. PUBLICATIONS. 
Development o~ technical infor- mation for publication is a demanding task. Elimination of most technical, 
terms, and careful definition of the remaining terms is difficult for the ordinary programmer to do. 
The User Services professional who picks up a technical background after having had technical writing 
and teaching experience usually finds this easier. In any case, standards.should require technical 
publications to be well-organized, well-written, procedures thoroughly tested, an attractive format with 
the materials properly indexed. cONSULTING. Consulting standards must include the requirement for a 
strong general technical knowledge on the part of the consultant. The consultant must be taught consulting 
techniques: how to ask the right question, and how to turn the user's conversation to a productive mode., 
Otherwise, too much time is spent in rambling conversation. Theconsultant's appearance and manner must 
cause the user to have confidence in the consulting services provided. A wrong answer damages the consultant-user 
relationship. Unless absolutely sure he is right, the consultant should check his answer, and should 
readily admit he cannot provide a solution at the moment, if such is the case. He should have access 
to more experienced staff to develop the solution, thus providing correct information to the user. On 
the other hand, experimentation is sometimes necessary to develop a solution. But when this happens, 
the user should be made aware that the computer run he is making will either produce the desired results, 
or will provide diagnostics needed to develop a correct set-up. CONCLUSION A discussion of the need 
for a new direction in providing user services is not complete without exploring the methods to be used 
in attaining a fresh approach to helping the university computer center user. We must avoid the poorly 
prepared answers to the user's legitimate questions which usually are worse than none at all. A profes- 
sional job needs to be done in User Services. 23 
			