
 Developing a Competency-Based Performance Management System Judy Hart Director, Human Resources Cornell 
Wormation Technologies Cornell University Ithac~ W 14853 jh20@come11.edu phone: 607-255-3745 fw 607-255-9145 
Abstract More and more it is becoming evident that contempora~ information technolo~ organizations in 
higher education need to build fl~ible, a~.le organizations and wor~orces to meet the incessant environmental 
changu they face. In general, our global, knowledge-based, post industrial economy neeh to be made up 
of organuations that have migratedfiom ajob-description based, task-on.ented worworce to one in which 
stafloccupy broader roles that may change over time as projects change, evolve, and develop. Many ITstaflin 
colleg~ and universities have already experienced thk shl~, stepping into roles from team leader to programmer 
to internal documentation e~ert open in a single calendar year. Our chan~.ng wor~orce ako nee~ to be 
aflaible and adaptive one; the tools we develop for our campus users can ako be exemplars of new ways 
to work and collaborate. me rapidi~ of technolo~ change demanh di~erent skills from our stafthan ever 
before in the past. Some require formal education or on-the­job training; others require new levels ofpersonal 
stamina and resilience. In the contet of an IT organization, how do we determine the skills and competencies 
that are most valuable to us? How do we addr~s some of the organizational culture and individual consciousness 
shl~ that need to occur to make such a program e~ective? Mat are the elements of a successful Pe~ormance 
Managementprogram? Can they be adapted for me at both large and small institutions? my is this so necessa~ 
now? This talk covers the @elements of developing a competen~ based and skills-focused IT organization, 
and ahwers thefollowing quations. my do we have to worry about performance based on competency? Many 
pressures face stiin our IT organkations today. There is fierce marketplace competitiveness for staff 
skills, and key employees are being wooed away by the private sector in droves. Many express a concern 
that there is no longer time or money to do W IT projects in higher education and the additional monetary 
compensation of industry and large corporations make their next professional choices fairly straightforward. 
Many institutions of higher education are teetering on the edge of budge~ crises. Budget cuts made it 
easier to defend downstiig or rightstiing or even increased retiance on temporary staff without benefits. 
How will you determine an objective way to cut staff or manage attrition if you can t effectively measure 
staff performance and the ability to perform your organtiation s remaining work? Qualitatively speaking, 
an effective peflormance management structure has been shown to be a way to build a healthier more productive 
workplace, key elements of both attracting and retaining qualified, trdented staff. A performance-based 
environment with tangible and intangible rewards for outstanding contributions motivates your current 
staff to learn new skills, take on new challenges, and understand what behaviors they should model. Permission 
to copy without fee M or part of this materird is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed 
for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machine~. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee andor specific permission. 01998 ACM1-581 13-066-6/98/0010...$5.00 
111 Dweloping a ... Performance Management System Judy Hart What is it we re reaUy talking about here? 
 This is a new kind of jargon, unfailiar to runny of the more technically focused members of your ~ organtition. 
h order to have a fii~ conversation about performance, we need to have some terms defined fret. This 
session will provide you with answers to the following. What is a performance based management system? 
 What are core competencies? What tools can we use to effectively assess staff skills, and recruit staff 
who have those skills? How does an organtition define them and get organizational buy-in? What is competency 
modeling and how should that be implemented as part of your overall performance management system? What 
is performance review?  Is ttis aUtalk or can it reaUybe implemented? Case Study: Transformation of 
Cornell Information Tecbologies How did Cornell Universi&#38; s centrrd IT orgtiation, Cornell Mormation 
Technologies (CI~ take these concepts and apply them to solving its myriad organtiational problems? What 
kind of thinking must occur before pitching anew model of performrmce­based accountability to all SW 
What does it take to get senior leadership buy-in? This section of the session showcases CIT as an orgtiation 
that is in the process of transforming itself from a historically bureaucratic organhation with little 
institutionahed and enforced accountability for performance into a workplace that is now seen as a place 
on campus where foh want to come to work. It will briefly cover the components of CIT S organtitiomd 
structure including anecdotes that illustrate historical problems as well as describe urgencies being 
placed on staff by new projects like Cornell s major, campus-wide PeopleSoft-based Project 2000. The 
importance of establishing a clear mission, goals, and values and then promulgating them from the Vice 
President on down-is also discussed. Since human resource costs are a large percentage of an overrdl 
IT budgeq this often cripples an organtition s ability to maneuver and fund new programs. At Cornell, 
it become necessary to find the courage to trdk about I the harsh rerdity that budgets are extremely 
tight that layoffs might happen, and that new skills are needed all around. This section also covers 
the logistics of the rollout t program of a new mission, values, and goals and the core skills that needed 
by dl staff to be successful in the next 3 to 5 years. It illustrates how the skill list got defme~ and 
then promulgated throughout the I organtition and includes descriptions of the following: Skill assessment 
workshops and coaching for all levels of staff. Change management teams and their makeup and mission. 
 Training and peer counseling for resume development and creation. Mentor teams in each division and 
their roles. Opportunities for foks to move in and out of different or new roles. Layoffs and reassignments-how 
they were determined to be necessary and how they were handed,   What are some good models for a formal, 
annual performance evaluation process? What are the key elements to ensure successful implementation? 
This section of the trdk covers the conceptual, strategic, and tactical changes that are necessary in 
order to legislate a formal annual performance review process. What are some key strategies for implementation? 
Whose support will be needed and at what orgtiationrd levels? I It describes ways to ensure the following: 
. Support for new policy at senior leadership levels including a commitment to universal reviews tied 
to merit increases. 112 ------- --. . - / , Judy Hti Enforcement of accountability at the managerial, 
supervisory, antior team leader levels of the organization. Flexibility to ensure feedback both from 
the top down and the bottom up. Adaptability across an organization to meet the different job levels, 
job requiremenfi, and historica~cultural needs. Synergy between performance reviews and a Competency 
Model.  Conclusion mat have we learned at Cornell that can be of value to your college or university 
as you embark upon a new, re-fmhioned petiormance management strategy? h conclusion, this session reviews 
examples of what we ve found to be successful and why, as well as what required fie-tuning once it was 
implemented. mat would we do differently with the wisdom of hindsight? How have our efforts tiected others 
across campus? Are we a role model or an experiment to be avoided? were do we plan to go from here? The 
next frontier in this work is finding ways to tie this kind of comprehensive performance management system 
to hiring, retention, and compensation so that the human resource dimensions of our workplace community 
become integral to everything we do. The talk will conclude by sharing Cornell University s overall organizational 
plans and gods for accomplishing this along with the ways CIT plans to work to rdign its progress-to-date 
with the ovedl University directions, core values and principles, currently on the web at<http://www.corneU.edtiAdmi_W.html>. 
Developing a ... Performance Management System ,, 113 I  
			