
 Proceedings of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. J. S wah, D. Goldsman, R, C. Crain, and 
J. R. Wilson DEVELOPMENT OF GENERIC SIMULATION MODELS TO EVALUATE WAFER FABRICATION CLUSTER TOOLS Neal 
G. Pierce Michael J. Drevna SEMATECH/Harris Semiconductor Systems Modeling Corporation 2706 Montopolis 
Drive 504 Beaver Street Austin, TX 78745 Sewickley, PA 15143 ABSTRACT This document presents the purpose, 
development and applications of generic simulation models used to design, evaluate and demonstrate the 
potential performance of semiconductor wafer fabrication cluster tools. The use of this type of highly 
integrated equipment is growing rapidly within the semiconductor manufacturing industry. Because of the 
complex interactions involved in cluster tools, analytical models and calculations have usually been 
inadequate for determining system performance. However, discrete-event simulation models have proven 
to be quite beneficial to cluster tool developers and owners. The models are used to simulate the performance 
of equipment integrating multiple process modules in a radial cont@ration. A menu-clrken interface permits 
analysts to customize, develop and exercise the model for a variety of cluster tools. 1 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes the generic simulation models developed by SEMATECH to assist with the design, operation 
and promotion of cluster tool equipment used in semiconductor wafer fabrication. The use of cluster tool 
equipment is growing rapidly within the semiconductor manufacturing industry. Because cluster tools integrate 
multiple process chambers within a vacuum environment, they reduce particulate and contamination. This 
advancement has resulted in enhanced yields at critical processing steps. In additio~ cluster tools reduce 
the number of distinct operational steps. This simplitles process flows and increases the benefit of 
using automated material hand~mg systems. Semiconductor manufacturers are currently utilizing these tools 
for metal stacks, poly­metal dielectric depositions and several other multi­level processes that are 
tilven by yield considerations (Seidel and Stark 1991). Annual cluster tool revenues were $954M in 1991 
with a 1995 forecast approaching cluster tool for chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The model provided 
analysts with accurate information regarding tool performance and proved quite successful in simulating 
this equipment. The model was not developed to be generic and was not flexible enough to simulate other 
cluster tools. Inexperienced programmers had dit%culty modifying data and exercising the model. This 
resulted in the development of the spec~lcations for the generic cluster tool models discussed in this 
paper. $3B (Holden 1991). The fust cluster tool model developed by SEMATECH was in conjunction with an 
Equipment Improvement Project for a particular multi-chamber 2 MOTIVATING PROBLEM The SEMATECH Operational 
Modeling group saw a need for a system that would ardyze, characterize, and predict capacity, cost and 
performance with enough flexibility to satisfy cluster tool designers and owners. Because cluster tools 
are essentially mini-fabs integrating several process modules (as opposed to the typical stand-alone 
equipment configuration), the task of evaluating and operating these tools ean be even more complex than 
that of examining typical manufacturing work cells. Cluster tools normally limit buffer sizes to one 
wafer, therefore when a queue occurs at a module chamber, it will block the preceding chambers. Likewise, 
the performance of a cluster tool or particular module is severely affected by the reliabWy of other 
system components. Static analyticxd models such as spreadsheets were unable to produce valid information 
except in simple experiments that ignored temporal effects and random occurrences. In order to adequately 
represent cluster tool behavior, a dynamic and stochastic modeling approach was determined to be necessary 
(Law and Kelton 1991). 874 Models to Evaluate Wafer Fabrication Cluster Tools 2.1 System Requirements 
The system requirements for the generic cluster tool models evolved from specifkations issued for the 
fwst SEMATECH CVD cluster tool model and from the need to simulate a variety of other pieces of processing 
equipment that have a radial cotilguration. Cluster tool components included up to six process modules, 
two load locks, a central wafer handler and one or two wafer loading robots. For the purpose of satisfying 
tool owners, a holistic approach encompassed an entire operation that included additional resources such 
as labor pools, WIP stockers and metrology stations. Information concerning cluster tool performance 
as well as system performance was needed. A menu interface or user-friendly data fde was required to 
input or modify data that would easily configure tool and system components. 22 Object-Oriented Analysis 
An extensive object-oriented analysis (OOA) was performed to thoroughly understand the interactions of 
cluster tools and to assist in code development. The Shlaer-Mellor notation (Shlaer and Mellor 1988) 
was used to produce 00A models for inforrnatio~ communication, state and process interactions. The object-oriented 
analysis proved quite successful in communicating the model design specitkations. However, the model 
was coded in SIMAN, not an object-oriented language, and thus does not perform like an object-oriented 
design. This became apparent when modifying and enhancing the generic cluster tool model. 3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT 
The original Multi-Cluster Tool Model (Pierce 1991) has evolved into several application-specific models, 
The Multi-Cluster Tool Model integrates two cluster tools via a pipeline using a buffer robot. The Dual 
Cluster Tool Model contains two separate cluster tools with independent systems. This model essentially 
performs two experiments simultaneously, but offers users the abtity to visually evaluate each tool s 
performance. Both of these models allow and animate one to six wafers per process chamber. The Batch 
Cluster Tool Model allows batch sizes of one to two hundred wafers per chamber. This model does not animate 
the wafers in the system, but does provide wafer counters at each resource. These models were created 
by Systems Modeling Corporation under contract to SEMATECH over a two year period. 3.1 Model Description 
The simulation model developed to capture the interactions of a generic cluster tool was constructed 
using the SIMAN IV simulation language and several sets of FORTRAN modules. The FORTIL4.N modules are 
used primarily for a menu-driven user interface and for the complex robot movement calculations. The 
user interface contains a multiple level menu system that allows users to define a cluster tool s configuration. 
Menu system default parameters and changes made by the user are saved to an external fde for recall by 
later simulation runs. This option allows the user to save several cluster tool conf@rations without 
having to reenter cluster tool options for every simulation run. The generic nature of the cluster tool 
effort required a SIMAN experiment frame that is considerably larger than would be required for a specific 
cluster tool model. Over eleven hundred variables and parameters and five hundred distributions are provided 
in the experiment. Most of these system variables may be changed through the menu system. The initial 
effort required development in the 0S/2 operating system with 8514 graphics. Reduced capability models 
execute under the DOS operating system with EGA graphics. External data fdes were also included to define 
up to ten process plans and to assign process plans to wafers entering the system. Users have the option 
of either running an animation with the simulation model, one that details cassette and wafer flow through 
the system, or running a model-only execution. Animation screens are provided to detail critical system 
statistics.  3.2 Model Features The generic cluster tool system was defined to contain six process modules, 
a central wafer handler robot, two load locks, buffer positions, a buffer robot and a metrology station. 
Figure 1 displays the animation layout of the Dual Cluster Tool Model. Additionally, each cluster tool 
model has up to three classes of operator pools for system tasks. The pools include transport operators 
for delivery of cassettes, technicians for system maintenance and repair, and super operators who are 
capable of performing all tasks. Cassettes of wafers are transported into the cluster tool system by 
one of the operators. The system restricts the number of cassettes entering the system to a user-defined 
number. Prior to entry into the system, each wafer in a cassette is assigned a process sequence to follow 
through the cluster tool. Restrictions on wafer sequence assignment include only Pierce and Drevna WAFER 
DUAL CLUSTER LEFT CLUSTER SYSTEM THROUGHPUT SYSTEM THROUGHPUT MODEL THROUGHPUT TOOL UAFFJI TUROUCSPIIT 
< hp~) SYSTEM WIFER TIIIIOIIGIIFUT (hi-s> SYSTEM twmn Tl#ROUGUPUT <hPs> rt4E0REIICn L TllR0ucnm7(-d/h~> 
, T1l EORETICn L THROUWPUT( ar/hF> , Queued Lots f t?) 0 IFmIma ter Ex, t Enter Figure 1: Dual Cluster 
Tool the requirement that wafers in a cassette enter a load lock together and exit a load lock together. 
This maintains cassette or lot integrity. Cassettes are placed in a buffer position and transferred by 
lot or by individual wafer to the entry load lock by the buffer robot. Once the lot has entered the load 
lock processing begins on the wafers. Up to twelve user-defined delays may occur while wafers are entering 
the system at the load lock. Load lock processing prepares wafers for processing in the cluster tool 
s modules. Transfer of the wafers to individual modules is accomplished via the central wafer handler 
robot. Each robot movement delay time is calculated in the FORTIUOJ subroutines to determine a precise 
delay that is dependent on the robot status. The robot delay time is determined from current robot location 
and destination and robot movement status (with or without wafer). The delay is calculated by determining 
the number of degrees the robot has to move and using Metrology Queued Lots f 1 1 BImmlfl (9 Exit Model 
Animation Screen user-defined values for angular sluing velocity, robot ramp up/down time and arm loading/unloading 
time. Wafers delivered to the modules are processed either in a batch or as a single wafer. Each module 
may be ccmtlgured to represent one of several different types of processes. Thirty-two options maybe 
defined by the user in the menu system for each of the process modules. Many of these options define 
the distributions and parameters for equipment failures and repairs. Wafers can be processed at secondary 
modules when the primary module is busy or in a state of failure. System failures for all resources are 
incorporated into the simulation and may occur randomly or with a pre-defined number of process cycles. 
Tecfilcians or Super Operators are requested when failures or maintenance requests occur. Thus, a failed 
resource will be unavailable until personnel respond and complete the repair. Wafers follow their individual 
process plan and are grouped back into their cassette upon arrival at the Models to Evaluate Wafer Fabrication 
Cluster Tools exit load lock. Processing at the exit load lock is followed by a transfer to the buffer 
robot, a transfer to the buffer positio% and a request for the operator to test the cassette at a metrolog 
station or deliver the completed cassette to an exit point. Statistics are then collected for throughput 
and cycle time characteristics of the system. One hundred and f@ time-persistent statistics are kept 
during simulation runs to detail equipment performance. Each module s characteristics are reporte~ including 
statistics for productive time, down time, idle time, time seized but not productive, and time spent 
waiting for the central wafer handler robot. Validation and testing of this model uncovered several unique 
characteristics of cluster tools and the process plans they required. Of particular note was the fact 
that the system could be easily deadlocked with certain process plans. For example, a deadlock occurs 
when wafer #1, (occupying module #1) requests module #2 while wafer #2, (occupying module #2) requests 
module #1. Testing of secondary options for process modules revealed an increase of the frequency of 
deadlocks. Thoughts of adding exception policies under deadlock situations were dismissed due to the 
wide range of policies that might be implemented by various users. No single policy was agreed upon nor 
could any be adequately defined to allow for inclusion in the simulation model. Additionally, it was 
determined that most supplier applications would require a single process plan for all wafers processed 
through the cluster tool. 4 MODEL APPLICATIONS The wide variety of cluster tool systems available in 
the semiconductor manufacturing industry prompted SEMATECH to direct this effort toward improving cluster 
tool design. This endeavor is part of SEMATECH S overall mission to create fundamental change in manufacturing 
technology and the domestic infrastructure to provide U.S. semiconductor companies with the capability 
to be world-class suppliers. The integration of modeling and simulation into the design of new manufacturing 
equipment reduces the development time required as well as providing a software tool to assist equipment 
owners with operational analysis. 4.1 Cluster Tool Systems The generic cluster tool simulation models 
are used to desi~ develop, improve and operate a variety of cluster tool systems. Cluster tool developers 
are Multi-Chamber where each chamber performs the same process. Mhough modules are typically single wafer 
process chambers, batching or mini-batch modules are also available. These design decMons and combinations 
certainly affect performance indices such as lot cycle time and wafer throughput. The simulation models 
enable cluster tool developers to analyze these designs. designing equipment with the following general 
formations Multi-Process using different dedicated chambers, Multi-Process using the same chamber, and 
  4.2 Instrument for Design and Promotion These models are successfully beiig used to design and promote 
cluster tool equipment. The advantages of improved yields and the reduction of operation steps are signitkant 
to this competitive, technolo~-driven industry. Comparisons and contrasts between conventional stand-alone 
work cells and cluster tools are conducted by examining cycle time, throughput and capacity. A wide variety 
of experiments can be conducted using the models. A typical experiment would include establishing the 
quantity, capabfities and basic sequence of module chambers. Redundant chambers may be included to counter 
the impact of modules with long processing times or poor reliabfity. Experiments may also include the 
analysis of wafer handlers and deadlock detection. Statistics concerning the operation activities such 
as labor, metrology and lot movements would then be used in evaluating the effect of cluster tools in 
a manufacturing environment. SEMATECH has used the generic cluster tool models to simulate eleven cluster 
tools from eight suppliers. Although these models do not need to be animated in order to be effective, 
they are easier to communicate and conllgure if the movements and interactions are viewed on a monitor. 
Due to this feature and the attraction it creates with potential cluster tool buyers, these models are 
enabling SEMI/SEMATECH suppliers to promote as well as design their equipment. Representatives from these 
cluster tool suppliers are using these models to simulate their equipment with customers at trade shows 
and on sales visits.  5 SUMMARY Because of the complex interactions involved with cluster tools and 
the proliferation of this kind of processing equipment within the semiconductor manufacturing industry, 
the generic simulation models 878 Pierce and Drevna have proven valuable for the purpose of designing, 
operating and promoting cluster tools. These models are exclusively available to SEMATECH and SEMI/SEMATECH 
member companies. REFERENCES Holde~ D. August 19, 1991. Electronics News. Law, A, M. and W. D. Kelton. 
1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis. 2d ed. McGraw-Hill. Pegde~ C. D., R. E. Shannon, and R. P. Sadowski. 
1990. Introduction to Simulation Using SIMAN. McGraw-Hill. Pierce, N. G. March 21, 1991. A Generic Multi-Cluster 
Equipment Model. SEMATECH Technology Transfer Document #90110376B-ENG. AuSt@ TX. Seide~ T. E and M. R. 
Stark. 1991. Learning Opportunities Through the Use of Cluster Tools. SEMATECH technical report, Austin, 
Texas. Shlaer, S. and S. J. Mellor. 1988. Object-Oriented Systems Analysirc Modeling the World in Data. 
Yourdon Press, Prentice-Hall. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES NEAL G. PIERCE is a Factory Performance Modeling Engineer 
at SEMATECH serving as an assignee from Harris Semiconductor. His activities include simulating and analyzing 
semiconductor wafer fabs, cluster tools and automated material handling systems. He earned a B.S. in 
Industrial and Systems Engineering from the University of Florida in 1985 and an M.BA. from the University 
of West Florida in 1987. Neal is a registered professional engineer and a senior member of the Institute 
of Industrial Engineers. MICHAEL J. DREVNA is a Project Engineer in the Consulting Services DivMon of 
Systems Modeling Corporation. He has developed simulation applications in semiconductor wafer fabrication, 
high speed canning and transportation systems. Prior to joining Systems Modeling he was employed by the 
BDM Corporation and Ford Aerospace. Michael received his B.S. in 1982 and his M.S. in 1985 in Industrial 
and Systems Engineering from Ohio University.   
			