
 DEVELOPING COMPUTER AWARENESS Lawrence J. Mazlack Computing and Information Science University of Guelph 
 Guelph, Ontario Canada Abstract There are three different approaches to an introductory computer science 
course: technical competance, non-technical awareness, and a mixture of technical competance and non-technical 
aware-ness. This paper discusses the best strategy for a course aimed at students who will not need a 
high level of technical competance once they leave the course. A course which develops a computer aware-ness 
through a mixture of technical programming instruction and a discussion of computer applica- tions and 
power for good or evil. Films are extensively used. DEVELOPING COMPUTER AWARENESS 1.0 Introduction Introductory 
computer courses are used to work toward two different goals. One goal is the ability to use the computer 
as a tool. The other goal is to develop an awareness of a computers potential, both as a tool and as 
a force changing society. If an introductory course is only one semester long, one of these goals tends 
to be substantially down-played for the other. The normal, or traditional, approach has been to explore 
how the student in the class may use the machine as a tool. This approach was developed to serve a specific 
need; i.e. tech-nical training. A need other than pure technical training has arisen. Most people in 
our society will have to reach an accommodation with computers, either indirectly as user of computer 
services such as credit billing or directly as a casual computer user such as the calculation of statistics 
for sociology. Students with a need other than the attain- ment of a high technical skill in programming 
were and sometimes still are placed in a techni-cal programming course. However, the trend is to develop 
courses which are designed to provide an awareness of computers without necessarily deve- loping a high 
level of technical competance. It may well be that this type of course will become the dominant form 
of introductory computer course. The question then is: what form should a computer awareness course take? 
 l.l The Traditional Form: Technical Competance The traditional approach has been to teach a language 
or a series of languages. This approach does develop an awareness of the usefulness of a computer as 
a tool. It may develop an awareness of the inner workings of a computer. However, little mo e than ability 
in a computer language and an appr~ e:tion of the use and function of a compu- ter is developed. An additional 
difficulty arises with this approach. Many students are afraid of mathematics and math like statements. 
Although some languages (PL/I, ALGOL, PASQUAL, COBOL) have a structure which is a combination of English 
and mathematics formulation, the difficulty still exists. A course whose main goal is the progressive 
mastery of a language is generally unappealing to students who are not interested in a math based discipline. 
Most importantly, a computer-as-a-tool course does not serve the need of many students who wish to take 
a first computer course. Many students only want to find something out about computers. They neither 
have the need nor the desire to become proficient programmers. 1.2 Computer Awareness Without Great 
Technical Competance There are various approaches as to the form that a computer awareness course. One 
approach is to develop a course utilizing a completely non-technical approach, discussing the potential 
and computers without any attempt to develop a computer language capability. The other approach is to 
develop a minimal language capability as well as to develop a non-technical computer awareness. 1.2.1 
No Programmin 9 Approach The intent in this type of course is to make a student aware of a computer's 
impact on society by discussing various computer related topics. Topics may include a discussion of ethical 
and unethical uses a machine may be put to, various applications of computers, advantages and disadvantages 
of using a computer in various application areas, artistic uses that a machine may be put to, and the 
possibi-lities of machine intelligence. It is not believed necessary to develop any technical capability. 
184 Several texts have been designed to be used to serve this type of course. The format and content 
varies considerably from text to text.  1.2.2 Awareness Mixed With Technical Competance This type of 
course also seeks to make a student aware of computers' power and potential by combing verbal description 
along with the development of a minimal technical competance. The argument for this type of course that 
it is impossible to truly develop computer awareness without developing some technical competance. Courses 
following this approach usually spend some of their time on programming and the rest on ethics, applications 
and potential.  In choosing a text book for this type of course, the approach is to utilize (a) a text 
offering both computer descriptive material combined with some programming language material, (b) an 
integrated set of texts with the main text providing the textual material and programming language text 
supplements, and (c) a descriptive text along with a non-associated short language text. 2.0 A Mixed 
Awareness Course Over a number of years, we successfully taught the WATFIV dialect of FORTRAN to a wide 
variety of students (Mazlack, 1976). Over the last three years, we have developed three different introductory 
courses. A high tech-nical competance course concerned with applying PL/I (using the PL/C dialect) to 
structured programming is taught to a general audience, FORTRAN is taught as an engineering tool course, 
and a general audience computer awareness course has been instituted. The computer awareness course combines 
a descriptive text with a short language text (PL/I using the PL/C dialect). 2.1 Language Choice PL/I 
was the chosen language for several reasons. It has a fast, well tested, student compiler available in 
the PL/C dialect from Cornell. It is a language which is in keeping with modern language theory, especially 
with respect to control structures. PL/I's character handling capability allows the student to discover 
that the machine is more than a super adding machine, i.e., it can mani-pulate symbols. For example, 
simple secret message decoding problems can be both fun and conceptually instructive. A student can quickly 
program in PL/I with-out the amount of attention paid to syntax that is required in most languages. The 
capability to solve a varied set of problems on the computer provides a source of continuing positive 
reinforce-ment. 2.2 Course Design The course is a mix of descriptive and language material. Approximately 
35% of the lec-ture time is spent on language instruction. The rest of the course is devoted to descriptive 
material. Movies are used to supplement the non-programming discussions. Course evaluation is dependent 
on the results a series of weekly programming assignment combined with the results of five hour exams. 
The exams largely deal with non-programming questions. 2.3 Course Outline The following is an approximate 
list of the topics in the order in which they are presented. One or two films are shown weekly. It is 
normally possible to schedule the films to coincide witil the desired topic presentation order. I. Introduction 
to course, course requirements 2. Necessary characteristics of a computer 3. Computer advantages/disadvantages 
 4. Differentiation between digital/analoge computers  5. Digital block diagram, description of elements, 
components, peripherals  6. Grosh's law 7. Staff vs. equipment costs 8. Detailed examination of auxilary 
storage devices  g. Labels and machine storage, relationship of I0. PL/C label rules II. PL/C: GET/PUT 
LIST 12. Equations, expressions, PL/C statements 13. PL/C job stream 14. Review and expansion of GET/PUT 
LIST 15. Arithmetic variables -declarations 16. Operators 17. Operator precedence 18. Examples of 
arithmetic and character operators 19 Review and expansion of PL/C labels 20 Transfer of control 21 How 
to solve proglems 22 Algorithms 23 Flowcharting 24 Turing's test 25 PL/C: ON ENDFILE(SYSIN)  26. PL/C: 
SKIP, PAGE 27. Computer history 28. Business a) application areas which can advanta-  geously use 
a computer b) languages c) general profit-making areas  29. PL/C: IF-THEN-ELSE 30. PL/C titles and 
labelled answers 31. Programming a) definition b) basic elements of a program c) purpose d) language 
e) high and low level languages f) why not English?  32. Loops and loop control 33. Loop advantages 
 34. PL/C: Character variables 35. PL/C: LENGTH 36. PL/C: SUBSTR 37. PL/C: INDEX 38. Modeling  
185 39. Simulation: uses and languages 40. Data banks a) description of data structure hierarchy b) 
security threats and protection c) potential misuse d) future potential 41. Subscripted variables 42. 
Graphics 43. More on subscripted variables 44. Computer generated music 45. Problem development steps 
for a computer 46. PL/C: Do-End groups 47. PL/C: data structures 48. The computer manufacturing industry 
 49. Medical uses of the computer 50. More on PL/C data structures 51. Computers in government 52. 
Game playing 53. Computers in the arts 54. PL/C: disk I/0 55. More on computers in medicine a) administrative 
b) medical practice  patient screening patient monitoring patient diagnosis -x-ray dosage 56. Legal 
system uses of the computer 57. PL/C: DO WHILE 58. Computer uses in defense and transportation 59. 
Artificial intelligence: definition, argu-ments for and against, accomplishments 60. Difference between 
men and robots 61. Advantages and disadvantages of a machine directed society 62. Calculators and computers 
 63. Package programs  2.4 Movies Considerable effort was expended in selecting a series of movies. 
The movies range from general introductory material to detailed applications of specific applications. 
The movie titles along with a description of them are presented approxi- mately in the order shown below. 
The descriptions are an edited version of that provided by the film supplier. The movies are available 
from a variety of sources: computer manufacturers, film producers, book publishers, universities, governmental 
film libraries and private film libraries. Some are free, some carry rental charges and some are available 
only through purchase. Computers (II minutes) Describes the major com-ponents of a modern computer and 
explains how the binary number system is useful in computer tech- nology. Ultimate Machine (30 minutes) 
General survey of computer applications. An introductory discussion of the possible detrimental uses 
of machines. Uses both animation and live-action footage. Cybernetics (39 minutes) Introduces cybernetics, 
a new science which investigates the similarities between the common laws of the human brain and the 
machine, and the human nervous system and the lifeless automates. The On-Line Story (33 minutes) On Line 
is the use of telephone lines to link widely separated opera- tions of a company directly to a central 
computer. This film visualizes several applications of the system by visiting user installations. Modern 
Merchandise Management (33 minutes) An audio-visual report on the use of retail classifi ~ cation systems 
combined with Electronic Data Pro- cessing. World of Automation (13.5 minutes) A film that shows by means 
of cartoon and live sequences the essential role that computer-controlled automation plays in every facet 
of life in Britain today. A Few Essentials (16 minutes) This film traces the development of five essential 
areas of living: food, clothing, shelter, transportation, and communications. Man's historical involvement 
with these areas is explored, as well as the role of the computer in helping manage the problems. Ani-mation 
and live-action footage. A Super Super Market (I0 minutes) This film des- cribes the advantages of a 
computer point of sale supermarket system to the shopper and the use of the uniform product code for 
fast, accurate cus- tomer checkout. Hear-Say System (19 minutes) Demonstration of a speech recognition 
system. Laboratory Automation Based Systems (23 minutes) Covers the use of computers in different types 
of laboratory environments. Locations shown are Stanford Medical School, California Institute of Technology, 
IBM Research Centre --Yorktown, Dow Chemical Co., Kings County Research Laboratories, Black and Decker, 
and the Syntex Corporation. Some Call It Software (II minutes) Defines the meaning of 'software' inferring 
to the programs, flowcharts, and other documents and instructions people must prepare enabling a computer 
to perform its task. As an illustration, programmers are shown studying traffic problems in a large city 
and designing a software package for improving traffic flow on two major highways. Computer Glossary 
(14 minutes) Using imaginative photography and animation, this film begins inside the complex microcircuitry 
of a computer. Also defined in basic terms are such computer termino- logies as flowcharts, boolean logic, 
nanosecond, and simulation. A Little Bit Better (II minutes) Decomonstrates the on-line customer information 
system at the Houston Lighting and Power Company in Houston, Texas and how they are using a direct access 
device and visual display terminals to handle customer inquiry and service orders. Also demon- strates 
the message switching in the processing of customer orders for service. Early Warning (25 minutes) The 
Veterans Adminis- tration Hospital in Minneapolis, Minn., has one of the most extensive computerized 
patient- monitoring setups in the nation. While the com-puter is analyzing monitored data from patients 
in the intensive care ward, it is also continually 186 calculating, during surgery, the patient's cardiac 
output and other vital information. Clinical Uses of the Computer (20 minutes) lllus-tration and discussion 
of the time-sharing system in ~he pioneering biomedical application at Latter Day Saints Hospital, Salt 
Lake City, Utah. Explains how the digital computer is used in con-junction with analog equipment for 
diagnosis and treatment of disease and for monitoring postopera-tive condition of patients. The Music 
Machine (II minutes) The film shows song composers using a computer, piano keyboard and cathode ray oscilloscope 
to create new musical arrangements. Through trial and error notes selected by the composer are fed into 
computer until a desired combination has been trans- ferred to be retained by the computer. Also shown 
are practical applications of the computer in the movie industry, i.e. production of sound effects. Computer 
Animation (30 minutes) Film animation has become an indispensable tool for educational and training purposes. 
The film exhibits anima-tions generated by both analog and digital compu-ters for weather displays architectural 
and engi- neering stress analysis, aircraft navigation and landing instruction, and as works of art. 
An Eye for Business (16 minutes) Discusses the concept of a computergraphics system and its use in designing 
pipework for a complex chemical plant. Designers show how the graphical display system enables them to 
"talk" to the computer in pic-torial terms, how a "light pen" works and the production of all the schedules 
and estimates by the computer. Cuttin 9 Pattern Costs (7 minutes) How computers can be put to work in 
the clothing industry. lllustrates apparel pattern size grading from digitizing to finished cut tagboard 
patterns. Right of Privacy (59 minutes) A report on the governmental and business activities which pose 
a threat to individual privacy today and the possible elimination of all privacy should the proposed 
National Data Center be established. Pre-employment investigations, lie detector tests, credit checks, 
personality tests and other activities are documented. Toward Better Government (13 minutes) Depicts 
a government information system encompassing the major functions of state and local government, as related 
to a terminal-based operating system, Applications illustrated are police, employment insurance, highway 
department estimate and design, teacher assignments in public schools, and wel- fare and employment records. 
(25 minutes) Reviews some recent experiments per-formed with Shakey, the Stanford Research Institute 
robot. The film begins by explaining the general features of Shakey and of his controlling programs. 
One feature of special interest in Shakey's ability to use the solutions to old probiems as an aid in 
planning the solution to a new problem. Shakey also has the ability to recover from a variety of errors 
and accidents that may occur as he executes problem solutions in a laboratory environment. 3.0 Summary 
and Results A course was developed to develop an aware- ness of computers. The course was designed for 
students from a wide variety of backgrounds. The target students did not have a need to develop a high 
degree of technical competence. The basic structure is to combine technical instruction with a discussion 
of the power of computers, both for applications and for good/evil. The lecture material is supplimented 
by a series of movies. The course has been successful both in terms of its pedalogical goals and in popularity. 
Several other academic departments allow students with a technical programming course requirement to 
substitute this course. Additionally, the majority of the students in the course are taking it for interest 
and not due to the desire to satisfy a specific academic requirement. (The substantial majority of the 
students in the other introductory computer course to satisfy a specific requirement.) References Mazlack, 
L. J. "Does A Computer Have Sexual Preferences?", SIGCSE bulletin, V.8, No. I. Postal Source Data System 
(15 minutes) The opera- tional story of on-line collection of data. Nation-wide coverage of post offices, 
with transmission of operational data via four tele-concentrators to either of two processing centers. 
Covers impor- tance of this system to national operations of the Post Office Department. Shakey: Experiments 
in RobotPlannin 9 and Learning 187 
			