
 DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION MODEL FOR COMPUTER INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING Susumu Fujii Haruhisa Tsunocta Atsusi 
Ogha Yasusi Kidani Department of Computer and Systems Engineering Kobe University Nada, Kobe, 657 JAPAN 
 ABSTRACT In this paper, we firstly discuss the necessity of a simula­tion tool which can handle h huge 
and complex manufac­turing system under CIM environment, and then consider problems incurred by developing 
such a large system model. A distributed simulation model developed on a distributed computer system 
is then shown to be a promis­ing method to cope with the problems. Lastly, a time bucket method with 
time warp mechanism is proposed for the synchronization of the distributed simulation and its computational 
features are investigated by modeling a vir­tual factory on six workstations connected by the ethernet. 
1 INTRODUCTION Computer simulation is recognized as one of the key tech­niques for the effective design 
and operation of manufac­turing systems. As the computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) system becomes 
well equipped in an industry and factories are automated and integrated by computers and information 
network systems, the terms of design and op­ erations of manufacturing systems becomes wider and more 
complicated scope than ever. ronment requires that the tools to be used for poses need to have enhanced 
functions to meet tion. to cover This envi­those pur­ the situa- In this study, we investigate basic 
t%nctions and structure of a simulation system through a discussion on the nlanu­facturing system under 
CIM environment. The simulation system is a hypothetical factory or industry built in a com­puter system 
and serves as a test bed for the evaluation of a new system plan and for the efficient operational deci­sion 
making at various levels in the factory. We firstly dis­cuss the necessity and requirements for design 
and opera­ l.;ei~-- Emcrprkc _leVei5-- Factory 7eIei_4-- Area level 3 Cell ie&#38;i2-- Stslion level 
1 Device, Machine m Figure 1: Hierarchical [ I J I I I I I -. [ I I r 1 I ---. Structure of Manufacturing 
System tion of manufacturing systems. Then a distributed simula­tion is proposed as a promising method 
to satisfy the re­quirements to certain extent and the basic structure of the s-ystem is investigated 
mainly from the viewpoint of physical distribution in the factory, A synchronization mechanism for the 
distributed simulation is then proposed and its computational features are studied by an illustra­tive 
factory model. 2 MANUFACTURING SYSTEM UNDER (XM EN-VIRONMENT 2.1 Structure of Manufacturing System The 
structure of a manufacturing system can be repre­ sented by a hierarchical one as shown in Fig. 1(1S0/ 
TC 184). Under ideal CIM environment elements at vati ­ous levels are connected each other and can communicate 
through information networks. At the same time, by auto­mation in the factory most of the machines and 
equip­ments are enabled to be operated automatically by the in­structions generated by controllers, and 
transportation 946 Distributed Simulation Model systems will carry works and products from one place 
to the other automatically. All elements in an inclustry are tightly interrelated information-wise and 
transportalion­ wise under such CIM environment. It is not in that level at present, but the interrelation 
among elements is becoming tighter as more computers and information networks are equipped at various 
levels of industry.  2.2 Necessity of Overall Performance Evaluation Considering such situation, it 
is more important than ever to evaluate the performance of newly designed manufac­turing systems in their 
planning stage or the operational decisions prior to their practice. The structure of a manu­facturing 
system in Fig. 1 maybe schematically shown as in Fig.2 at the factory level and lower levels. Ellipses 
in the factory correspond to the areas and D.M. s are deci­sion making units. Small circles may correspond 
to cells constituting an area. Areas are connected by information networks for data exchange and by transportation 
systems for physical distribution of works among areas. As the in­frastructure of computer integrated 
manufacturing is more equipped, more D.M. s are connected to the information network and more automated 
and sophisticated transpor­tation systems, such as AGV S or new logistic systems, are installed. The 
higher level of automation in the area level will be materialized as well. On the course of this progress, 
the design of a new system and the decision making for the daily or middle ranged operational plan­ning 
at the area will require new view points for the evalu­ ation of the effectiveness of the plan. 1) Design 
of a new system Most of the effort for the automation in factory was de­voted within the area or lower 
level equipment in Fig, 1. As a result, when a new system is planned to be installed as a replace of 
former system as shown in Fig. 2, the per­formance evaluation of the new system at its designing stage 
was mostly limited to its performance as a stand alone system or isolated system, Typically, in a simulation 
study of a new FMS we usually assume that the input to the system is a source node generating arrivals 
of works randomly by a given probability distribution or regularly by a predetermined schedule as shown 
in Fig, 3(a). Also the output from the system is simply absorbed by a sink node and is not affected by 
the activity of the trstnsporta­tion system or the succeeding area which needs the output product as 
its input work. In practice, the new system is tightly connected to the neighboring areas by information 
networks and transpor­ tation systems ancl thus both of the inputs and outputs of the system will have 
a strong influence with the neigh­ bors. This indicates that the performance of the new sys­ tem must 
be evaluated not only as an isolated system but H m DESI(;N Installation of a new System Restructuring 
of Organization 0 00 Irrhrmation Network 0 00 New Logistics Area 2 0 0 )----{ N o =0 ) Decision Making 
( Forecasting and Evaluation of Results) Figure 2: Schematic Factory under CIM Environment L, II .: source 
and sink node .: source and sink node (b) Transportation System(a) Processing System Figure 3: Conventional 
Simulation Model also as a subsystem of larger system in its designing stage. The latter evaluation is 
especially important 10 reveal the problems incur-red in the neighbors by the new system and to point 
out where to improve for the full utilization of the system. To establish such an evaluation system it 
will be essential to develop a factory wide simulation system which can describe not only the detail 
activities of the ob­jective new system but also those in neighboring areas. Similar discussion is applicable 
for the design of a trans­portation system by referring to Fig. 3(b). 2) Operational decision making 
When any D,M. in Fig.2 is going to make an operational decision, such as daily scheduling or rescheduling 
due to failure of machines or due to delay of processing, the re­sulting decision will be more preferable 
if it is made on the basis of information collected from inside and outside of Figure 4: Activities in 
a Factory Shop Floor Activities Planning Activities Area Area   Area Tmnsportation Status Informatic 
1 I I I I 2 I I I I I I I I n Process of Areasfl wGlobal Production Pbmnning (}hgh Level DeclsIon Making) 
Time Ti Strr~ge ~ Processing, I I I Transportation Bucket As$embly 1 I among Local Production PIanning 
($T) Test I Trdnsoortalion I in Area Areas to Areas (Area LeveI D.M.) 1 Tit I 1 1 I L (=Ti+AT) I I 
I I I I Minor Production Planning I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Ti+z (=Ti+I+AT) I I I I I I Global Production 
Planning I I I the area and its influence to the schedule of inside and out-of the factory is modeled 
in its detail while other parts are side of the area is evaluated. Figure 4 shows the shop floor simplified. 
However, for the evaluation of a new system activities and planning activities. Only the decisions influ-or 
decisions in an area from the view point of the total encing neighboring areas are shown with the collection 
of factory, we need to model the total system in the same status information and the dispatching of resulting 
in-detail. This results in a large scale simulation system struction to the areas. Since the exchange 
of such infornla-which is difficult in model building and in implementation tion is not difficult by 
the hrformation network of CIM and operation. factory, it will be the problem to have a tool for evahra­tion. 
Similarly to the case of design of new system, a fac-2) Spatial spread of areas: tory wide simulation 
system will be one of promising so-Areas are widely spread in [he factory and the transporta­lutions 
for the problem. tion of works from one area to the other takes longer time In the above we confined 
the total system in Fig. 2 to a than that in the area and is made by a transportation sys­factory, but 
the total system can be raised one level higher tem different from that in the area. Transportation systems 
to the industry or enterprise level with factories as lower both in the area and between areas are to 
be modeled in level subsystems. detail. This incurs a problem to model various types of transportation 
systems in a hierarchical structure. 3 FUNCTIONS OF SIMULATION MODEL UNDER (XM ENVIRONMENT 3) Different 
level of automation in areas: Machines and devices processing works in areas differ in Base on the above 
consideration, we consider to develop a their level of automation. If the area is at a low level of factory 
wide simulation system, sometimes called a vir-automation, various Iogics are to be assumed for manual 
tual manufacturing system or a virtual factory. We pre-operations and human decisions and their appropriateness 
sume in the following that the basic functions of general are to be tested. Local decision making such 
as scheduling simulation languages and special functions for manufac-is also different in the automation 
level and incurs the dif­turing simulation are all inherited in the proposed system, ficulty in model 
building. and we concentrate to clarify the features specially re­quired to develop a factory wide simulation 
system satis-4) Expansion and replacement in the model: fying the purposes described in 2.2. Although 
the final model to be developed is a large and detail one, model building in practice starts from a small 
1) Large scale and detailed model: and simplified one. Therefore the capability to extend the The system 
at the factory level is a large scale system in model gradually in its size and in its detailness is 
essential reality. In the conventional simulation, only litnited part to the simulation system. It is 
also essential that some part Distributed Simulation Model of the model can be easily replaced by a new 
system in planning stage for its evaluation or by a new system in­stalled in reality, 4 STRUCTURE OF 
DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION MODEL The above considerations and basic studies (Fujimoto(1990), l%jii et al(1989, 
1992, 1993a, 1993 b)) indicate that a simulation system for virtual manufactur­ing is properly modeled 
by a distributed simulation sys­tem utilizing a distributed computer system installed as the infrastructure 
of CIM system. By the requirements pointed out in the above, each subsystem at the area level is decided 
to be modeled on one processor and a transpor­tation system connecting areas is modeled on one proces­sor 
transferring works as shown in Fig. 5. Each area model and the transportation process modeled by the 
conventional simulation method as in Fig. 3 are modified at the source and sink nodes as shown in Fig. 
5 and other functions necessary for the distributed simula­tion, especially those related to the synchronization 
mechanism are added in this stucly. The information ex­change functions among areas for special collection 
of specific information occurring time to time are also neces­sary to be prepared but are left for future 
study. The ordi­nary status report of areas for global and minor decision making in Fig. 4 is hypothetically 
modeled as a report to a monitoring processor informing that the simulation clock of each simulation 
process arrived at a certain time. 5 SYNCHRONIZATION MECIIANISM A synchronization mechanism called a 
time bucket method was proposed in (Fujii et al(l 992, 1993a)) for a distributed manufacturing simulation. 
In this study, the method is further modified and improved by adding a function 10 roll back the status 
of an area as in the time warp mechanism (Jefferson( 1985)) and a function to save the status of an area 
at predetermined time for time warp. To explain the basic procedure it is convenient to use a model in 
Fig. 6 simulating two areas and a transportation system. 5.1 Time Bucket Method with Time Warp Mechanism 
In the model shown in Fig.6 we assume that a work is transferred from Area 1 to the transportation system 
and then from the transportation system to Area 2. A work is transfemed from area to transportation system 
and vice versa without any time consumption and its transportation time from one area to the other is 
consumed in the trans­portation system. The transfer of work is represented by a .. . > Spatial Transfel 
of Works Area  ~c1] .. _ Area Q~-~;j -: ]  _.. _ .. . . F-r Are[: L-----l . (a) Distributed Model 
Transportation System Area 1( Transportation Systern,j J 0 : Functions to send and 0 : Functions to send 
and receive messages receive messages (b) Area Model (c) Transportation Process Figure 5: Distributed 
Simulation Model message in Fig. 6. In the time bucket method, the size of the time bucket, i.e., bucket 
size, is set to AT and during that period each processor runs its simulation model independently. If 
the simulation in that period completes and the local simtrla­tion clock of the area arrives at the end 
of the period, i.e., a bucket time f.),T1 or T2 in Fig. 6, the processor waits for an instruction to 
resume the simulation in the next time bucket. Noting that each simulation process requiles dif­ferent 
processing of events and thus proceeds in a differ­ent speed of processing. Becatrse of this unsynchronized 
processing of events on each processor, sometimes con­tradiction may occur. For example, the work from 
the transportation system is sent to Area2 at Time T32 but the process of Area 2 could be already at 
Time T21 which is greater than T32. To keep the occurrence of the events in chronological order, the 
status of Area 2 must be rolled back to Time T32, The roll back is realized by first rolling back to 
a certain time, tl in this case, when the status of the area is saved a priori and then resume the simulation 
from that time to Time T32. The status of the area is saved at the end of the time bucket. We consider 
to save the sta­tus at prespecified times in the time bucket to lighten the roll back operation. If a 
simulation process has already made a transfer before the roll back, it is necessary to can­ Area 1 
Area 2 Simulation )=( Clock (1A t IT3i h hlessageJ -_ Z T]t( D- - S!atus Saving A ~ ~ m AT t, -. 
------. . ---------. . . . . -----. ------------------------. . . T32 >G - . . . g Message I Roll Back 
1 21 )f \f )f : ?\ T] -Bucket 1 ime ~\ \ Message 2 Status Saving - - - ­+ k -------. ------.-.----------------------. 
. . . . . . .--. . . ---- AT tz- . ______ * --~MessagcMessage3 Tjj k 134I I . - - -T22 v T2 v Figure 
6: Illustration of Time Bucket cel the transfer by sending an anti-message as shown in Fig. 6. For example, 
a transfer of work at Time T34 from the transportation system to Area 2 is to be rolled back to Time 
T33 by the arrival of another work represented by Message 3, an anti-message is sent to Area 2 in the 
roll back operation in the transportation system. 5.2 Rationalization of Time Bucket Method The concept 
of the time bucket in manufacturing and in distributed simulation is rationalized by pointing out spe­cial 
features in a manufacturings ystem. 1) Global or minor decision is made at a certain time of a day as 
shown in Fig. 4. For this activity the report of status information from all areas is necessary. This 
indicates that the simulation of each area will be suspended until status reports from all areas are 
collected, the decision is made and the resulting instruction is dispatched to resume the simulation. 
2) Time bucket is a common concept used in the produc­tion planning such as the Material Requirement 
Planning and the schedule in the area is basically determined for the works in the time bucket. 3) Actual 
preparation of tools, jigs and works in any area are made at the same time, e.g., at the beginning of 
morn­ ing or afternoon work time. 4) The operations in warehouse made about the same time. This works 
shipped into an area in may not be used or processed or storage area are also implies that even if some 
the morning (afternoon) until the next afternoon Message 2 -1, / Method with Time Warp Mechanism [\ 
* Processing Area * > Processing Area \J Figure 7: Factory Model (morning) or later. This implies the 
dependence among areas due to the transportation of the works is not so strong as that at lower levels, 
Ihus, by assigning one area to one processor, simulation of each area can be made indepen­dently in most 
of the time. 6 A MODEL FACTORY For the evaluation of the computational feature of the pro­posed synchronization 
method, we developed a virtual factory consisting of four areas, i.e., two processing areas, one assembly 
area and one test area, connected as shown in Fig. 7. For simplicity, the production plan to the factory 
is represented by the arriving works at two processing ar­eas and other areas are controlled by the push 
system rep­resented by the transportation of works from preceding areas. The transportation is made by 
a lot base consisting of m pieces of same type of work. In the following the details of the model are 
described. 6.1 Area Model and Transportation Process Each type of area consists of two storages at the 
entrance and at the exit, five cells and transportation system in an area connecting cells. The works 
ttrmsportecl by a lot are divided into a piece in the storage at the entrance of an area and are processed 
one piece base in the area. At the end of the area the works of same type are put into a lot again for 
transportation in the storage. The works are pro­cessed in the FIFO order in the area. The structure 
and function of the area and the transportation process are as follows. 1) Processing Area A processing 
area is structured m shown in Fig. 8. Cell 1 is for preprocessing and Ceil 5 is for postprocessing. Cells 
2, 3 and 4 constitute a job shop and process works in the given order of processing of each type of work. 
By the processing sequence at these three cells, we have six dif­ferent types of work. 2) Assembly Area 
An assembly area receives works from two processing ar­eas as shdwn in 13g. 9. Cells 1 and 2 preprocess 
works and Cell 3 assembles two works. At Cells 4 and 5 some postprocessing is made on the assembled product 
to com­plete a product. 3) Test Area In the test area shown in Fig. 10, products are tested in four cells 
in a sequence. If any trouble in quality is de­tected on a product, the product is sent from Cell 4 to 
Cell 5 for rework. The rate of trouble of products can be prespecified and the trouble is generated by 
some prob­ability distribution. Reworked products are also due to the trouble. 4) Transportation process 
The works are transported from an area to the other by this transportation process. Various types of 
carriers can be modeled in this process. By a transmission of request for transportation from an area 
to the transportation process as shown in Fig. 11, the processing for transportation is initiated. When 
a carrier is dispatched 10 and arrived at the originating area by the request, the lot will be transferred 
from the area to the transportation process releasing the space occupied by the lot to the storage. When 
the carrier arrives at the destination area and finds a space in the input storage, the lot is transfemed 
from the process to the area releasing the carrier.  6.2 Simulation Conditions In this study conditions 
and assumptions for simulation are set as follows. A cell can process one work at a time, The processing 
time of any work at any cell is set to be constant and 20 minutes. Modef 951 Figure 8: Processing Area 
++ Cel14 Cel15 Storage Celi3 Storage -! Figure 9: Assembly Area -+ +- Wmrge Figure 10: Test Area Transportation 
Process m Area Area Figure 11: Transportation Process E ach ceil has a buffer with infinite capacity. 
Cells do not fail and are available any time.  T here are six types of works of which processing order 
in the processing cells differ as described already.  T he lot size of work for transportation is frve. 
In the test area the trouble of a work is detected at Cell 4 if any and reworked at Cell 5. The rate 
of finding a trouble is 1070.  T he storage has n sufficiently large space. Every work in an incoming 
and an outgoing lot stays 30 minutes in the   storage. T he transportation system in arty area simply 
provides a five minutes delay and carries a work between cells. .The transportation process is modeled 
as a vehicle sys­tem with infinite number of vehicles for simplicity. The time delay for transportation 
between areas is set to one hour. E ach processing aea receives one lot of each type of works at predetermined 
time reflecting a production plan at the higher level. Six lots of all types arrive at processing areas 
every four hours at a time.   6.3 Configuration of Computer System for Simulation The computer system 
used for this study is consisting of six engineering workstations, Sun SPARC! station ELC(23.7MIPS), 
connected to the ethernet as shown in Fig. 12. Each of four areas and a transportation process of the 
factory model in Figs. 8, 9, 10 and 11 is assigned to one workstation as in Fig. 12. In this study, a 
simulation monitor is introduced to measure the computational fea­tures of the proposed system. This 
monitor serves as a hy­pothetical decision making processor described in the sec­tion 4 and as a time 
bucket controller. The functions of the controller in this study are to receive messages completing the 
simulation in the time bucket from area processors and to transmit a message resuming the simulation 
process of all areas and transportation for the next time bucket after receiving messages of completion 
from all processes. The simulation models are basically described by a simu­lation language written by 
C, SMPL(MacDougall (1987)) and additional programs are written in C. The communi­cation among workstations 
is made by using a message communication library p4(Butler and Lusk(1992)).  7 COMPUTATIONAL FEATURES 
OF TIME BUCKET METHOD The factory model is used to verify the appropriateness of the proposed time bucket 
method for synchronization. It will be obvious that all simulation processes must be stopped at any time 
when global and minor decisions are made. Therefore the bucket size is set according to the time of such 
decisions. We considered four bucket sizes, i.e., 1, 2, 4 and 8 hours where 4 and 8 hours assumed to 
correspond to half and full day, respectively. As described in Fig. 6, it is necessary to roll back to 
the time when the status of the area is saved and then the simulation is resumed to the target time of 
roll back, when some contradiction is occurred and time warp is activated. We changed the frequency of 
status saving in one time bucket from 1 to 4, and the simulation of ten days is run 1 11 11 Simulation 
Process of Areas Figure 12: Configuration of Computer System Frequency of Status Saving ~1 ~4 ~z 30 
::: ;;: : ;~ ::: 25 ......... .,,.................l ........ .......... ..... ,;,,,.,...,,;,.,,,,., 
~;: :: :: ::: 20 .............. .............. ..,..,,... .......... .......... .................. 
K;;;::; 15.+-..........3 %...; .........+............................ m k k: ­........ ...... .,..,,..,:..,...,, 
5 01234567 8 BucketSize Figure 13: Effect of Bucket Size and Frequency of Status Saving on Simulation 
Time ~ o% ~ 50% Rate of Events witlr long processing ~ 20% ~ 100% 50 40 ................,,;,,.,....,,..,,............ 
............ ................. 30 20 0 012 34 Frequency of Status Saving Figure 14: Effect of the length 
of event processing Distributed Simulation for five times. The data of last five days are taken for 
evaluation. Figure 13 shows the effect of the bucket size and the frequency of status saving on the simulation 
time. The figure indicates that the frequency of status saving is to be set to minimum, i.e., once in 
one bucket and that large bucket size is effective to shorten the simulation time. The reason of this 
feature may be explained by the fact that the time required to save the status depends on the data size, 
i.e., the size of the area and about 70ms in this case, which is relatively longer than the time required 
to simulate the area again from the beginning of the time bucket. To verify this, two types of events 
are considered such that the time for processing an event are different. Certain portion of the events 
are randomly selected to consume longer time for its processing as shown in Fig. 14 and the simulation 
time was measured. The bucket time was set to 4 hours. By increasing the rate of the events with longer 
processing time from O to 100 70, shorter simulation time is observed at larger fTequency of status saving 
for a constant rate, especially for 10070 four times of status saving showed the shortest time. In this 
case, the actual time for simulation may be longer than the time for status saving. This suggest that 
the performance of the simulation model is affected not on! y by the bucket size and the frequency of 
status saving but also the size of the area and the complication in the processing of events. The last 
two factors are the keys in the model building and need to consider the balance between the size and 
compli­cation of the area for one processor and the simulation parameters such as the bucket size and 
the frequency of status saving.  8 CONCLUSIONS A distributed simulation model for virtual manufacturing 
is proposed in this study for the performance evaluation of a design of new system and/or the operational 
decisions at the area level. A time bucket method with time warp is also proposed as a synchronization 
mechanism of the dis­tributed simulation and the computational features are evrduated by developing a 
factory model with five pro­cesses. The proposed method is shown to be useful espe­cially when the actual 
simulation time becomes con~pat­ ible to the time for status saving. These observations re­ vealed the 
importance to consider the balance of sub­ systems assigned to one processor and the simulation pa­ rameters 
in modeling a distributed simulation model for virtual manufacturing. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are 
grateful to Messrs. M. Hirano and M. Yamane and Ms. Y. Hirashitna for their contribution Model 953 founding 
the basis of this research. This study was par­tially supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Re­search 
(B) of The Ministry of Education, Science and Cul­ture and the Research Grant from CSK Ltcl. REFERENCES 
13utler, R. and E. Lusk. 1992. User s Guide p4 Pro­gramming Sys/em, Argonne National Labora­tory. Fujii, 
S et al 1989. A Study on Distributed Simulation for Flexible Manufacturing Systems. [n lnfor­ination 
Control Prohlents in Manufacturing Technology. ed. E.A. Puente and L. Nemes( 6th IFACfIFORS/lMACS Symposium), 
27-32. Pergamon Press. Fujii, S. and M. Hirano. 1992. A Basic Study of Simula tion Method for Evaluation 
of Design and Op­eration of Large Scale Manufacturing Systems. Proc. of 2nd Design and systems Engineering 
Conference qf.lSME, 920,103, 121-126. (in Japanese) Fujii, S. and M. Ilirano. 1993. A Basic Study on 
Dis­tributed Simulation Model of Virtual Manufac­turing system under CIM Environment. Produc­tion Re.~earcit 
1993, ed. V. Orpana and A. Lukka, 281-282, Elsevier Science Publ. Fujii, S., H. Tsunoda and M. Yamane, 
1993. A Study on Distributed Manufacturing System Simulation-Synchronization with Time Bucket-. Proc. 
of 17th NCP Conference,JSME,31 -34. Fujimoto, R. M.. 1990. Parallel Discrete Event Sitnula­tion. Communication 
qf dte ACM, 3, 10, 31-53. Jefferson, D.R. 1985. Virtual Time. ACM Trans. Pro­gram. Language and System, 
7,3,404-424. McDougall, M. Il. 1987. Simulating Computer Sys­tems: Techniques and Tools. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES SUSUM[J FUJII is a Professor of Computer and Systems Engineering 
at Kobe University. IIis research interests in­clude computer integrated manufacturing, production planning 
and scheduling, and manufacturing system simulation. HARUIi ISA TSUNOI)A, ATSUSI OGITA and YASUSI KIL)ANI 
are graduate students in Department of Computer and Systems Engineering at the Graduate School of Kobe 
University. They are currently pursuing their masters degree in Engineering.  
			