
 Distributed Design of Hip Prostheses with BHAUTIK Chandrajit L. Bajaj Daniel R. Schikore Department 
of Computer Sciences, Purdue University Keywords Distributed Systems, CollabomtiveDesign, Problem Solving 
Environments, Computational Science. Abstract We suggest a procedure for the distributed design of custom 
artificial implants. The design of a custom implant can be broken up into several distinct phases which 
can be carried out by separate toolkits which specialize in the smiceneeded for each stage. We describe 
the environment which supports this distributed design, and the necessary steps and toolkits to perform 
the design. Introduction SHASTRA is a highly extensible, distributed and collab­orative geomernc software 
environment consisting of a growing number of individually powert%l and interopem­ble (client server) 
toolkits which support collaborative de sign sessions[l]. In the SHASTIUl environment multiple users 
(say, a colhborative engineering design team) inter­actively create, share, manipulate, simulate, and 
visualhe complex geometric designs over a heterogeneous network of workstations and supercomputers. In 
this paper we describe how three of the SHASTIL4 toolkits, SHILF, a solid mod­eler, VAIDAK, a medical 
imaging toolkit and BHAUTfK, a physical atdysis toolkit, can be used in the design of custom artificial 
implants[4, 10,11]. Overview of Bhautik BHAUTIK provides the tools necessary to set up andpexform scientific 
and engineering simulations on geometric models. It allows creation of 2-d and 3-d problems, made up 
of Pmnbriinb q Witbartfa? .ll or pml of tbk Et8tcfil u granted _t~ttk~amti-&#38;w d~tcdfordimcf conrnre.rriatxh 
ant8gq tbe ACM -I nOtioE.nd tba titk of tbc publication81MIitsdate .ppear,8A notb. n #vca thatmp@rLI* 
by Pcrroirsionof tbe =Iim for Coqm~ Mxbinq. TO COPY OtbCJWkC, of 10 rcpubhh qllk a fee .Od/Or~ pcllni&#38;o. 
ACM-&#38;4C 9X993JDL USA CJ1993ACMO-S9791-SdS-~..Sl30 solids and laminas imported from other systems. 
Solids are defined in a brep format, and may contain curved edges and faces. Finite element meshes can 
be generated for-h solid. Elements are assigned material properties from a material databme. Boundary 
conditions and forces are imposed on the solid. Results for analysis are obtained through remote calls 
to any of a number of finite element solvers. These results can then be visualized in BHAUTIK. Domain 
Creation The objects manipulated in BHAUTIK are imported from the other SHASTRA toolkits which support 
solid creation. VAIDm the medical imaging and reconstruction toolkit, manipulates medical image volume 
data It can be used to construct accurate surf= and solid mcyiels of skeletal and soft tissue structures 
from CT (Computed Tomography), MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) or LSI (Laser !hrf~e Imaging) data. Figure 
1 shows a femur mccmstructed in VAIDAK. The solid modeling toolkit, SHILP, manipulates curved solid objects 
with pieuxvise algebraic surfaces. It can be used for the interactive creating and editing of solids 
with algebraic surface boundaries. Figure 2 shows a femoral implant constructed in SHILP for the femur 
pictured. Solids constructed in these toolkits can be imported into BHAUTIK for analysis. Types of Problems 
BHAUTIK ~ modeling of SWt?d different kinds of physical problems. Problems can be 2-or kitmxtsional in 
nature. Structural analysis problems model the stress in objects of various composition which are subject 
to various forces. Heat transfer problems examine the effect of heat sources placed around a solid. Figure 
3 shows a BHAU-TIK problem session in which a structural analysis is being performed on part of the femur. 
Mesh Creation and Refinement The creation of good finite element meshes is an integral part of BHAUTIK 
Triangular and Q tddated .meshes are SUppOlted in both 2-and 34imensions. Good bounded as­pect ratio 
triangulations are supported for both solids and 36 Figure 1: Creating a solid model of a femur using 
VAIDAK laminas[2, 7]. Solids can be triangulated by surface or vol­ume rnangulation. For _ xcuracy in 
analysis and vi­suakation, meshes can be refined by repated subdivision. Material Properties BHAUTIK 
maintains a materkd &#38;abase, detaihg proper­ties of varkm mataials such as Young s modulus, Poisson 
~0, and density. ~S can be bound to * eka nent in a solid individually, or to regions of a solid specified 
by the user. Alternatively, for a solid which has been rtxmnstructed from medical da@ material proptiea 
maybe assigned by analysis of the original CT data his option ptmnits ac­curate modeling of bones, emphasizing 
regions where the bone is weak and subject to harm from additional stress. Us­ ing the integration tec4miques 
of Beanardini [5], BHAUTIK computes other properties fcwthe solids such as surface ~ volume, moments 
of inti and mass. Figure 2: Prosthesis constructed in SHILP Boundary Conditions Solids may be subjected 
to various boundary conditions. Ex­ternal forces may be pku?d on particular parts of a solid, Cer­tain 
nodes may be marked as fixed, or unmovable. Boundary conditions for one solid may also be imposed by 
the position of and forces on a different solid, to simulate the interaction between two solids. In Figure 
4, arrows represent forces act­ing on a part of the femur, resulting from the placement of the implant. 
 Finite Element Analysis All aspects of finite element analysis up to this point are independent of the 
solver which is being used. BHAUTIK provides the capability to interface with a number of finite elernemts 
solvers to generate results for problems created by the user. Viition lle final stage of a compIete analysis 
is a comprehendible Visualhtm n of the results. The method used in BHAUTIK is to map stress values into 
a colormap, and display each element of the solid basal on the average stress over the elemem he interior 
of the solid can be viewed using a cross section mode, in which the user can browse through cross sections 
of the solid. In figure 5, the lighter shades on the piece of the femur indicate higher stresses. Hip 
Prosthesis Desiin BHAUTIK and the otheJ related SHASTRA toolkits provide a distributed environment for 
the interactive design and anal­ysis of a hip prosthesis. VAIDAK accurately reconstructs a solid model 
of a patiemt s femoral bone, which SHILP can use as a guide for the design of an artificial hip replacement. 
Using these two models, BHAUTIK can analyze the inter­action of the prosthesis with the original bone 
of the patient. and provide feedback for possible modifications for the bone and the prosthesis design. 
Creating Contmm To reconstruct a bone in VAfDAK, the user first creates a contour of the bone for each 
CT/MRl slice. VAIDAK h~s two methods for creating the contours of an object. The user can probe the density 
values in the CT/A41Udata to establish a threshold between the density of the concerned object and the 
surrounding tissue or bone. By setting this threshold, an automatic contour can be generated starting 
from a user defined point. If there is not a well defined border between the object and the surrounding 
area methods such as this may fail. A manual contour mode will allow the user to trace a contour with 
the mouse. After contours have been created they can still be modified using a contour browser, which 
allows extensive editing of contours. For applications such as a hip prosthesis design, it is neuxsary 
to create both an inner and outer contours of the bone, to arxurately model the cavity in the bone as 
well as the thickness of the bone at each point. Figure 3 shows a slice of data and the contours created 
for that slice, as well as the contours for the entire solid. Volume Mesh Generation 37 Figure 3: Stress 
Transfer Modeling from Prosthesis to Femur in t3HAUTIK Generating a volume mesh of the femur is a task 
left to VAIDAK, because of the special form of the data. l%e tetra­hdralization is based on the assumption 
that at each level of dti~ there area pair of non-intersecting contours, one inside !he other. First, 
the area between -h pair of contours is triangulated. This breaks the problem down into a number of smaller 
problems. The region between every two cross sections can be triangulated by forming tetmhedron using 
the triangles formed in the first step. The method for form­ing the tetrahedron is based on the surfxe 
triangulation of the inner contours as computed by the graph traversal algo­rithm of Fuchs. Kedem, and 
Uselton[81. Since this algorithm produces good triangulations between parallel contours, this wdl Icave 
the cavity in the femur open. In this extension of the FKU algorithm, eah vertex in the graph is a pair 
of edges, one from the triangulation of the uppex contours, and one from the lower contoum, three edges 
joining the end­points of these two edges to form two triangies. -h edge in the graph corresponds to 
advancing either the upper or lower edge. When one of these edges aivances, the trian­gles betweem the 
upper and lower edges also advance, and the volume between the old and new triangles is tilled by tetrahedral. 
he imer surfxe of the volume triangulation is made conforrnai to the triangulation of the FKU algorithm 
by assigning appropriate weights to the edges of our new graph. If the advance of an edge does not create 
a new triangle on the inner surfax of the femur, the graph edge is given a weight of zero. Xfthe advmxx 
of an edge does create a new triangle on the inner su.rke, the graph edge is weighted wxording to either 
the area of the new hiangle or the Iength of the new edge. Details of this algorithm are provided m [3]. 
F&#38;trre 6 shows the tetrahwhlizadon of the femur along with the tetrahedralproduced betweem two of 
the sets of contours. Designing an Implant/Modifying the Femur Using SHILP, we can design an implant 
based on the femur which was reconsmtcted in VAIDAK. Designing an Implant Figure 4: Boundary conditions 
resulting from contact with another solid is simplified by the nature of the defined contours in the 
femur. Using the inn= contours which were created in VAIDAK, contours for the implant can be designed 
using simple shapes, such as ellipses. At the same time it may be necessary to modify the shape of the 
femur, to create good contact regions where sues can distribute easily. The outer contours provide a 
guide for how much the femur can be altered, as reaming away too much of the femur would leave a thin 
area in the bone, which would be unsuitable for stress transfer. The contours of the implant created 
in SHILP can be tiled into a solid model of the implant using remote calls to VAIDAK. Figme 5: Visua&#38;ing 
the stress values after analysis Computing Boudary Coruiitions BHAUTfK computes bmmdary conditions based 
on the con­tiwt points betw~ tlw famtr and the implant. fle bone may be dispirced or rdaped by the insertion 
of the implant, nxwking in regions of contact through which stress would be distributed. Parts of the 
bone may need to be reamed out for the implant to be hserted. Given a lod or m force pliwed on the implant, 
it is important to see how that load transfers to the femur. We compute boundary forces on the femur 
m a proportion of the force on the implant redirected in the d~ection normal to the plane of conmt. 
38 of the University of Toronto. References Figure 6: Femur contours and tetrahedral mesh in VAIDAK Computing 
Material Properties Materialpropertiesforsolids reconstructed from medieal data can be obtained by analysis 
of the original data[6]. The density at any given point directly comsponds to the value in the CT image. 
Other parameters such as elasticity depend on the densities of the surrounding tissue and bone. At this 
stage BHAUTIK reads through the CT images from which a solid was reconstructed, and obtains average values 
for the material properties over each finite mesh element. Shape Optimization Based on the results of 
analysis, modifications maybe made to either the bone or the implant[9]. If a region on the bone is under 
too much stress, the bone may be reamed out more in that region. If the bone is not thick enough to modi~ 
at that point, the implant can be redesigned to redistribute the stress to other areas. Traditional implants 
vary in the length of the femoral portion of the implant. Changing the length may help to disrnbute the 
stress. l%e orientation of the implant with respect to the femur may also be altered. Conclusions and 
futurt work We have described a distributed design system for custom implant design. We begin with model 
reconstruction using a medical imaging toolkit, and implant design using a solid modeler. Next a finite 
element toolkit is used to assign bound­ary conditions and material specifications to the reconstructed 
bone for stress analysis. Fhwdly the design ean be modified based on the results of analysis. In this 
environment, several scenarios for modifications of designs exist. Orientation and size of the implant 
maybe changed independently or together to examine the effect of changes. Future plans allow for dif­ferent 
materials to be used for implant design to examine the effects of various materials on implant performance. 
Acknowledgement This research was supported in part by NSF grants CCR 90-00028, DMS 91-01424, AFOSR contract 
91-0276 and industrial funds from AT &#38; T and Nippon Steel Company. We also acknowledge the researeh 
project assistance of Brian Bailey and Gopalakrishnan Srinivasan of Purdue University, K. Okamura of 
Nippon Steel Company, and James Stewart [1] [2] [3] [4] [51 [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] V. Anupam, C. Bajaj, 
and A. Royappa., The SHASTRA Distributed and Collaborative Geometric Design Envi­ronment. Computer Science 
Technical Report, CAPO­91-38, Purdue University, Department of Computer Sci­ences, 1991. C. Bajaj and 
T. Dey. Convex Decompositions of Poly­hedra and Robustness. Siam Journal on Computing, 21(2):339-364, 
1992. C. Bajaj and J. Stewart. Volume Triangulation from Planar Contours, 1992. W. Bargar. Shape the 
Implant to the Patient. Clinical Orthopedics and Related Research, 10(249):73-78, 1989. F. Bemardini. 
Integration of polynomials over n dimensional polyhedra. Computer Aided Design, 23(1):51-58, 1991. D. 
Carter and W. Hayes. The Compressive Behavior of Bone as a Two-Phase Porous Structure. The Journal of 
Bone and Joint Surgery, 59a(7) :954-962, 1977. T. Dey, C. Bajaj, and K. Sugihara. On Good Trian­gulations 
in Three Dimensions. International Journal of Computational Geometty and Applications, 2(1 ):75 95, 1992. 
H. Fuchs, A. Kedem, and S. R Uselton. Optimal Surface Reconstruction from Planar Contours. Communication~ 
of the ACM, 20:693 702, 1977. J. Lewis, M. Askew, R. Wlxson, G. Kramer, and R. Tarr. me Influence of 
Prosthetic Stem Stiffness and of a Cal­car Collar on Smesses in the Proximal End of the Femur with a 
Cemented Femoral Component. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 66a(2) :280-286, 1984. S. Stuberg, 
B. Stulberg, and R. Wlxson. The Ratio­nale, Design Characteristics, and preliminary Results of a Primary 
Custom Total Hip Prosthesis. Clinical Orthopedics and Related Research, 10(249):79-96, 1989. [11] S. 
D. Stulberg. Custom-made Primary Total Hip Re­placements. Orthopedics, 12(9):1245-1252, 1989. 39 
			