
 Does Visualization Improve Our Ability to Find and Learn from Internet Based Information? Daniel A. 
Kauwell kauwell@uiuc.edu Jim Levin j-levin@uiuc.edu Hwan Jo Yu hwanjoyu@uiuc.ed Young Jin Lee ylee12@uiuc.edu 
Jeff Ellen ellen@uiuc.edu Arun Bahalla bhalla@uiuc.edu University of Illinois, 405 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, 
IL 61801 / 217.244.9682 1. INTRODUCTION Historically, issues such as the retrieval of information have 
been the problem of Librarians and information scientist and only of ancillary interest to educators. 
However, we need to consider that current government estimates show that more than 95% of American K-12 
schools and virtually all institutions of higher learning are connected to the Internet. Indeed, billions 
of dollars have been spent to provide the infrastructure and equipment to achieve this. Ultimately, most 
educators would like to see a day when students can access the limitless collection of media on the Internet 
and find many relevant resources related to their topic of study. Clearly, the seemingly boundless trove 
of information, art, music, literature and other forms of media on the Internet is one of its greatest 
potentials. Information and media that in the past might have been available to only a few, can now be 
accessed by the many. For the first time in history, those that are connected can have equal access to 
libraries, databases, galleries, video, etc. regardless of their geographical location. If we are to 
realize the potential of the Internet as an information source for education, educators must raise their 
awareness of the information sciences. 2. GUI INTERNET SEARCHES Given that current methods for searching 
the Internet are often lacking [1, 2] and that Web Browsers and most search interfaces give little support 
for information seeking, we have developed a graphical user interface that applies visualization to Internet 
search results. Instead of lengthy lists of search results, the Visualization of Information Tool (VisIT) 
presents the user with a graphical, spatial representation of the search space where each Web site is 
represented and all of the hits returned are clustered within that site representation. Now the user 
can see the hits returned by the search engine and other pages at the site and, when any of the pages 
are clicked the appropriate page is displayed in the browser window (Figure 1.). Searchers query multiple 
search engines simultaneously to construct a search space and, heuristic based rules augment search engine 
relevancy rankings. Upon placing the cursor over any page, a pop-up box appears with search engine comments 
(if any) and the first n characters of text found on the page. Users can scan text from the page in this 
manner and they can make a more informed decision as to which pages to explore further by clicking on 
them. This interface allows users too not only quickly scan hundred of hits at once but, numerous perceptual 
cues are added to convey more information as well. Arrows are drawn that show which pages in the search 
space are referencing other pages, the color intensity of pages indicate relevancy weighting, visited 
pages are marked to enhance navigation, etc. Once information is found, we need to assimilate it into 
our existing knowledge structures and graphical representations can help with this process. To facilitate, 
VisIT's graphical displays Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR 01, September 9-12, 2001, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-331-6/01/0009 $5.00.  can be saved, and re-opened 
later. Users can edit the search space by deleting sites, grouping sites, making annotations on pages, 
labeling sites and more. Background images can also be inserted allowing users to place information on 
a meaningful referent (Figure 2).  Figure 2. Search Space After User Modification and Background Image 
3. REFERENCES 1. Jansen, B.J., Spink, A. and Saracevic, T. 1998, Failure Analysis in Query Construction: 
Data and Analysis from a Large Sample of Web Queries. in International Conference on Digital Libraries, 
(Pittsburgh, PA USA.), 289 - 290. 2. Spink, A., Bateman, J. and Jansen, B.J. 1999, Searching the Web: 
a survey of EXCITE users. Internet Research, 9 (2). 117-128.  
			