
 DYNAMIC APPROACHES TO SETTING LEARNING OBJECTIVES WHEN TEACHING WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES D. Scott Brandt 
Technology Training Librarian Purdue University Libraries Information Technology Dept. 363 Stewart Center 
Purdue University W. Lafayette, IN 47907 Phone: 317-494-2857 Fax: 317-494-0156 E-Mail: <techman@mentor. 
cc.purdue.edu ABSTRACT If you believe in Murphy s Law, just remember that Murphy never logged onto the 
Internet (let alone tried to teach others how to). The opportunity for things to go wrong is multiplied 
a thousand times throughout the complex and often fragile systems and linkages which make up the Internet. 
Not only can anything go wrong, but sometimes when everything goes right the results can be unexpected 
or less than desirable. Traditionally, learning objectives for teaching are established after an assessment 
of user needs, often with an emphasis on what is to be learned without much thought to the environment 
in which it will be learned. Because of the complexity of the Internet, such objectives may be unsatis­factory 
or unusable when the system being shown is unreliable or unavailable this is often the case with many 
Gopher servers, for instance. As Gavriel Salomon noted in the Spring 1992 issue of SIGCUE Outlook [1], 
objectives will be influenced not only by the effects of working with new technologies (e.g., learning 
commands, how to manipu­late files, etc.), but also by the effects o~these technologies (e.g., how they 
are configured, how they are accessed, what causes them to crash, etc.). Thus, some assessment of the 
environment must be factored into the process of setting learning objectives. The scope of the problem 
will be discussed, with examples given to illustrate the range of complexity. Traditional approaches 
to assessment of needs and establish­ment of learning objectives will be reviewed. An eclectic perspective 
is given, cutting across lines of information technology and systems development, and then a description 
is given of how the process can be enhanced to be applied to the problem at hand. Strategies for setting 
learning objec­ tives when teaching with new technologies are then dis­cussed. INTRODUCTION The Internet 
itself is not all that new, but as one can observe by reviewing the numerous daily postings to Iistservs 
such as NETTRAIN [2], with increased use of the Intemet comes a greatly increased need for training and 
instruction. This is, of course, true for any product or resource, but especially so when it is a technology 
as complex as the Internet. What makes the Internet so complex, and therefore hard to learn? One obvious 
answer is that it is a network, and by its physical nature can exhibit so many different kinds of problems. 
Electrical interference, congestion, or physical disconnection may cause transmission failures: and other 
problems can result from lack of buffer space or when traffic load exceeds the gateway s capacity. [3] 
Similarly, normal network conditions such as queuing or administra­tive restrictions can be seen by some 
users as network problems. [4] Other factors contributing to the complexity of the Intemet include the 
diverse variety of software and the many complex parameters and protocols required just to access it.[5] 
For instance, Intemet users have progressed from using ftp (the UNIX file transfer protocol) directly 
to using WAIS to Gopher to World Wide Web for information searching and retrieval in just over five years. 
Much of this software has not been subjected to the usual or traditional methods of quality control which 
software development usually demands. Usually an alpha testis done by develop­ers to ensure the product 
works, followed by a beta test of a temporary release to a controlled group of users who test and evaluate 
the software, which then gets further modifica­tions as needed before release. [6] In the case of the 
Intemet, it often seems as though things are in a continual state of beta testing. The complex nature 
of the hardware and software can compound an already dit%cult task-does one teach people the skills needed 
to be able to use the Internet, or does one treat the Internet as a resource and emphasize the kinds 
of inforn-qtion one finds there, or some combination of both? Librarians, who deal with advanced and 
constantly changing Permission distributed for appea~ and noor to republish, to copy without fee all 
or part of this material direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright tice is given that copying is 
by permission of the requires a fee andor specific permission. is granted notice and Association provided 
the title for Com that the of the publication puting copies are Machinep, not and to made or its data 
copy otherwise, @ 1994 ACM 0-89791-656-5/94/459940 $3.50 I Meet the Shadowy Future technology on an 
ongoing basis, often attempt to teach general strategies for finding information that transcends the 
technology used to store or retrieve the information. [7] Others caution that technology can impact the 
user, differen­tiating between those effects with using technology, and those o~the technology. [8] In 
the case of the Internet, the effects with using the networks are numerous benefits in access, storage 
and retrieval, but the effects of using the Internet are that the capabilities of technology permit and 
encourage active use before all problems or issues can be worked out. [9] Thus, the impact of the technology 
itself must be factored into training. A CONSTRUCTIVIST APPROACH Simply put, instruction or training 
is broken into four main parts some kind of assessment or analysis of the problem to determine needs 
for training; establishment of goals or objectives to meet those needs; implementation of the instruction 
or training; and some kind of evaluation to improve as needed. [ 10] Traditionally, objectives have been 
based on behavioral changes as a way to measure the success of the training. [ 11] However, current thought 
in instructional technology moves away from behaviorist approaches which simplify or systematize components 
to be learned and specify perquisite learning, to a cognitive approach which emphasizes moving the learner 
into thinking in the knowledge domain as an expert user and de-emphasizes specified knowledge while encouraging 
users to search for other relevant knowledge domains. [12] This is referred to as a constructivist approach 
to cognition. The constructivist approach has early ties to the application of cognitive science to artificial 
intelligence. It emphasizes that a study of complex domains includes a study of their content, structure, 
representation and use, and that understanding a domain requires a great familiar­ity with its connections. 
[ 13] It does not have learning and performance objectives, but rather encourages learners to search 
for authentic tasks and let the more specific objec­tives emerge. [14] It also challenges Iearners to 
look at their own models and to construct better models in coping with complex situations.[ 15] A constructivist 
approach can be oriented toward the development of the special cognitive skills needed in ill­structured 
domains, by providing exploration environ­ments, organized around building blocks for knowledge assembly. 
[16] Although the term ill-structured domain is formally applied to areas like political theory (as opposed 
to mathematics, for example), it could be manifested in any domain in which the ill-structuredness leads 
to serious obstacles to the attainment of advanced learning goals. [l7] Internetworking (and the Internet 
as an instance thereof) can be viewed as a knowledge domain, and the problems outlined earlier contribute 
to its ill-structuredness. As such, a constructivist approach to teaching how to use the Internet would 
emphasize many of the ideas presented above. Thus, learning objectives might encompass the content of 
the Internet and how to use the programs thereto access those resources, and also attempt to get users 
to develop models from a networking or information systems approach. SYSTEMS AND TEACHING There are several 
reasons for teaching from a systems development perspective. Systems analysis involves identifying the 
structure and parameters, which leads to developing a model of the system, which can then be used to 
solve problems.[18] It can provide insight into some of the lessons learned in large-scale systems development 
efforts that are pertinent to end-user computing. [19] In approaching the development of learning objectives 
from the systems perspective, users will hopefully gain the kind of implicit knowledge which can not 
be gained, but enables experienced systems developers to innovate when faced with novel problem situations. 
[20] As noted above, librarians tend to teach Internet-related courses by focusing on the content or 
resources available, while programming analysts often tend to focus on using particular configurations 
of software and hardware to do so. Often, neither question the users implicit computing knowledge. It 
is assumed that this is because users are expected to generalize and abstract (that an online index is 
similar to a printed index, for instance), or that they can follow step-by-step instructions for achieving 
a given result. Unfortunately this assumption often fails to take into account the complexity of error 
recovery within networks, or within a particular application, such as Gopher. Does this mean that end-users 
must be taught all the intricacies of networking to able to use the Internet? Obviously, before computers 
librarians did not teach users how to open card catalog drawers and how to flip through cards. But implicit 
knowledge about computers and net­works can not be assumed for naive users. Thus some enabling conditions 
must be incorporated into the teaching which allow users to acquire knowledge within an ill­structured 
domain. This does not mean teach them how to design networks, but rather provide them with environmen­tal 
conditions to explore and build and revise their own models about how the network influences the work 
they want to accomplish there. BUILD AND EXPLORE MODELS As part of the analysis background work for formulati­ng 
learning objectives, the instructor must review both the needs of the users and the requirements of the 
systems used. In the case of teaching users how to search gophers using Veronica for instance, the instructor 
should know that the client software used in a demonstration may differ from that used in other locations 
but rather than attempt to teach all the possible differences between these packages, the instructor 
points out that there exist differences, and allows users to develop their own models for how various 
clients are used for searching. Likewise, the instructor should be aware of the variations in configuration 
of gophers (index- ACM SIGUCCS XXII ing, search engines, etc.), but explains briefly only what one configuration 
entails, and leaves it to the users to determine a model for variations and differences. The general 
objec­tive here, if there is one, would be to get users to understand that they must work at building 
models. Likewise, the instructor must be able to provide some kind of environment in which users can 
explore and build their models, and ultimately their knowledge. For example, a demonstration or lecture 
without hands-on experience would not allow exploration for knowledge assembly. And further, initial 
hands-on exploration without opportunities to encounter obstacles (represented by error message) with 
an instructor (expert) available to generate discussion can be counterproductive. Thus, some kind of 
experience encoun­tering obstacles should be worked into initial explorations. In lieu of experts, peers 
can serve as collaborators off of which to bounce ideas. Similar strategies and tactics would emphasize 
and foster understanding that the operations of networks can and do influence how quickly and easily 
users can build their content-related knowledge. However, rather than enumerate types and kinds of errors 
and understanding or resolving specific problems, the instructor emphasizes the need for strategies to 
try different approaches. Thus, given the basic introduction to the underlying structure of the Intemet, 
users can gain an understanding of trying alternative ways to accomplish what they need. CONCLUSIONS 
As outlined here, the Internet is a complex and ill­structured domain. Constructivist approaches to developing 
learning objectives which emphasize user involvement and model building best help in the acquisition 
of knowledge in this domain. Strategies which incorporate users as enablers and environments which allow 
exploration of the connec­tions between elements (content and application) are likely to assist best 
in the acquisition of knowledge. Learning objectives must take these factors into account. [1] Salomon, 
G. What does the design of effective CSCL require, and how do we study its effects? SIG CUE Out­look, 
vol. 21, no. 3, Spring 1992, pp. 62-68 [2] NETTRAIN is a BITNET listserv, NETTRAIN@UBVM [3] Comer, Douglas. 
Operating Systems Design, vol. II: lnternetworking with XINU, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1987 
[4] UNIX man pages and similar documents from SURFNet and the University of California (Berkeley) can 
be found by doing a Veronica search on a gopher using the term net­work errors [5] Brandt, D. Scott, 
On using the network: considerations for training. Academic and Library Computing, vol. 8, no. 7, Jul./Aug. 
1991, pp. 14-15. [6] Awad, Elias, Systems Analysis and Design, Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 
1985 [7] Pask, Judy, et. al., The Savvy Studentk Guide to Library Research, West Lafayette, IN: Purdue 
University Under­graduate Library, 1993 [8] Salomon, G., ibid. [9] Brandt, D. Scott, The workstation 
in the academic research library setting, Academic and Library Computing, vol. 8, no. 4, April 1991 [10] 
Mager, Robert, Making Instruction Work, or Skillbloomers, Belmont, CA: David S. Lake Publ., 1988 [11] 
Dick, Walter, et al, The Systematic Design of Instruc­tion, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Co., 1985 
[12] Bednar, Anne, et al, Theory into practice: how do we link? in Instructional Technology, Past, Present 
and Future, ed. by Gary Anglin, Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, 1991 [13] Rissland, Edwina, The structure 
of knowledge in complex domains. in Thinking and Learning Skills, vol. 2: Research and Open Questions, 
ed. by Susan Chipman, et al, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1985 [14] Bednar, Anne, ibid. 
[15] Perkins,D. N. What constructivism demands of the learner. Educational Technology, vol. 31, no. 9, 
September 1991, pp. 19-21 [16] Spiro, Rand, et al, Knowledge representation, content specification, and 
the development of skill in situation­specific knowledge assembly, Educational Technology, vol. 31, no. 
9, September 1991, pp. 22-25 [17] Spiro, Rand, et al, Cognitive flexibility, constmctivism, and hypertext, 
Educational Technology, vol. 31, no. 5, May 1991, pp. 24-33 [18] Madala, Hems, Inductive Learning Algorithms 
for Complex Systems Modeling, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994 [19] Karten, Naomi, Integrating IS disciplines 
into end­user training, Journal of Information Systems Management, vol. 8, no. 1, Winter 1991, pp. 75-78 
[20] Mgwenyama, Ojelanki, Developing end-users systems development competence, Information &#38; Manage­ment, 
vol. 25, no. 11, Nov. 1993, pp. 291-302 Meet the Shadowy Future 
			