
 E-commerce and Computer Science Education Yuzhen Ge Jiangeng Sun Department of Computer Science IBM 
Global Services University of the Pacific jisun@ibm.us.com 3601 Pacific Ave Stockton, CA 95211 jge@uop.edu 
 Abstract Electronic commerce is gradually changing the way the commerce is conducted. Computer science 
graduates will need to be prepared for the challenge posed by the increasing demand for professionals 
who can develop and maintain electronic commerce systems. By exam- ining the standard computer science 
curriculum, some suggestions are proposed.  Introduction Electronic commerce has been gaining market 
share by leaps and bounds in both retail commerce and business to business commerce in just the last 
two years. With the increasing use of the Internet, the advancement in network technology, and the appearance 
of low-priced PCs, electronic commerce will undoubtly be one of the main channels that commerce is conducted 
in the fu- ture. Usually e-commerce refers to both retail com-merce and business to business commerce 
and e-business refers only to business to business commerce. Conducting business over the network has 
been prac- ticed for almost 20 years. GM and Walmart were among the first to force their suppliers to 
participate in EDI ( Electronic Data Interchange ) over VAN ( Value Added Networks) to improve their 
bottom lines. But it is the Internet, the inexpensive public network, that offers the general public 
the opportunity to conduct business on- line. The exponential growth of the Internet electronic commerce 
makes many companies, small or big, to re- align their business strategies to electronic commerce, which 
leads to the changes in their business processes, information technology infrastructure, and overall 
the way the business is conducted. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all orpart of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advant -age and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGCSE 2000 3/00 Austin, TX, USA &#38;#169; 2000 ACM 1-58113-213-1/00/0003.-$5.00 
 This is the classical business cycle in modern society: the new technology offers many new business 
opportu- nities; the realization of these new opportunities further stimulates the development of the 
new technology; and the paradigm shift for both the technology and the busi- ness occurs, and the cycle 
is complete. Technology plays an important role in this cycle, led by computer science and information 
technology [2]. In this paper, we will investigate the major component of an electronic commerce system 
from the point of view of a practitioner who develops electronic commerce sys- tems and a computer science 
educator. We will analyze whether a standard computer science curriculum will meet the need of training 
students for the challenge of electronic commerce. 2 Components in an Electronic Commerce System There 
are many software products that can enable elec- tronic commerce activities [3]. All of them should in- 
clude at least the following subsystem: 1. Electronic Catalog 2. Secure Web Server 3. Graphical User 
Interface 4. E-Commerce Engine 5. Communication Management System 6. Database Management System  
2.1 Electronic Catalog The first task of any e-commerce endeavor is to organize the products or services 
in a form that is suitable for browsing on-line, or to generate an electronic catalog that has a logical 
structure that is easy for on-line user to navigate, search, and make selections. This task seems to 
be easy. However, it is usually quite complicated since the followings need to be taken into consideration: 
 Many companies have some sort of paper catalog s- tored in word processing software like PageMaker or 
Quark. These kinds of paper catalogs are difficult, if possible at all, to be used in e-commerce systems. 
In the core system in many companies, the produc- t/service data is stored only for accounting purposes, 
and is not organized or structured at all for on-line browsing. It is a daunting task to transform millions 
of items organized for the accounting department to that organized by logical structure and suitable 
for customer browsing. The electronic catalog will not only have the logical organization of the products 
or services, but also the pricing structure, which should include promotions, discounts, package deals 
versus separated items, etc. The wholesale and retail trading partners need to ex- change the product 
and service data. In e-commerce it means exchanging electronic catalog and catalog- update information. 
The trading partners may have different structure in organizing data, different data formats, and different 
communication mechanisms. These issues are not completely new, but e-commerce adds new spin on them. 
It has been known from the client-server days that data analysis and migration is the first task for 
client-server implementation. E-commerce requires not just mapping the existing data, but also organize 
the data in the way that is natural to potential on-line browsing customer. The catalog should also help 
the e-commerce system to generate at- tractive and enticing graphics, which the paper catalog has been 
trying to convey, and the catalog data should be easily "published". This requirement of presenting the 
same data in differ- ent ways, from existing accounting system to electronic catalog, and from paper 
catalog to electronic catalog, calls for a system that unifies the data content, and has a common protocol 
to present the data on an electronic data interchange. SGML has been used mainly in DOD (Department Of 
Defense) and academia for the last 20 years as the vehicle to transfer structured data. Recent- ly XML, 
a subset of SGML with 20% of the complexity but 80% of the functionality, has been widely accept- ed 
as the open standard for electronic structured data format, and is promised to be the solution for the 
data migration problem. 2.2 Secure web server The main tasks of a web server will be receiving requests 
from user's browsers, forwarding them to the appropri- ate applications if necessary, and returning the 
results to the browsers. They should be able to serve a large number of document formats including HTML, 
images, multimedia files and applet/servlet programs via HTTP protocol;  provide the CGI (Common Gateway 
Interface) for other server side applications;  provide API ( Application Programming Interface) for 
high performance server side programming.  handle secure transactions using methods such as SS- L(Secure 
Socket Layer);  Most of the web-server products on the market, such as open-source Apache or other commercial 
product- s, follow HTTP protocol and provide standard CGI. However, different vendors provide different 
APIs. For example, NSAPI is from Netscape, and ISAPI is from Microsoft, etc. Apache, because of its open:source 
na- ture, can load any module for different API, such as perl-module, PHP-module, to speed up performance 
for those systems. The security of communication between the web brows- er and the web server is one 
of the main concerns of many users of online commerce system. Most of peo- ple may worry about giving 
out personal information or credit card information online. Four issues concerning a secure communication 
between a web browser and a server are 1. Authenticity, which refers to both parties trust each other's 
identity. 2. Confidentiality, which refers to message content re-mains private throughout the communication 
be- tween the browser and the server. 3. Accountability, which refers to both parties agree that the 
exchange has happened or the transaction has been processed. 4. Integrity, which refers to the property 
that the mes- sage is not altered while being transmitted.  Current technology allow the following measures 
to ad- dress some of the security issues, especially the first and the second issues. First, it is server 
authentication. The server authenti- cation process is described in the following. 1. The server creates 
a public/private key pair, storing the private key in itself and the public key in a cer- tificate file. 
 2. The server sends the certificate to a selected Certifi- cate Authority to sign and waits for the 
Certificate Authority to verify its identity and sign the certifi- cate.  3. The Certificate Authority 
signs the certificate and sends the server the signed certificate which is usu- ally encrypted with the 
private key of the Certificate Authority. The ° server has completed the certification process. Server 
certification is one measure that will thwart im- postors and to address the issue of authenticity, For 
a browser, if it trusts the Certificate Authority, it should also trust the certificate signed by this 
Certificate Au- thority. Once the server is certified, the measure to ensure confi- dentiality in the 
communication between a browser and a server is by using the Secure Socket Layer (SSL). To enable SSL 
transaction (see Fig. 1), a user will need to typed in a URL or be linked to a URL starting with HTTPS. 
Then the server will send its public key and certificate. The browser will then send an acknowledg- ment 
to the server that is encrypted with server's public key. Then the encrypted data section begins. Encryp- 
tion is a measure to thwart eavesdroppers to maintain the privacy of the messages between the browser 
and the server. SSL is based on the RSA algorithm. Accountability can be addressed by exchanging mes- 
sages between the user and the server. Once the trans- action is completed, a server will send a message 
to the user indicating that the request or order has been re- ceived. However, it can still be an issue 
because of the unreliability of the network. The same is true with the integrity issue. Given the current 
state of the Internet, it is possible that a network link goes down temporar- ily or the server goes 
down temporarily. Therefore, it is possible that a packet which is part of a message is lost, which amounts 
to message being altered while be- ing transmitted. However, the probability of destructive effect is 
low and should not influence the decision to go electronic. 2.3 Graphical User Interface The user interface 
issue has been around since the first terminal was attached to a computer. From pure com- mand line interface 
to menu-driven screen interface on a dumb terminal, then to GUI on a graphical termi- nal, user interface 
has evolved into an important de- sign factor in any application development as well as a teaching and 
research topic in universities and industry. The experiences and the methodology accumulated in this 
process also apply to the user interface design in the e-commerce environment, but there are special 
con- siderations needed to be given to the e-commerce user interface development. In addition to issues 
considered in the early user in-terface development, which emphasizes on the business processes, the 
usability and the functionality of the sys- tem, thus driven mainly, by the technologist, the e-commerce 
user interface development should put equal weight on user satisfaction and attractiveness of the sys- 
tem. Therefore, artistic and creative skills are also the driving force for the web user interface design. 
The user interface of an e-commerce system is not only a front- end for business processes, but also 
a marketing tool which should supply information and provides unique and pleasant user experiences. In 
the era of e-commerce, the graphical interface envi- ronment is the web browser. The browser communi- 
cates with the web server by means of HTTP protocol over the TCP/IP network, and renders the information 
collected from the server. Browser technology also e- volves as the audience and their expectation changes, 
from a text and drop-down-box type of appearance, to an environment where a whole set of multimedia bell- 
s and whistles makes the browsing an interactive and engaging experience. Currently, the most widely 
used browsers are the Netscape Communicator and Microsoft Internet Explorer. HTML has been the language 
for web-browser to ren- der information. As the content of web pages becomes more and more dynamic and 
requires more and more multimedia support, the language for the web is evolv- ing as well. XML is promised 
to take over HTML as the next-generation standard to convey the content of the web pages, and XSL etc. 
as the language to convey the rendering of the web pages. To handle more sophisticated browser screen 
events and "plug-in" mechanism so that a third party can devel- op multimedia applications inside a browser. 
Netscape introduced JavaScript into its browser. Microsoft fol- lowed suit and implemented JavaScript 
in an incompat- ible manner. The proliferation of plug-ins and incom- patible JavaScript and plug-in 
interface implementation endangers the universal appeal of web browsers. Java has been initially marketed 
as a client-side GUI scripting tool, but the hefty resource requirement, the network bandwidth demand, 
and the performance prob- lems have plagued this prospect. It does succeed, however, in server-side application 
development, and is rapidly evolving into an enterprise application com- ponent development environment. 
With the advent of computer hardware capacity and Java-specific hard- ware, as well as the spread of 
broad-band public net- work, Java may return as the attractive choice for GUI environment. 2.4 E-Commerce 
Engine E-commerce touches every aspect of the core business in an organization. While the corporate products 
and 252 services need to be reorganized to be presented on the Internet/Intranet, corporate core business 
systems need to have a system to interface with the open network, the electronic catalog, and the database. 
This system is the e-commerce engine. E-commerce engine should handle all the core business processes 
in the organization, typically including order processing, payment processing, inventory control, lo- 
gistics, etc. It may relay the tasks to the core business systems through some integration process, but 
it has to be designed to work on the Internet/Intranet off the electronic catalog, and leave enough hooks 
so that those integration can happen. With all different business pro- cesses in diverse business and 
operating environment, it is impossible to have one-size-fit-all e-commerce en- gine. One can try to 
build a specific turn-key engine for a particular industry, or a generic engine and can be used only 
after substantial customization, or anything between those two extremes. Currently there are many commercial 
packages that fits into this spectrum. One collective effort under way is to set up protocol for those 
systems, or any systems that participate in the e-business for that matter, to communicate with each 
other over the Internet. Once again, XML is promised to be the common language for this communication, 
and the effort emphasizes more on setting up the Document Template Definition for different industries. 
   2.5 Communication Management System As a generalization of secure web sever management, enterprise 
communication management is a key com- ponent of e-business strategy. Internet/Intranet is just another 
way of information interchange, another way of communication after all. An enterprise should decide: 
 1. Who should participate in the business relationship? To what extent they participate? This calls 
for a di- rectory service. This service can be built into certain proprietary application, but this application 
can hin- der the cooperation over the Internet. At the present LDAP is widely accepted as the standard 
directo- ry service application interface, and is supported by many commercial product. 2. How to authenticate 
the business partners? The lim- itation of username/password authentication is well known, and certificate-based 
certification is recog- nized to be more secure. However, certificate and key management are relatively 
new to the general public and commercial enterprises, and the practice needs time to mature. 3. Communication 
protocol? Different business partner- s need to send messages to each other, and the mes-  sage format 
becomes important. There have been commercial packages specializing in translating from one format to 
another. Once again, XML is rapidly accepted as the common language to communicate.  2.6 Database Management 
System Database Management System (DBMS) is an importan- t component of any business system, e-commerce 
is no exception. The difference is how the DBMS is used. In e-commerce system, the end user, using a 
web-browser, generally connects to the web-server, and the web-server maintains the database connection; 
the end user brows- er itself rarely makes direct connection to the database. In this way, the database 
is separated from the end us- er, thus improving the security and performance of the database because 
it only needs to maintain one persis- tent connection to the web-server. 3 Developing an Electronic 
Commerce System The process of developing an electronic commerce sys- tem is similar to that of the developing 
most informa- tion technology systems. It involves system analysis, requirement specification, design, 
implementation and testing. Therefore, the basic principles of system engi- neering and software engineering 
should apply. However, e~commerce applications are not traditional in-house IT applications. The collaborative 
and open nature of e-commerce systems determines that the sys~ tems are more customer-oriented, involves 
more inten- sive interactions with the end users, and should be more visually appealing with multimedia 
support. E-commerce applications are business applications, but at same time they are also marketing 
channels. Because of this end-user oriented nature, most of the e- commerce system developments follow 
the Rapid Appli- cation Development (RAD) approach. The first work- ing prototype should come out quickly, 
not necessarily feature-complete. Then the features are added as the application evolves to production. 
Typical development tasks both from the development side and-the manage- ment side will include the following: 
 1. Application planning and marketing analysis; 2. System analysis, requirement collection and specifi- 
cation; 3. Installation and configuration of an existing product; 4. Graphical design of the look and 
feel of the web pages, product/service name branding; 5. Creation of the electronic catalog;  6. Creation 
of the web pages reflecting the products and services name branding and individualized look and feel; 
 7. Implement business logic for the web pages; 8. Implement the business process for the logic; 9. 
Testing. 10. Maintenance - Logging, backup and cleanup  Usually maintenance will not be part of the 
development effort. It is included here for completeness. Some of the steps above may be iterated many 
times before the final version is decided upon.  Implication on Computer Science Education Who are 
the ones that are going to "do" e-commerce? Traditional MBA programs with emphasis on Informa- tion Management 
Systems can prepare students on spe- cific e-commerce related business processes, and the im- plication 
of those processes to the overall functionality of the enterprise. But implementing the e-commerce system 
needs people with technical background, and those people are most likely come with training in com- puter 
science. Existing CS curriculum offers programming languages such as C/C++, or even Java, software engineering, 
op- erating system such as UNIX, computer architecture, relational database principle, etc. These are 
the essen- tial ingredients of a technical person, and the must-have for anyone interested in a career 
in information technol- ogy. E-commerce does require other knowledges and skill- s from technical people 
besides those that can be ob- tained from core computer science courses. Some of these skills and knowledges 
are required for any career, some are specific to this field. As shown in Fig. 2, main skills for developing 
an electronic commerce system are illustrated. 1. Ability to learn independently, ability to adapt and 
to create; Because e-commerce is a rapidly evolving business model and technology, new ideas, methods, 
and technology are appearing all the time. There will be few people can claim expert on any subject, 
and change is the norm rather than the exception. It is important to encourage student not only to "think" 
creatively, but to "do" creative things. This ability is really different from "skills". Training students 
to have such an ability is indeed, in our opinion, one of the main issues facing computer science education. 
 2. Markup Languages; Markup Languages are different to general programming languages. It does not empha- 
 size on data processing, but on structured data pre-sentation. It organizes data in certain structure, 
and feed other data processing applications with the struc- tured data. The purpose of markup languages 
is differ- ent from other general programming languages such as C/C++, and the syntax is very different 
as well. Teach- ing markup languages involves other applications, which are typically written in C/C++, 
Java, etc., and should be done after students have acquired solid understand- ing of programming in general. 
As we have mentioned in above sections, XML is promised to be the focus point for many e-commerce related 
technologies. Currently there is almost no cov- erage over the markup languages in computer sciences 
curriculum. In our opinion, there should be a selec-tive course dedicated to the subject of markup language 
in general, XML in particular, and related processing methods such as DOM ( Document Object Model), SAX, 
XSL, etc. 3. Cryptography; Web server security, and to a greater extent security in general, is of major 
concerns not only to individual web users but also to commercial enterprises. Traditional-ly, username/password 
type of challenge-based securi- ty mechanism played, and is still playing, an important role, but with 
the advent of Internet, various certificate- based security mechanism starts to take strong hold. R- 
SA algorithm is the basis for most of the security pack- ages or protocols such as SSL. Because of its 
mathemat- ical nature, it is also a topic that few people working in industry really understand. Some 
curriculum have a separate cryptography course covering the topic in depth, however a practitioner may 
not need to know all the detail in the subject. For student pursuing career other than cryptography, 
it is probably enough to in- clude RSA algorithm as part of networking or discrete math course. 4. Human-Computer 
Interaction; Human computer in- teraction is an area that is becoming more and more important. It deals 
with usability issues of any human computer interface including web pages. It encompass- es principles, 
methods, and the process Of developing an usable human computer interface. Many curriculum in computer 
science curriculum do not include a course in human computer interaction. It will be difficult for computer 
science graduates to design an interface that is of high usability without being exposed to issues in 
human computer interaction. A chapter in software engineering should be devoted to this subject if a 
curriculum does not include a course in human-computer interaction. 5. Installing and configuring e-commerce 
product is a  process that require skills in operating system, network- ing and database management 
system. All of the three are of equal importance. Most of the computer science curriculum include operating 
system and database man- agement systems, but networking is not required for all the students. In the 
era of Internet technologies, net- work will be a crucial part of any information system. S- tudents 
need to have clear concepts and solid knowledge base of networking in order to be able to work in the 
con- nected environment. Therefore, networking should be an indispensable part of computer science curriculum. 
If a separate course is not offered, at least a significant portion on operating system should cover 
networking. Moreover, more hands-on projects should be given to students for them to learn the practical 
aspects of op- erating system and networking. 6. Electronic commerce is enabling business on the In- 
ternet. Inevitably, the developers of the system must understand business in the real world. However, 
stu- dents majored in computer sciences may have the tech- nical inclination to start with. It may not 
be practical to require business courses for those students. How to balance the technical training and 
business skills still needs further study. In summary, main components of an electronic com- merce system 
are discussed and the development pro- cess of an e-commerce system is briefly summarized. By examining 
the standard computer science curriculum, we conclude that some of the materials that are crucial in 
developing an electronic commerce system are still not required and some of the computer science cours- 
es Still lack hands-on and up-to-date components. To meet the challenge of the e-commerce era, our comput- 
er science curriculum needs to evolve and to change its content and delivery methods.  References [1] 
Tucker, A. B., et al, Computing curricula 1991: Re- port of the ACM/IEEE-CS joint curriculum task force, 
New York: Association for Computing Machinery. [2] Shaw, N.G., Foundations of Electronic Commerce: Computer 
Science at Work, Crossroads, The ACM Stu- dent Magazine, Fall 1997-Issue 4.1. [3] IBM Global Services, 
IBM Net.Commerce Version 3 Implementation, IBM Education and Training World- wide Certified Material. 
 
			