
 E-Commerce Workforce Development Strategies: A Dialogue with Industry Panel Session SuzyChan, Panel 
Chair Information Systems Division and Institute for E-Commerce School of Computer Science, Telecommunications, 
and Information Systems DePaul University 243 South Wabash Avenue, Chicago, IL 60604 Tel: 312.362.8723 
schan@cs.depaul.edu 1. OVERVIEW This panel provides a unique exchange of e-commerce workforce development 
strategies and models among industry and academic participants. The moderated dialogue will center on 
five topics: a) the issue of e-commerce ownership within organizations, b) the unique relationship among 
strategy, development methodology, and project management within an e-commerce environment, c) the composition 
of e-commerce development teams, d) workforce development strategies for e-commerce, and e) projected 
demand for specific skill sets, tools, and technologies. The rich experiences and organizational models 
presented by this panel will illuminate issues and strategies facing both Internet-based organizations 
and traditional organizations moving into e- commerce. The panelists represent a diverse range of industries 
and experiences, including professional service firms, a leading futures exchange organization, and an 
innovative graduate degree program in e-commerce. The three professional service firms on the panel include 
a full service firm specializing in Internet-based solutions (USWeb/CKS), a leading IT and management 
consulting firm with a strong focus on e-business strategies (Andersen Consulting), and an IT consulting 
firm specialized in technology and integration solutions that is moving toward a focus on e-business 
(Whittman-Hart). The panelists' experiences in the e-commerce market space are different, and their approaches 
to workforce development also vary. For example, USWeb/CKS has taken an aggressive acquisition and consolidation 
approach to become a leading full-service provider for lnternet solutions. This enabled them to integrate 
strategy, marketing, branding, design, communications, usability, content development, software engineering, 
and data mining. They employed extensive skill mapping and team building among 35 units in order to provide 
integrated support for clients. Their experience provides insights into both internal workforce development 
and how professional service firms can augment client resources in knowledge transfer and workforce development. 
Whittman-Hart, with strong experience in technology services and systems integration, is entering the 
e-commerce market via the support of the Whittrnan-Hart Institute of Strategic Education. In contrast 
to the professional service firms, the issues and strategies of the Chicago Board of Trade magnify those 
experienced by many corporations in deploying intranets, public and proprietary web sites. The CBOT experience 
is particularly enlightening because of the information-intensive and technology- dependent nature of 
their business. The panel will also examine how DePaul University's School of Computer Science, Telecommunications 
and Information Systems responded to industry needs through its innovative M.S. program in E-Commerce 
Technology. The DePaul program is notable as the first program that places equal emphasis upon both e-commerce 
business models and the underlying technological skills needed to implement them. By assessing the program's 
applicability to business needs, the panel will also be providing guidance for other universities seeking 
to expand their e-commerce offerings. 2. OUTLINE OF TOPICS This panel will address five topics: 1. Ownership 
of E-Commerce Which area or department holds primary responsibility for an organization's e-commerce 
strategies and solutions? How does the ambiguity in ownership affect solution development? What roles 
do traditional IS departments play in e-commerce projects? What are the emerging organizational models 
that support e- commerce development? What are the tensions, challenges, and advantages presented by 
these models? 100  2. Relationship among e-commerce strategy development, methodology, and solution 
development How does the relationship among strategy, project management, and solution development methodologies 
differ for e-commerce? How does the relationship differ for B2C, B2B, and Intranet development? What 
are the implications of these relationships and differences for workforce planning and development? 
 3. E-Commerce Development Teams What is the required mix of skills, background, talents, and knowledge 
for an ideal web commerce team? How do these skills and talents differ with B2C or B2B e- commerce? 
What are common deficiencies and obstacles? What can professional service firms provide to support their 
 clients' e-commerce teams? What are the emerging new career models in the e-commerce market space? 
 4. Workforce Development Strategies What organization models are available for systematic development 
of an e-commerce workforce? What role should universities play in the development of such a workforce? 
How might industry and universities form partnerships to support e-commerce workforce development? How 
could skill development and human resource strategies be integrated?  5. Specific Skill Sets What specific 
technical skills are required of e-commerce designers and developers? What tools and technologies are 
in demand now? What are future projections? What non-technical skills are required? Which areas have 
the most serious shortage of supply? How should academic programs and courses address these issues? 
  Description of Participating Organizations USWeb/CKS is an Internet professional services firm that 
works with companies to define strategies and implement innovative ways to build their business by combining 
the expertise of strategy, Internet technology and marketing communications. This firm created the measure 
of "Time-to-value" as a new standard for E-Success in the digital economy, for realizing value from a 
business initiative, whether the value is expanded sales, efficient supply chain management or productive 
employees. Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is the world's oldest and largest futures exchange. CBOT is 
in the planning and development phase of its business-to-business e-commerce strategy, designed to facilitate 
order delivery between the Exchange and its Futures Commission Merchant brokerage firms. It is representative 
of the myriad of traditional institutions that are making the transition to the world of e-commerce. 
For the Board of Trade, the challenges that such traditional organizations face are magnified by the 
information-intensive nature of its business, and the technology- dependent structure of its industry. 
Whittman-Hart is a leading Information Technology consulting firm, focused on the middle market. As a 
full service consulting organization in over 20 cities around the world, e-Business solutions have become 
a key factor in its marketing strategy. The Whittman-Hart Institute of Strategic Education (WHISE) is 
the company's Corporate University that manages the development of the firm's resource skills. By leveraging 
marketplace demand analysis, continuous skill assessment and web-accessible distance learning opportunities, 
WHISE is able to deploy Just-in-Time education to prepare Whittman-Hart's consultants to meet demands 
for expertise in a broad range of rapidly shifting web technologies. Andersen Consulting, as a world 
leader in IT and management consulting, believes the convergence of computing, communication and content 
technologies has spawned a new electronic economy with an entirely new set of rules, opportunities, threats 
and challenges. No longer are interaction and collaboration costs high. No longer do physical assets 
play the central role in value propositions. No longer does size ultimately limit returns. No longer 
is access to information restricted and expensive for organizations, their customers and trading partners. 
No longer does it take several years and deep pockets to build a business with global presence. The School 
of Computer Science, Telecommunications, and Information Systems (CTI) at DePaul University started an 
innovative M.S. in E-Commerce Technology program in September, 1999. This program emphasizes integration 
of e-commerce business models, development methodology, tools and technologies. Students have opportunities 
to develop hands-on experience and in-depth knowledge in the full spectrum of e- commerce development, 
ranging from strategy formulation, marketing, branding, web engineering, usability, design, content management, 
distributed architecture, telecommunications, database integration, and project management. 101   
			