
 ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS IN DATA CENTER SECURITY By Robert J. Wilk, P.E. Grumman Data 
Systems Corporation Bethpage, New York This paper presents an overview of some of the tech- nical and 
managerial aspects of protecting the personnel, data processing systems and computer facility from delib- 
erate or accidental damage by internal or external forces. With regard to site planning, the environmental 
com- patibility between the computer system, its data communi-I cation and electric energy systems must 
be established. Electro-magnetic spectrum area profiles are utilized to detect high energy transmitters 
which could necessitate shielding of the facility and filtering of all incoming wire lines. The effects 
of magnetic fields on magnetic storage media is also discussed. The unique requirements of real-time, 
on-line sys- tems, i.e. airline reservation, satellite tracking, require special solutions related to 
uniterruptable power systems (UPS). In this context this paper will also examine the management decisions 
which must be made regarding the cost effectiveness of a "fail safe" vs "fail soft" system. Data security 
is examined in light of the time- value relationship of information applied to program- ming changes, 
data transmission to remote terminals, available software and hardward cryptography systems. The application 
of various electro mechanical devices and computing systems for use in area control situations is examined. 
Additionally, the relatively new use of voice, hand and fingerprints for access control is surveyed. 
The use of closed circuit television and its effect on personnel management will also be consid- ered. 
Low light level techniques and time-lapse video tape recording sub systems applied to unmanned surveil- 
lance of critical areas or processes is discussed. SUMMARY The increasing use of computers by commercial, 
government and law enforcement organizations has resulted in large concen- trations of data and assets 
in a system which has become the favorite target of dissident groups. As the computing systems are designed 
for greater data capacities and higher speeds, they also demand operating environments which support 
these operating mades. This paper examines some of the management considerations which impact the integrity 
of the information processed in the data center. INTRODUCTION The subject of Computer Security and 
Data Privacy began to receive attention in the United States in 1965, with the greatest awakening raised 
in 1967 at the Spring Joint Computer Conference sponsored by the American Federation of Information 
Processing Societies (I). It was here that many papers were presented which focused on a variety of 
security vulnerabilities within computer systems. During the years that followed, organi- zations increased 
their reliance and invest- ment in data processing equipment to the point where it represented the most 
concen- trated area of assets and in far too many cases a most vulnerable area. Paralleling this rapid 
growth in the United States was the evolution of radical militant groups whose dissatisfaction with the 
political and social system was further aggravated by the Viet Nam war issues. Anti- war demonstrators 
and other militant groups rapidly became aware of the tremendous damage which could be inflicted on an 
organi- zation with a few well placed incendiary or explosive devices. The height of this activity was 
felt during 1970 when, for example, the U. S. Army Mathematics Research Center at the University of Wisconsin 
was bombed, resulting in the death of a research employee and the destruction of a 1.5 million dollar 
computer system complex with between 5 and 6 million dollars damage to the facility. Data which had been 
collected over a 20 year period and represented 1.3 million man hours of effort was also irre- trievably 
lost (2). Unfortunately, there were and continue to be further examples of this type which underscore 
the vulnerabilities of computer systems to a variety of threats. The concept of Operational Data Security 
has evolved through the practical necessity of providing the required amount of security to the data 
centers commensurate with the risks involved and minimizing the effects of applied security measures 
to computer operations efficiency. To achieve these objectives, those charged with the responsibility 
for Technical Security within an organization must have viable working relationships with all per- sonnel 
involved and a good working knowledge of the facility, the computer systems, its supporting environment, 
the surrounding community and the formal and informal organi- zational structure. Additionally, the 
manner in which jobs are processed and the interaction and dependence of various groups and functions 
must be clearly understood. Without this, the proper application of security technology to problem areas 
cannot be achieved. Changes in hardware configuration and systems applications could render the equip- 
ment more or less susceptible to misoperation and result in further expenditures or savings. In this 
context, the Technical Security Director wears several hats. He must be responsive to problems of an 
engineering, management, computer operations and indus- trial security nature. His ability to shift inter-disciplinary 
gears smoothly and influence the decision making process of his organization will be reflected in the 
ultimate success or failure of the Data Security Program within that organization. I have arbitrarily 
defined six major areas of concern regarding Operational Data Security: Personnel; Facilities; Computer 
Hardware; Computer Software; Communications and Procedures. Each of these should represent an area of 
concern for those charged with the responsibility of protecting the organization against the deliberate 
or accidental dis- closure, modification or destruction of data and maintaining the integrity of the 
data processing function. For the purpose of this paper we will focus on the engineering management 
aspects of these areas of concern. Security and operations efficiency are not generally complimentary. 
To be sure, there are certain security measures, such as limiting access to operations areas which will 
enable the personnel in those areas to perform their functions without interruption and thereby enhance 
their efficiency. However, there is a point, within each organization, where a further increase in security 
will result in a decrease in operational efficiency. A trivial example is to provide software security 
to a program through key or password protection known only to the user. This type of protection can limit 
the user (theoretically) to read, write, append, execute or destroy a file, depending upon his level 
of access authorization. However, to provide this file security requires core storage for the various 
keys and sub-routines as well as resource time to check passwords called from the operating system by 
the application program. Two separate cross-correlation studies on large major time-sharing computing 
systems have verified that a high degree of security was effected while keeping resource expendi- tures 
for security below 5% of the total system cost and degrading the operational efficiency by less than 
3%. Security in the absolute sense is neither desirable nor practical. Certainly there are situations 
requiring a higher level of security than others. As organizations extend their use of data processing 
systems and manufacturers move from one generation of computer to the next, we become increasingly aware 
of the gradual disappearance of manual back up systems and total dependence upon the computer operations 
function.  Higher operating efficiencies are demanded of personnel and machines in order to reduce costs 
and achieve organizational objectives. The tolerance for errors and interruption, either intentional 
or accidental, is inversely proportional to the organizations dependence upon the system. Risk/value 
and profit/loss considerations must be carefully weighed by those responsible for Data Security.  What 
value do you place on the data being protected? Of what value is it to your competitor? How much should 
you spend to protect it? ~hat is its time/value? Have you considered all your vulnerabilities? ~hat is 
the probability of their occurrence? What is the measurable effect on system perform~Ice? [~ben have 
you last tested your security system? These are some of the questions which require answers in order 
to formulate an operational data security system. Many large corporations are engaged in activities 
as suppliers to the government, thereby, making them prime targets for dissident militant groups. The 
sophisticated thief has discovered profitable methods of successfully infiltrating the computer systems 
of banks, brokerage firms, credit card houses, etc. Finally, government and law enforce- ment agencies 
are increasing their use of computers for criminal identification and in the solution of complex cases 
with a great savings in time and manpower (3).  The goal of the militant bomber or thief working against 
these organizations is to: 1 . Disable an organization by curtailin~ its ability to function through 
the destruc- tion of its Computer Center and Data Files.  2. Disrupt a critical process i.e. space 
vehicle re-entry and retrieval procedure. Other on-line, real-time systems also have a low tolerance 
for even small interruptions. 3. Obtain, alter or destroy information resident in the computing system 
by any means available for personal gain. Data security personnel must employ cost effective techniques 
which will deter, detect, prevent or limit damage and enable recovery to the point of disruption, with 
a minimum of impact on the organization or its function. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPATIBILITY Computers are 
capable of performing a great deal of high speed calculations but they demand a highly reliable operating 
environment. The environment we shall examine will contain the Computing Center Facility, remote time- 
sharing terminals and their communication links. This configuration offers more vulnerabilities than 
the simpler batch operating system. (Figure 1) In addition to the many important design considerations 
regarding the computer systems requirements for proper temperature, hmnidity, cooling water and fire 
detection and control systems, we must also consider the susceptibility of computer hardware to electro-magnetic 
 interference. Electric Field Problems ~hen we speak of electro-magnetics in a computer environment, 
we will usually be refering to either of two separate and distinct problems. For the time being, we will 
concentrate on one of these problems. That is, the sensitivity or the susceptibility to failure of computer 
hardware to externally generated electro-magnetic fields. The ot]~er problem which we will address is 
the security of electro- magnetically radiated signals containing information pulses which can be useful 
to someone who will take the trouble to obtain it. Now what computer hardware are we con~:erned about? 
We are concerned about the central processing units and the control units within the system. And in addition 
to the hardware directly associ- ated with the computer, we will also discuss the effects of electro-magnetic 
5n+erference on magnetic tapes, disks and other storage media, which utilize ma{fnetic phenomena to store 
data. It is a physical fact that all electronic and electrical equipment emit and are susceptible to 
various levels of radiated and conducted electro-magnetic energy. Further, as the computer manu- facturers 
go to designing faster systems which will accomplish many more tasks in a shorter period of time through 
the use of large scale intergrated circuits and micro electronics, two things pertinent to this discussion 
occur: First: The computing equipment becomes more sensitive to its electro-magnetic environment. Second: 
The circuits energy, which problem area. emit less aids us EMI in another Now which portions of the 
computer are we speaking of: We are speaking of the clock circuits which have to do with timing and pulse 
train energy. What are the levels of susceptibility? It is very difficult to obtain this type of informa- 
tion. Many manufacturers will not say what the levels are, for competitive reasons. One large manufacturer 
has stated that his system will operate with no problem in ambient fields of less than I volt per meter. 
In fields of I to 5 volts per meter his operation will be marginal and in ambient fields above 5 volts 
per meter trouble could be definitely expected. Which circuits are susceptible to electro-ma&#38;~etic 
interference within the computers and to what degree, will vary between manufacturers. Low level circuits 
of the computer, whose normal input is within the range of 50 milli-volts to 2 volts peak to peak do 
malfunction when subjected to moderate field intensity. Sense amplifiers of the memory element malfunction 
at a field intensity in the region of 15 volts per meter; the tuning oscillator of the output section 
will malfunction near 40 volts per meter peak. Data conversion receivers of the input section malfunction 
at 50 volts per meter peak. The flux amplifier of the output section fails at 100 volts per meter. A 
few other circuits are even more susceptible, however, they represent a comparatively small number of 
the total computer circuits. Generally, when susceptible circuits are subjected to radiation near the 
low end of the 450 to 3,000 megahertz frequency band, they are more susceptible than when subjected to 
the higher frequencies in this band. Now how does this compare with the real world situation? As an 
example, a large oil company recently located its data center on the 60th floor of one of the office 
buildings in a major United States city. They were plagued with a tremendous amount of operating errors. 
 A consultant was called in who, fortunately, was aware of this type of problem. The ambient field was 
measured within the computing romm and found to be in excess of 1,000 volts per meter. When an electro- 
magnetic spectrum analysis was performed in the area, several high energy sources were located in the 
immediate vicinity. There were three radio station towers operating in the A.M./F.M. band, two micro-wave 
repeater stations, and a high energy transmitter used for radio telephone paging purposes. Having identified 
the problem a solid shielded room was built to house the computer system, all power and signal lines 
were filtered and air conditioning ducts and other penetrations treated. Naval shipyards and commercial 
air- ports are other areas where significant high energy systems are employed in the forms of IFF and 
Long Range Radar systems. Consider another practical example discovered at one of the International 
Airports in the United States. A computer center was located 2 kilometers from the Long Range Radar 
antenna (Figure 2) havinE a power gain of 2,5000 (34db). The peak transmitter power was 3 megawatts. 
 Calculating the electric field intensity in volts/meter at point "C" E =~30 Pt G (1) R i~here: E = 
Field intensity in volts/ meter Pt= Peak transmitter power in watts G = Power gain of the antenna R = 
Distance in meters Substituting and solving for E: E = (~0 X ~ X 10 6 X 2.500) ½ (2)2000 E = 237 volts/meter 
(Peak) The maximum field intensity at point "C" can be twice the above cal- culated value because of 
the surface reflections adding in phase with the direct ray. Therefore, the maximum field intensity at 
point "C" is Ema x = 474 volts/meter (peak). Thus, the radar can produce a field which is: 20 lOglo 
[Lt ] = 54 db (3)  U.OJ The importance of performing an electro-magnetic profile survey of the proposed 
computer location cannot be overemphasized. Its use becomes further apparent in other technical security 
areas such as the location of clandestimc trans- mitters and integrity monitoring of our own secure computer 
systems. If you are committed to a partic- ular location for your computer center, then there are many 
things you carl do to protect it against high intensity fields, such as shielding and filteriuc. If you 
are building a new installation, it is obviously more desirable to perform an electro-magnetic area 
survey prior to the initial construction and include shieldin{~ and filterizJg, if required. Malqnetic 
Field Problems Thus far, we ]Lave been addressing ourselves to the electric field problem. With re{?ard 
to information recorded on magnetic media such as tape, disk, drums and so on, let us discuss that briefly 
and allay some of the fears and false notions which have occurred over the years. There will be no electro-maunetic 
degradation of data on any of these storage media from X-ray equipment or from radar sources. These sources 
can cause damage from heating effects if the media are brought in close proximity to the direct beam 
produced by these equipments. What we are concerned with here are degradation of data from magnetic fields 
produced by electro-magnets or permanent ma#nets. Magnetic fields produced by AC operated equipment, 
such as floor waxers, electric motors, televisions and so on, are of no danger to a magnetic tape if 
those appliances are in proper operating order. In this context, periodic checks should be made on all 
the equipment brought into the Data Center for the purpose of maintaining the area to be sure that the 
integrity of the shielding material used on those equipments are still in good order. A gaussmeter properly 
utilized does an effective job in this respect. IIowever, a more disruptive effect can be gotten from 
the electric field as the floor waxer or buffer is turned on, from the tremendous amount of electrical 
noise generated in the area. This should be of equal concern, as well as the possibility of magnetic 
leakage. One important consideration when  discussing magnetic tapes is the higher than the potential 
susceptibility coereivity of the tape. Its property level of the computer. is measured in units called 
the 0ersted. The coercivity is the ability of the tape to retain a magnetically recorded signal. The 
coercivity of typical magnetic computer tapes ranges from 250 to 300 0ersted. For instance, a tape with 
a coercivity of 250 0ersted will be erased by a magnetic field with a magnitude of 800 0ersted. Now, 
if a magnet presented a field of 100 0ersted to the same tape, the signal would not be erased, however, 
noise would be introduced into the background. At this point consider the length of time the magnet is 
kept in contact with the tape. As far as erasing the signal goes, it will have no effect, no matter if 
the magnet is held there for one minute or one week. However, it will have an increasing effect on the 
noise in the background. This is only a consideration in analog or accoustical type tapes and not in 
digital systems which we are primarily concerned with. Another important consideration is the recording 
level which the manufacturers designed their equipment for. Various manufacturers design their equipment 
to record their signal levels at different field strenghts. This is something to consider from the point 
of view of de-gaussing your sensitive or proprietary tapes prior to reusing them for non-sensitive jobs. 
Typical commercial de-gaussing equipments will usually develop magnetic fields which are a minimum of 
5 times as great as the coercivity of the tape. Disks may be de-gaussed by placing a thin (2 mil) i,lastic 
sheet over the disk and moving a 1500 0ersted magnet over and in direct contact with the surface of the 
plastic covered disk. Now how serious is the threat from permanent magnets? Can a visitor or workman 
walk through a computing center several feet away from the magnetic media carrying a concealed magnet 
and inflict any damage? Definitely not! Not from several feet away. Distance is our greatest protection 
in these matters. The streugth of a slowly varying (alternating current) magnetic field decreases inversely 
with the distance cubed in the same manner as the steady field produced by a permanent magnet or direct 
current electromagnet. That is:  i~ (4) IId = -/2 d 3 The field strength measured at a distance d is 
equal to the maximum value, lip, measured on the axis between its pole faces, divided by the distance 
cubed. For example, the field strength measured on the direct axis between the pole faces of a horseshoe 
magnet is lip = 800 0ersteds; at a distance of 2 inches (51 mm) from the magnet the field strength 
dropped to 100 0ersteds (8,000 Amperes/meter). At a distance of 4 inches (102 nun) it dropped to 12 
0ersteds (960 A/M). In one test a 1,400 0ersted magnet was held against the outer flange of a 2,400 
foot reel of magnetically recorded computer tape. A plastic tape seal wrapi~ed around the reel edge was 
the only protection afforded. The tape was read before and after the test and it was found that the first 
800 feet (33%) was unreadable. Protection during shipment of tapes can be afforded through the use of 
mn-metal and styro- foam chests which will adequately protect the tapes from stray magnetic fields. 
 The amplitude of a recorded digital signal will begin to be affected at a field strength of 50 0ersted 
and the computer will not recognize bit patterns on a tape exposed to a field of 700 0ersted at its surface. 
The key point here is to recognize the threat to data integrity from magnetic sources and protect against 
them. Con~ercially available magnet detectors are sold which can detect maz~ets carried by personnel. 
These are useful if properly applied. One should not overlook other magnetic sources which find their 
way legitimately into the computer room. A Gaussmeter was used to read the field intensity on a disk 
drive con- taining a substantial permanent magnet. The field intensity was measured as 750 Gauss utilizing 
a Hall-effect probe. The cabinet was easily opened without benefit of interlock. This piece of equipment 
is an integral part of the computing system of one manufacturer. Undoubtably, there are other manufacturers 
with potentially hazardous equipments, from a data security standpoint. A digital tape was read on the 
computer, deliberately exposed to this field and re-read without success. Despite the best efforts of 
the computer operator, the machine merely responded with "data check" and "input tape error" messages. 
 The significance of this is that one must also protect against what is not obvious and become familiar 
with the various internal hardware threats and vulnerabilities of the computer system and work with the 
manufacturers to correct any deficiencies.  Grounding System One of the most frequently over- looked 
areas in protecting the integrity of the computer is a properly designed ground system. Variations in 
soil composition and moisture content as well as the layout pattern chosen for the particular grounding 
system will determine its final effectiveness. Most computer manufacturers have definite requirements 
for grounding their equipment, whether it be analog, digital or specialized instrumentation. Shield rooms, 
filters and electric power distribution equipment all require effective grounding and many countries 
have specific codes governing recom- mended grounding practices. (4,5,6) The type of system utilized, 
i.e. buried wire grid, single or multiple driven rods, star burst pattern etc. or simply connecting to 
the building structural steel, will be determined by your situation and requirements. A good ground 
system will also enhance the protection afforded against lightning strokes. Stroke currents in excess 
of 200,000 amperes have been recorded and must be guided harmlessly to ground. In this context, magnetic 
storage should be stored away from structural steel members of the building to prevent damage from the 
magnetic field introduced by the stroke current. Electric Power Systems The ability of the incoming 
facility power supply to support a real-time, on-line computer system must b e o f prime concern to achieve 
reliable~ secure computer operation. When the computer system does not receive the in-spec power which 
it requires, one possible solution to protect this large capital investment is the installation of an 
uninterrupt- able power system (UPS). Generally speaking, all power disturbances can be placed into 
three categories: 1. Transients which are dissipated within one half cycle.  2. Interruptions which 
are dissi- pated within 30 cycles.  3. Outages which are dissipated after 30 cycles. (0.5 second)  
 The UPS systems commonly employed to protect or buffer the critical load from out of spec excursions 
in voltage and frequency fall into three categories: rotating systems, static systems and hybrid systems. 
 Why is UPS needed and where is it applicable? Some of the factors that must be considered are: What 
has been your operating experience to date? Have you had complaints from the EDP users within your organization? 
Have your systems controls been ade- quately handled? Have you had problems in data logging and load 
handling? What type of electrical disturbance is most prevelant in your particular location? Do you suffer 
most from transient interruptions, longer term interruptions or complete outages? What kind of records 
do you have readily available to substantiate the arguments for an UPS system? Another important point 
is whether the disturbances are generated internally or externally. Is it a function of someone using 
a passenger elevator in the building, a control system in the building, someone throwing on a large motor 
load or is it, indeed, an external disturbance? Now there are reasonably priced, highly sensitive instrumentation 
which have recently become available. These can continuously monitor the computer power bus and record 
out of spec disturbances. A strip chart recording can provide valuable docu- mentation of interruptions 
for you. In addition to this, an alarm is sounded to enable operator interven- tion. The operator can 
annotate the documentation that he has gotten from the recorder as to the time of occur- rence and the 
circumstances; aside from this and possibly more important, he can flag the output of the computer and 
have it checked at a later time by the users or the progr ammer for errors. flow is UPS justified? Simply 
stated it is based on what your par- ticular system can economically tolerate. Certainly those with on- 
line, real-time systems have a more severe power requirement than batch processing operations that can 
be repeated if necessary. In a multi system configuration, the ability to break out your on-line, real-time 
systems and supply them from your essential bus, while your batch processors are supplied from your 
non- essential bus, can effect substantial savings in UPS. Each computer system has a determinable 
cost associated with it based o11 lease or purchase cost, overhead and availability. Once the problem 
area has been identified through the use of moni- toring devices and procedures, it will enable the 
data proeessinj manager to present substantiated arguments to top management for their decision.  A 
great deal of engineering study goes into defining the requirements and specifications for an UPS system. 
Factors such as load diversity, load frequency requirements (50, 60 or 400 hz), equipment mean time between 
failure (~BF) and mean time to replace parts (MTTR), installation and cost data, to mention a few. Certain 
non-critical on-line, real-time systems and some critical batch processing systems utilize a "fail-soft" 
approach to enhance their computer systems security. Figure 3 shows a complete UPS system. The solid 
line portion represents a "fail-soft" system and will protect the computers security systems and other 
critical loads from voltage transients and interruptions for as long as the batteries can carry the load. 
 ~hen the computer operator is notified of a utility system failure, which appears to be long term, 
he initiates procedures to stop execution of programs at logical points, store all data and shut down 
in an orderly manner. This is much more desirable than system "crashes" which are expensive and in some 
cases detrimental to the systems hardware. The system shown, is a solid state one, modular in construction, 
relatively simple to install and more efficient than a rotating UPS system. The in- coming feeder from 
the local power utility passes through an incoming circuit breaker CB-I, then to the Rectifier/Charger 
section of the system keeping the battery under constant charge and supplying regulated DC power to the 
Inverter section. Upon failure of the incoming utility supply, the battery maintains 390 V.D.C. on the 
incoming supply to the Inverter. The Inverter unit converts the DC power to precise, regulated and filtered, 
3-phase, AC power at the required frequencies of the critical loads. This power is supplied through circuit 
breaker CB-2. Circuit breaker CB-3 is the UPS system bypass breaker which allows utility power to be 
fed directly to the critical loads should the UPS system require service. Because of the modular construc- 
tion of static UPS systems, it is relatively easy to add power modules to accommodate load growth. To 
move from a "fail-soft" to a "fail-safe" system only requires the addition of back-up gas-turbine generator 
sets. I prefer these over diesel units because of their design simplicity, quick starting ability, ease 
of maintenance, smaller size and weight and adaptability to various installation locations. The system 
diagram shows gas- turbine generator (GT-I) supporting the facility air conditioning requirements while 
GT-2 supports the critical loads. GT-3 is added when required for future load growth. This is the type 
of system utilized by many critical on-line, real-time systems which cannot tolerate any interruption. 
Examples of these are: airline reservation, satellite tracking, communications, law enforce- ment, banking, 
investment brokerage and critical manufacturing process computing systems. The system design philosophy 
is straight-forward. For transient and short term power interruptions the battery-inverter sub-system 
sustains the load. Should the interruption last more than 30 seconds, GT-2 is brought on line to supply 
the critical loads. After 5 minutes GT-I is brought on line to power the compressors and building air-conditioning 
load. Obviously, if greater reliability and flexibility are demanded, additional l'edundant gas-turbine 
generators and static UPS power modules can be added to increase the mean-time between- failure rate 
(MTBF) of the system. The cost of a typical non-redun- dant 800 KVA, 120/208 volt, 60 hz static UPS 
system is about $550,000. ~hile the gas-turbine generators rated at I,O00 KVA, 800 KW, 480 Volt, 60 hz 
cost about $150,000 each. Cost/value tradeoffs are extremely significant wnen contemplating an UPS installation. 
 PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROLS ~le data center, its communica- tions links and the remote terminals are vulnerable 
to a great variety of accidental and deliberate intrusions. IIowever, through the proper engineering 
evaluation and application of security devices and sub-systems these threats can be minimized. Space 
age technology and the Southeast Asian wars contributed significantly to the development of many of these 
sub-systems which have been de-classified for commercial and industrial security use. The application 
of infra-red, modulated light beam, laser, micro- wave, radar and ultrasonic devices for use in perimeter 
and area control is not unique to a data processing center or a remote job entry station.  However, 
the technical considerations of each sub-system must be well under- stood regarding its own vulnerabilities 
to air currents, phase shift, tempera- ture extremes, electro-magnetic jamming, etc. Each of these sub- 
systems has strengths and vulnera- bilities which must be evaluated from a probability of failure and 
misoper- ation standpoint. Image intensifiers,low light level television and time lapse video tape recorders 
have found numerous applications in unmanned outdoor surveillance applications and the protection of 
night shift personnel in company parking lots. The use of closed circuit tele- vision coupled with other 
communica- tions and control sub-systems has achieved substantial savings in multi- access control of 
personnel and material throughout the computer complex. Mini-computers have been intro- duced, (5) designed 
specifically for programmed access control. These systems will admit or lock out personnel from pre-determined 
areas at pre- selected times based upon their author- ization level. A print out and alarm occurs at 
the Security Office console should an attempt be made to subvert the system. Each controlled area has 
a card reader installed at the protected entry or terminal. Individual access is achieved through the 
use of magnet- ically encoded identification cards which are unique for each person. A lost or stolen 
card is invalidated in the system, when discovered, and a new one issued via the Security Office. Other 
functions, such as time and attendance keeping, environmental monitoring and control, etc. can also be 
programmed into the system to effect savings in personnel. The use of coded cards, keys, combinations 
and passwords for access to protected areas has long been in effect. They are subject to many human induced 
failings, such as theft, transferrence, loss, duplication, etc. The search for an operational, non-transferrable, 
cost-effective access system is still in the evolutionary stage. Systems are being marketed which utilize 
hand geometry, finger- print and voiceprint verification with high reliability. Here again, their application 
must be well defined and consideration given to items such as population and vocabulary size, reliability 
and repeatability, system recognition time, resources utilized, etc. DATA SECURITY The problem of electro-magnetic 
 interference is a dual one. Not only are we concerned with the suscepti- bility of our computer systems 
to electro-magnetic fields within our immediate operating environment, but in many cases we are also 
concerned with the emission and interception of information bearing signals by persons desiring this 
data. Within the Department of Defense this type of problem is referred to as a TEMPEST problem and 
is dealt with where ever the need justifies taking preventive measures, hqlat are some of the things 
 that we should be concerned with and what are some of the hazards which we can identify? Our three 
main areas of concern are the: 1. Computer Systems Center  2. Conm*unications Links  3. Remote Terminals 
  In each of these areas, we must consider: a. the value to you of the data you are trying to protect 
and  b. its value to your advesary.  If it is worth more to him than you, consider selling it. If 
you choose to protect it, do so according to its value. Computer Systems Center Sensitive information 
can be processed in the computer center either on a dedicated computer with a single job stream, whose 
working storage and core areas are purged after the job has run. Or a multi- processing computer can 
be utilized, through the proper application of software protection features which provide program limit 
checks, read/ write protection, seek verification and memory bounds protection. The dedicated system 
lacks the efficiency of the shared system but this must be traded off against the security desired. 
For a high security system, the o f a shielded room to house the secure computer coupled with the proper 
power and co~nunication line filters and integral air conditioning units must be considered. IIowever, 
in a multi-computer complex, a great deal of benefit can  be derived fr~m the masking effect provided 
by the information and con- trol signals being processed by the neighboring computers. Indeed, only 
 a thorough survey utilizing sensitive signal correlation and measurement techniques will determine 
the extent of the computer center vulnerabilities to clandestine pickup. Some areas of concern within 
the data center are the underfloor plenum areas which house the power, communi- cations and control cables. 
The telephone connection frame rooms are also vulnerable. Data line switching units of a time sharing 
computer are also subject to hard wire taps. These taps through the use of spare cable pairs can be run 
back to a remote area where suitable equipment can retrieve the wanted data. The sophisticated thief 
can rent or purchase the equipment required to wiretap data lines; such as data sets, teletypes, video 
terminals, etc. Keep in mind, however, that as the distance increases between the infor- mation bearing 
signal source and receiver, the cost to the thief to receive the signal increases sharply. From that 
point of view, physical access controls can do much to enhance the security of the data center. In addition, 
the spurious signals gen- erated by keypunch, electric accounting machinery, card readers, electric typewriters, 
line printers and com- puting systems all provide a degree of signal masking difficulty in retrieving 
the desired signals by clandestine methods. The Communications Link As our data moves en route to 
the remote terminal, it is transmitted via cable and/or micro-wave paths through public switched networks 
and exchanges. It is vulnerable to accidental or deliberate loss or modification at many points along 
the way.  Because of enviromnental factors, microwave systems are designed with a "fade margin" which 
allows for degradation of received power. How- ever, the same loss of signal strength ~s detected if 
an intruding antenna 5s placed in the microwave transmission path. Other vulnerabilities exist at the 
unmanned microwave repeater stations along the circuit. Obtaining the correct data is not without problems, 
as there are more than 1,800 voice grade channels per circuit. Which channel contains the data? Some 
secure systems employ synchronous transmission over alter- nate channels. Others introduce a pseudo-random 
bit stream which is then removed at the receiver to prevent energy concentrations from occurring at 
one portion of the bandwidth and enhance the transmitters efficiency. Various situations may warrant 
the use of intrusion resistant cables which can detect attempts to penetrate their protective shields. 
These are generally limited to use over short distances. Teleprocessing of computer data increases the 
demand for more efficient usuage of our data communications links. To achieve this efficiency, time and 
frequency division multiplexing devices, as well as hold-and-forward concen- trators are being used increasingly. 
This is of significance to those responsible for data security when considering the application of en- 
cryption devices which offer a high degree of security to sensitive data and voice communications. It 
is recommended that a careful analysis be made regarding the time-value of the data being protected, 
as well as the work factor required to break the encryption system. A high quality, on-line privacy system, 
suitable for full duplex data transmission presently costs about $8,000 and offers the user a choise 
of 32 X 1010 codes or keys, as shown in Figure 4. It is recommended that periodic electronic "sweeps" 
of sensitive conference areas and data/voice com- munications lines be performed utilizing techniques 
as described previously. Terminal Se curit} ~ Much of what has been previously stated regarding physical 
security at the computer center also applies at the remote terminal area. It may be located in a public 
office building, warehouse, airline terminal, etc. It must be secured in accordance with its function. 
 Two types of terminals are in common use. The former is an alpha- numeric display unit with keyboard 
and telephone coupler. The unit can be used in either half or full duplex mode.  The latter is a graphics 
inter- active display unit with keyboard and light pen attachment for modifying structural design data 
as displayed on the screen. Because of the repetitive nature of the video signal on the cathode ray 
tube, these devices are relatively poor security risks from a signal emanations standpoint unless special 
precautions are taken. The application of good shielding and filtering procedures will secure the sensitive 
data. Physical distance from possible clandestine receivers and signal masking are also useful in securing 
these terminals. Many time sharing and remote job entry terminals are equipped with auto-ignition key-type 
locks which preclude non-authorized personnel from attempting to gain access to the system. Other terminals 
make use of magnetically encoded card keys to allow terminal access to the computers. These are usually 
used in conjunction with the persons identity number or other password which the system soft- ware supports. 
 These are also vulnerable. People who cannot remember passwords write them down in all the obvious places, 
lest they forget where they wrote them. The cards and codes are trans- ferrable and again we must ultimately 
rely on the integrity of the personnel. There are, however, other vulner- abilities and safeguards which 
go beyond the scope of this paper. Soft- ware security via audit trails, file authorization techniques, 
vital records protection, purge programs, emergency and back-up facilities procedures all contribute 
to the total operational data security profile of an organiza- tion. CONCLUSIONS Operational data security 
can only be achieved through the proper evaluation of threats and ruiner- abilities to the system. The 
process is a dynamic one because of the design changes in computer hardware and the constraints imposed 
by the operating environment. There are three areas which still require a good deal of work: 1. Testing 
and listing of elec- trical and electronic security devices and sub-systems by an independent laboratory 
simulating actual operating conditions. The security performance of the devices would be rated on reliability, 
error free operation, etc. 2. Periodic testing and certif- ication of data processing systems by teams 
made up of government representatives. Testing would be on a volun- tary basis. Each organiza- tion would 
be rated as to its vulnerabilities to various threats.  3. A more active participation on the Graduate 
School level of Colleges and Universities to offer formal courses which can treat the subject of operational 
data security in the depth required for such a topic. In this context I am happy to report that the Management 
Department of the Polytechnic Institute of New York has seen fit to respond favorably to my request and 
the first Graduate level accredited course in Computer Security Management is being taught by me to students 
enrolled in the 51aster of Science program during the  Fall 1973 semester.  REFERENCES 1. American 
Federation of Information Processing Societies, Spring Joint Computer Conference Proceedings, Vol. 30, 
1967, Thompson Books, Washington, D. C., U.S.A.  2. Computerworld, Vol. 4, Number 35, September 2, 1970 
 3. New York Times, March 21, 1973  4. IEEE Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial 
Power Systems, IEEE  5. Grounding and Shielding Techniques in Instrumentation, R. Morrison,  J. Wiley 
and Sons, 1967  6. National Electric Code, National Fire Protection Association International~ Boston 
t Mass., U.S.A.  7. IBM System 7, Operators Guide Publication GA34-0007-0 IBM ~orld Trade Corp., New 
York, N. Y., U.S.A.  FIGURE CAPTIONS Figure I - Typical remote time sharing computer system. Figure 
2 - Radar source/victim configuration. Figure 3 - UPS electrical one line diagram. Figure 4 - Typical 
T/S computer with crypto units protecting the data link. REMOTE TERMINAL  [ I I I I ! i I I I i i CABLE 
AND/OR MICRON'AVE LINKS COMPUTER CENTER  Typical remote time sharing computer system. ~i~J~re I RADAR 
SITE  d G DIRECT RAY -  PT ~ " ECTED EMOTE RMINAL) POINT "C"  I--~--I, 1--11313  ~1-10 E313 13 
 Radar source/victim configuration. Fi6ure 2 21 FACILITY AIR CONDITIONING ELECTRIC POWER AUX. CRITICAL 
LOAD FEEDERS STATIC UPS i l P0~¢ER MODULE CB-I I I CB-2 INCOMING %/ RECTIFIER BATTERY CHARGER INVERTER 
[ 1 \ / v ELECTRIC PONER STORAGE SUPPLY BATTERY CELLS =====~ CB-3 UPS electrical one line diagram. Figure 
3 DEDICATED ~'ERMIN;;~ CRYPT0I DEVICE WIRE OR ~ RADIO CHANNEL MODEM CRY ~TO [ DEV ICE CENTRAL C 0~. b~X- 
PROCESSING CONTOLLER DESEX UNIT DATA FILES I[ Typical T/S computer with crypto units protecting the 
data link. Figure 4 22  
			