
 ESCAPING THE PARANOID-CRITICAL TRAP Michael W. Quiner User Services Consultant Integrated Technology 
Services Willamette University 900 State Street Salem, OR 97301 mquiner@willamette.edu Tel: 503.370.7694 
ABSTRACT During the 1996 SIGUCCS conference in Chicago, on afield trip to the Art Institute ofChicago 
we viewed a painting by Salvador Dali that the artist did in the Paranoid-Critical method. Asfar asfine 
art goes, we had no idea what the artist meant by that term. Yet the term struck a chord with us when 
we reflected on the many stories we had heard (and thefew experiences shared) over the course ofSIGUCCS. 
It seemed that the term Paranoid-Critical was a perfect description for artunderlying problem plaguing 
many Technical Support teamsin their relationships with upper administration, other departments, technology 
users and even other team members. Support staff burnout, dissatisfaction and dysfunction, accelerated 
turnover, ofice politicking. Paranoid-Critical methods of interactions, both ofindividuals and teamscan 
be one factor(although certainly not the onlyfactor)in producing and maintaining these undesirable conditions. 
The paper willanswer thefollowing questions : . What is the Paranoid-Critical method? Does it exist 
in our organization? Whatare some examples? . How did we get into the Paranoid-Critical trap? Why is 
it so prevalent in Technical Support functions? What effect does it have on our organization?  . How 
do we avoid Paranoid- Critical relationships? Whattechniques or methods can be used to minimize its effects? 
  ESCAPING THE PARANOID- CRITICAL TRAP Disclaimer: The term paranoid, in thispaper, is not intended 
to be taken in a clinical sense, as a psychotic disorder characterized by delusions ofpersecution or 
grandeur. The author is not a psychologist or a trained counselor. Nothing in this work should be construed 
as professional or medical research or opinion. The noted surrealist Salvador Dali created some introspective 
and ethereal portraits in what he called the Paranoid-Critical method. It is fortunate for our culture 
that Dali was innovative and willing to experiment. In contrast, it is unfortunate that so many of us, 
especially those working in the area of technical services and support, are also working in the Paranoid-Critical 
methodology. Not realizing that it can harm our working 4% *, relationships as well as * the culture 
of our c- wcjy professional 3 b environment. 22 -? 25Implied in the 25 desultory atic conversations 
between ? cy colleagues and friends. ~ Found in underlying 4 P tension between c Si!lD administrators 
and their staff. Manifest as frustration and anger between support providers and their clients. The phrase 
Paranoid-Critical method seems to be an apt description for these symptoms of 8 failed human communications. 
First an individual feels unfairly judged and criticized in Permission to make digital/hard copy ofall 
or part Ofthis workfor personal or classroom use is granted without feeprovided that copies are not made 
or distributedfor pr@t or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title ofthe publication and 
its date appear, and notice is given that coping is by permission ofACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
topost on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission an&#38;orfee. 10 I997 
ACM ISBN # O-89791 -990-4/97/0011 $3.50 Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 0271 Escaping the Paranoid-Critical 
Trap a particular interaction. The reaction to the perceived fault is to develop an attitude of fear 
or distrust of others. This slight, but pervasive, sense of paranoia colors the perceptions of the motives 
and actions of others. Causing our well meaning, but reactive, subject to criticize others who fail to 
meet the strictest of expectations. Thus, critical leads to paranoid, and paranoid leads to critical, 
which leads back to paranoid in turn. This negative cycle of interpersonal relations is what we will 
call the Paranoid-Critical method This paper wiil present some examples of Paranoid- Critical methods 
of management and communications to determined if it exists in our organizations and how it affects our 
productivity. We will examine the causes of Paranoid-Critical methods and explore why it is so prevalent 
in Technical Support organizations. Finally, ways to escape the alarming gravity of the Paranoid- Critical 
method will be proposed. Feeling like a Caltrop? A caltrop is a device of four spikes spaced so that 
no matter how you place it, three Qulckllme~ and a decompressor of the spikes form a tripod are needed 
to see thls picture. supporting the fourth spike straight up in the air. During the medieval period caltrops 
strewn on roads or in fields could effectively stop a Calvary charge. For those Braveheart fans, Robert 
the Bruce used them at Bannockburn. We can imagine ourselves as one point of a caltrop. Our bosses, co-workers 
and clients make I, up the other three points. It might seem in day-to-day transactions that one or the 
other of those principles end up on top, and we have our face pushed in the dirt. When you feel like 
a caltrop, it is probably a ) l manifestation of entanglement in the Paranoid-Critical ,, trap. The call 
log, and staffs negative reaction to it, or any type of productivity tracking mechanism is a prime example 
of Paranoid-Critical thinking. Often technicians will see the institution of logs and journals as a means 
for administrators to judge their productivity unfairly. Staff commonly believe that administration has 
little concept of what is involved in providing quality technical support and will use the records to 
criticize their efforts. The technicians perceive their bosses as being critical and react in paranoia. 
The supervisors find their people balky and uncooperative while they attempt to initiate a powerful tool 
for customer support. Michael W. Quiner They react to this resistance by feeling paranoid about the 
underlying motives of the service team. The budget bluff is another prime example of Paranoid-Critical 
methodology. During budget preparation a technology department will feel paranoid, The upper hierarchy, 
they fear, is likely to trim their submitted budget by a dangerous amount and then add projects and responsibility 
after the budget is completed without providing additional funding. The only relief is to inflate budget 
line items. The university executives will certainly feel the budget has been increased without substantial 
cause. They will pare the numbers down while expecting greater results from their IT people. Thus the 
ParanoidCritical trap creates a, self fulfilling pattern of distrust on both sides of the budget negotiations. 
If we go back to our example of the caltrop and look at each of these examples. We,acknowledge that Paranoid- 
Critical dynamics might leave one of the players standing, but the remainder of those involved, especially 
our clients, find themselves buried fact down in the ground. The tangible effects of these dynamics adversely 
alter the bottom+ine of our professional efforts. Columbus and Post-it @Notes The often repeated truism 
that communication is always a part of the problem and always a part of the solution illustrates one 
of the main dangers of Paranoid-Critical thinking. In some situations the emotional noise from frustration 
and distrust filter out any positive, encouraging or appreciative messages. A break down in complete 
communication, while a serious problem to any team objective, is not the only toxic result of Paranoid-Critical 
methods. There is nothing wrong with making a mistake. As Shakespeare said There is nothing QulckTlmelM 
and a decompressor are needed to see this picture. either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. We find 
history littered with examples of large goofs that turned into gold mines of opportunity and advancement. 
Christopher Columbus, on his first voyage west to the Indies convinced himself (as he also assured his 
crew and patrons) that it was only 2,250 miles to the coast of China. He was off by 6,900 miles or so, 
and had there not been another 272. ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Are You Ready? Michael W. Quiner continent along 
the way he would almost certainly not have survived the adventure. Another, more recent example, is the 
Post it @Notes. The adhesive for this ubiquitous little office helper is the result of a mistake. At 
the time 3M was trying to develop a glue to affix ceramic heat shields to the space shuttle. Their failure 
at one attempt has created a whole industry for little pastel paper scraps. Obviously, we can use blunders 
to our advantage, yet nothing squelches initiative like Paranoid-Critical environments. In the slightest 
degree, a fear of certain criticism by superiors, fellows, or clients, can be enough to hinder experimentation. 
When we become paranoid about losing our job or our reputation, to the extent that we are no longer willing 
or able to make mistakes. Then the Paranoid-Critical trap has robbed us of a great advantage. TLA s or 
Three Letter Acronyms are, to technology workers, as common as fleas on a hound dog. Most of us instantly 
recognize CYA . How much productive time do we lose in maintaining CYA files or following procedures 
aimed at minimizing our personal exposure to risk? The whole philosophy driving CYA is reaction to Paranoid-Critical 
stimulus. Another way in which this level of interaction decreases our productive time is the faddish, 
but often quixotic, attempt at consensus building. Sometime a consensus is not only undesirable but impossible 
to obtain, yet we seek it in the name of empowerment and buy-in . If we posses enough confidence in the 
implicit buy-in that our bosses, co-workers and clients must already have in us, then it must be some 
form of paranoia that takes us back for constant affirmation. It is to be hoped that we recognize the 
amount of Paranoid-Critical method that exists in our organization. We also acknowledge that it alters 
our day to day behavior by ruining communications, stealing our initiative and establishing roadblocks 
to real accomplishment. Having seen some examples of what the Paranoid-Critical method is and does. It 
is appropriate to examine the causes and propose some solutions. From The Honeymooners to The Odd Couple 
 Are you Ready? Escaping the Paranoid-Critical Trap How did we get into a position where we are suspicious, 
critical and mistrustful of QuickTimem and a Photo - JPEG decompressor are needed to see this picture. 
those with whom we spend our professional lives? It did not start that way. In the beginning we were 
like The Honeymooners, we got along with everyone, our opinions were sought out and respected. Over 
time, too gradual to notice, things start to change. Our work relationships start to resemble The Odd 
Couple until finally we find ourselves operating in an increasingly antagonistic environment. In the 
service and support field it is even more pronounced, when we start viewing our clients, whom we should 
have the best rapport with, like lizard face aliens. From the many likely origins of Paranoid-Critical 
problems, the scope of this paper will be limited to examining two of the more prevalent causes: fear 
and power. In order to fully appreciate the impact of these elements we need to understand the vital 
role that trust plays in interpersonal relationships. Stephen Covey, in his book Principle-Centered Leadership(Simon 
&#38; Schuster, 1990) defines trust as an emotion bank account between people. When we become overdrawn 
in our trust account, we resort to Paranoid-Critical methods to accomplish our goals. Every person to 
person transaction requires the use of some form of power, although the term Influence might be equally 
appropriate and carry less pejorative connotations. Dr. Covey delineates three types of power and warns 
of their misuse. + Coercive power is an attempt to use fear to influence and control behavior. Although 
once popular among managers, it has fallen from favor for the reason that it sometimes seems expedient 
but is illusionary. As Soviet dissident and writer Aleksander Solzhenitsyn observed You only have power 
over people as long as you don t take anything away from them. But when you ve robbed a man of everything, 
he s no longer in your power- he s free again. Those who rely on coercive influence destroy trust. Of 
the three methods of power, it is not only a direct cause of paranoia, but is also the result of paranoia. 
It is applied when fear of non-compliance is greatest. ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 0273  Escaping the Paranoid-Critical 
Trap t Utility Power is the kind favored by most institutions. On first blush it appears an acceptable 
methodology based on fair treatment. This type of influence appeals strongly to our capitalistic sensibility. 
We like to get equitable exchange of goods for services. Cliched proverbs such as quid . pro quo, tit 
for tat, I ll scratch your back if you scratch mine, one hand washes the other embody the self-interest 
philosophy existing behind utility power. The danger here is that trust does not feature as strongly 
as profit. This tends to build individualism instead of teamwork, fosters litigation over negotiation 
and promotes situation ethics. The revolving door to the Apple CEO office i s a prime example of the 
use and dangers of this type of influence. Can we safely assume that the next CEO of Apple will be facing 
a Paranoid- Critical crises? t Principle-centered power, the kind championed in Stephen Covey s book, 
is based on honor and integrity. Those who subscribe to principle- centered methods will act to preserve 
and build trust. A study publicized by Business Week reported that 59% of managers at Pitney Bowes and 
70% of managers at Uniroyal felt pressured to compromise their personal ethical principles to achieve 
corporate goals. These types of findings imply that principle-centered power is sadly deficient in many 
organizations. It would help if we could remember Harry Fosdick s advice Our power is not so much in 
us as through us. Because power, misunderstood and misused, is one of the sources of Paranoid-Critical 
situations. A second source of problems, most common in the field of . technology support, is that of 
fear. Technophobia exists not only in the most difficult support cases, but also in the best of cases. 
It also exists to some degree in all technical support staff. Attempts to deny, suppress or ignore the 
phobia always contribute to Paranoid-Critical feelings. It is important to realize that we start each 
task with a handicap of inadequacy and uncertainty. With a technology base that evolves into a new organism 
every six months it is impossible for any one person, or even any organization to operate consistently 
without fault. Microsoft, for example, completely overlooked the burgeoning importance of TCPLlP. Uncomfortable 
as it may be, we cannot hold ourselves or others to standards of performance that are outside the realm 
of reality. Michael W. Quiner The rapid pace of change adds another, usually overlooked, facet to technophobia. 
We may be able to cope with the ever increasing level of complexity on an intellectual level, but emotionally 
we remain unprepared for its sophistication. This explains why we devote so , many resources to the unique 
and entertaining, such as stereo sound and screen savers, that are essentially non- productive. Since 
we are relatively unprepared emotionally to explore the full potential of our technology, we are relegated 
to expending our efforts worrying about our desktop icons and color schemes. Building the Four C s 
Paranoid-Critical problems are caused by certain types of trust maiming behavior, brought about by fear 
and power abuse. :Then it follows that. changing behavior inside an organization, working to rebuild 
trust, can remove the unsavory aftereffects. The enthusiasm to institute programs or to fix our organization 
that this ,revelation might create has to be tempered with the understanding that, as Stephen : Covey 
reminds us There is no such thing as * organizational behavior. There is only individual behavior. It 
bears repeating that the only individual : behavior that we can change is our own. When trust exists 
there is less inclination to be critical, or paranoid. Before trust can exist each component must evidence 
a greater, degree of trustworthiness. In order to establish personal trustworthiness Mr. Covey suggests 
working on twb areas, competency and character. To eliminate fully the effects of the Paranoid-Critical 
methods we need to focus on the four C , not only Competency and Character, also Confidence and Charity. 
t Competency - Constant training and professional development are not only important to avoid personal 
obsolescence, but the very.effort of increasing our knowledge base proves that we are sincere in our 
motivation. The width and breadth of our industry assures us that we can each excel in any field that 
we choose, thus increasing our value as a resource to our bosses, coworkers-workers and clients 274 
. ACM SIGUCCS X0. 1997 Are You Ready? Michael W. Quiner Escaping the Paranoid-Critical Trap + Character 
- Once when I was a teenager I was told that I lacked character. My critic then, though well meaning, 
could not give me any positive advice as how one went about building character. I have discovered in 
the years since that it involves making and keeping promises to build internal security. Simple on the 
face of it, yet one of the biggest challenges faced by those in the service arena is having to choose 
either to disappoint clients early by presenting them with a.realistic picture of the limiting conditions, 
or to disappoint them later by failing to meet expectation. The former choice is more difficult, but 
it is the one that builds trust and character. + Confidence - It is difficult to remain confident in 
the face of criticism, and a little paranoia over the prospects of one s career might seem warranted. 
However, it should help to keep two important concepts in mind. First, we have already won the lottery! 
In whatever position we have, we were selected from among a pool of qualified applicants as the one best 
suited for that position. We are the best that can be found, that s why they gave us the job in the first 
place. If we have continued to increase our competency and character then we have a right to confidence 
 Secondly, The great demand for professional IT and technology workers, combined with the dearth of 
qualified people has created an environment that provides a great degree of job security. US Colleges 
are expected to produce ten-thousand graduates with computer science degrees this year, but the demand 
is estimated to be ten-times that number. The thought that there is nobody to take our positions should 
go a long way to dispel any lingering paranoia. + Charity - Charity means giving resources to those 
who cannot afford the price. In our organizations it means loyalty, integrity and diligence, traits that 
can be donated but not hired. When the other components are in place charity is the final ingredient 
needed in developing trust. It proves that we are not mercenary and that efforts to contribute come from 
real concern and commitment. IT Departments also need to develop the four C s, in order to illustrate 
to other departments and outside observers that the trustworthiness of individual team members is not 
an aberration but a shared trait nurtured by the environment. Competence - Professional development has 
to be planned, budgeted and scheduled. Character - Make and keep promises on an organizational level. 
Establish realistic expectations and reachable goals. Confidence - A 1997 Fred Pryor Seminar on Project 
management advises that Celebrating should be the final stage in every project s life- cycle. Team confidence, 
esprit de corps, can have a profound effect on eliminating Paranoid-Critical behavior. Management guru 
s Peters and Waterman maintain that The simple act of paying positive attention to people has a great 
deal to do with productivity. Charity - An IT director recently stressed the importance of keeping the 
moral high-ground. As an organization extends itself to the limits of its charter, it can freely move 
beyond those boundaries only if and when it has strong relationships of trust in place as a moral superstructure. 
Otherwise it stands the risk of being held to undesired courses by the equivalent of political extortion. 
 Conclusion Having defined the Paranoid-Critical methods as patterns of interpersonal communications 
and attitudes that create obstacles to our professional development and effectiveness, this paper has 
provided illustrations to the origins and results of the Paranoid-Critical trap. We have explored how 
technophobia and lack of trust have let these harmful relationships thrive in our organization? Finally 
several means for eliminating Paranoid-Critical behavior by concentrating on competency, character, confidence 
and charity have been proposed. Critical has been used in this discussion to mean a predisposition to 
judge severely and find fault, and issues that are risky and full of danger. Yet critical can also have 
the meaning of crucial or decisive, indispensable to reaching an objective. User support organizations 
can be properly defined as Critical when they are free from the shackling effects of the Paranoid-Critical 
method . Are you Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 0275  
			