
 Establishing Trustworthiness in Services of the Critical Infrastructure through Certification and Accreditation 
 Seok Won Lee, Robin A. Gandhi and Gail-Joon Ahn Department of Software and Information Systems The University 
of North Carolina at Charlotte 9201 University City Blvd., Charlotte, NC 28223, USA {seoklee, rgandhi, 
gahn}@uncc.edu ABSTRACT Trustworthiness in services provided by the Critical Infrastructure (CI) is essentially 
dependent on the quality of underlying software, systems, practice and environment, as which the software 
information infrastructures are becoming increasingly a major component of business, industry, government 
and defense. The level of trustworthiness required from services that are operational in such critical 
software information infrastructures is often established based on standardized infrastructure-wide evaluation 
criteria -Certification and Accreditation (C&#38;A) -through the identification of operational risks 
and the determination of conformance with established security standards and best practices. In order 
to effectively establish such levels of trustworthiness for services in the CI, we identify the need 
for a structured and comprehensive C&#38;A framework with appropriate tool support that combines its 
theoretical and practical aspects. In this paper, we present our efforts in developing such a framework 
that leverages novel techniques from software requirements engineering and knowledge engineering to support 
the automation of the Department of Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation 
Process (DITSCAP), which is a standard for certifying and accrediting the information networks that support 
the Defense Information Infrastructure (DII). Through the examples derived from our case study, we further 
motivate the applicability and appropriateness of our framework. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.1 
[Software Engineering]: Requirements/Specifications structured methodologies, tools. General Terms Measurement, 
Reliability, Security and Standardization. Keywords Information Security Requirements Engineering, Information 
Systems Certification and Accreditation, Critical Infrastructure Protection, Risk Assessment, Ontological 
Engineering Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. Software Engineering for Secure Systems Building Trustworthy Applications (SESS'05), May 15-16, 
2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-114-7/05/05...$5.00.  1. INTRODUCTION Recent 
tragic events and ever growing threats to national security amplify the importance of trustworthiness 
in services that get delivered through the CI, of which the software information infrastructures are 
becoming increasingly a major component of business, industry, government and defense. Such software 
information infrastructures require an effective and comprehensive C&#38;A framework to assess their 
operational risks, optimize their security posture and evaluate their Information Assurance (IA) practices. 
Despite such necessities, the criteria to establish the level of trustworthiness required in the services 
made available through these information infrastructures is often confined and restricted to the experts 
in the domain or those who are familiar with specific operating systems, programming languages and protocols. 
Infrastructure-wide standardization of C&#38;A processes seek to address this issue, but the gaps that 
exist between the standards and their interpretation and enforcement in real world practices diminishes 
the value of such efforts. The Department of Defense (DoD) increasingly relies on the services made available 
through the DII, irrespective of their level of classification, to perform a variety of functions and 
accomplish their missions. The success of these missions is essentially dependent on the quality of underlying 
software, systems, practice and environment to provide high quality of service and trust in the information 
furnished to the DoD and national-level decision makers. The infrastructure-wide DITSCAP standardization 
[4] was introduced to ensure that the shared interests of the common infrastructure are approximately 
represented and accounted for in the decision-making process of all the systems in the DII. Although 
the DITSCAP provides an excellent platform to assess the security of systems from organizational, business, 
technical and human perspectives, we contend that its current approach has certain limitations and drawbacks. 
DITSCAP is a long and exhaustive process of self-checks and documentation, requiring extensive resources 
to conduct, manage, and maintain, resulting in delays and huge monetary costs. Furthermore, the complex 
interdependencies that exist between information from large and diverse sources required to be referred 
and comprehended for a system to be compliant with DITSCAP, is a significant factor restricting human 
ability to effectively engineer secure systems that comply with DITSCAP. We identify that the lack of 
an organized framework and related tool support to gather and analyze the C&#38;A related information 
is at the root of this problem. To deal with such issues that encompass several research areas, we propose 
an integrated, well-defined and comprehensive framework which combines novel techniques from requirements 
engineering and knowledge engineering. Such a framework will support capturing, modeling and analyzing 
DITSCAP-oriented requirements, related domain knowledge, user criteria and their interdependencies across 
several dimensions and levels of abstractions, to identify the emergent features of the software system 
working as a whole, under a certain configuration in the given complex environment. In this paper, we 
specifically focus on automating the DITSCAP in ways that promote effective and comprehensive assessment 
of the operational risks and evaluation of compliance with security requirements and best practices applicable 
to the target system. Through the examples derived from our case study, we further motivate the appropriateness 
of our framework in achieving these objectives. In the following section we provide a brief overview 
of the DITSCAP followed by the motivation and objectives for DITSCAP automation in section 3. In section 
4, we introduce the conceptual architecture of our DITSCAP Automation Tool (DITSCAP-AT) and discuss its 
components. Section 5 outlines various models used in our framework that help to aggregate and analyze 
DITSCAP related information and demonstrates their applicability and appropriateness through examples. 
Finally we present our concluding remarks and future work in section 6.  2. DITSCAP OVERVIEW DITSCAP 
is the standard DoD process for identifying information security requirements, providing security solutions, 
and managing information systems security activities [4]. DITSCAP focuses on the system mission, environment, 
architecture, and life cycle while assessing impact of operation of the information system on the overall 
security posture of the DII. The DITSCAP defines Certification in the context of information systems 
as Comprehensive evaluation of the technical and non­technical security features of an information system 
and other safeguards made in support of the accreditation process, to establish the extent to which a 
particular design and implementation meets a set of specified security requirements [4]. Following the 
certification activities, the accreditation statement is an approval to operate the information system 
in a particular security mode using a prescribed set of safeguards at an acceptable level of risk by 
a Designated Approving Authority (DAA). It should be noted that, the relationship of the C&#38;A process 
with information systems is not something that is established once to get over with, but it should be 
a life time commitment [6]. DITSCAP tries to fulfill this commitment by distributing its activities over 
four phases that range from the initiation of the C&#38;A activities to its maintenance and reaccreditations. 
The level of rigor adopted for the C&#38;A process depends on the certification level chosen for the 
system among the four levels available which are 1) Minimal Security Checklist; 2) Minimum Analysis; 
3) Detailed Analysis; and 4) Extensive Analysis [2]. The Program Manager, DAA, Certifier and User Representative 
are the key roles of DITSCAP that tailor and scope the C&#38;A efforts to the particular mission, environment, 
system architecture, threats, funding and schedule of the system through negotiations. Once the system 
definition has been agreed upon by the key roles of DITSCAP, it is documented and becomes the Software 
Security Authorization Agreement (SSAA). The SSAA is used throughout the DITSCAP process to guide actions, 
document decisions, specify IA requirements, document certification tailoring and level-of-effort, identify 
potential solutions, and maintain operational systems security [4]. 3. DITSCAP-AT MOTIVATION AND OBJECTIVES 
The DITSCAP Application Manual [2] outlines a list of tasks and activities to be carried out along with 
the roles and responsibilities of the associated personnel. Although DITSCAP is well-defined, it is expressed 
at a very abstract level to maintain general applicability. This inherent abstractness coupled with a 
manual approach makes it hard to ensure objectivity, predictability and repeatability in practicing the 
DITSCAP in real world settings. Furthermore, the DITSCAP requires a multitude of DoD directives and security 
requisites, for a system to be compliant with, that address a diversity of factors across several dimensions 
at various levels of abstractions to determine the applicable security requirements. We also identify 
that a structured and comprehensive method to assess and monitor the operational risk of information 
systems is also missing in the current approach. To further aggravate the situation, the DITSCAP often 
becomes a mere bureaucratic necessity to get approval to operate by generating an SSAA, without specific 
focus on assessing and managing the operational risks of the site and system, which is the key to its 
effectiveness. We believe that DITSCAP-AT will reduce certification costs, resulting from the need of 
fewer resources to conduct, manage and maintain the C&#38;A process, by providing an integrated environment 
to articulate the C&#38;A efforts. Also, such an integrated environment is inevitable to maintain efficiency 
of C&#38;A activities to significantly reduce the development and deployment time of information systems. 
All these factors advocate a strong and urgent need for a well-defined and comprehensive framework for 
DITSCAP automation, to gain the high level of trustworthiness required from the services of the information 
systems in the DII. Since the problems mentioned above apply to several research areas, an integrated 
solution for DITSCAP automation must be engineered synergistically to incorporate the followings. Firstly, 
a methodology to establish the extent to which an information system meets the DITSCAP-oriented security 
requirements, which supports the process of identifying, interpreting and evaluating the applicable requirements 
based on user criteria, at various levels of abstractions. This includes tool assistance throughout DITSCAP 
by a well-organized flow of tasks in different activities of secure systems engineering process to populate 
system models that are easy to understand and analyze. Secondly, a structured, justifiable and repeatable 
methodology to collect threat, vulnerability and mission criticality information from a broad spectrum 
of sources, technical and non-technical for evaluating cost versus risk trade-offs. And finally, tool 
support for actively discovering and monitoring network related vulnerabilities to compare the intended 
and the actual operational environments. Currently we limit the scope of DITSCAP-AT to level one DITSCAP 
certification as applied to LAN systems only. 4. DITSCAP-AT CONCEPTUAL ARCHITECTURE The DITSCAP-AT conceptual 
architecture is shown in Figure 1. We now discuss each one of its three modules in further detail. 4.1 
Process-driven Workflow The Process-driven Workflow module aims to guide the key roles of the DITSCAP 
through the C&#38;A process, to elicit and capture information required for satisfying the goals of the 
DITSCAP. The tasks outlined in the DITSCAP application manual [2] are extracted and homogeneously grouped 
into process components (P1, P2 Pn) as shown in Figure 1, based on their interdependent goals/objectives. 
Such C&#38;A goals contained in each process component are expressed using carefully designed questionnaires/forms 
embedded into wizard-based interfaces designed to fill out necessary parts of the SSAA, and create and 
gather well-defined metrics and measures that are amenable to automated analysis. The process components 
also retrieve applicable requirements/policies/meta-knowledge from the Requirements Repository as well 
as network discovery and monitoring information from the Multi-strategy Machine Discovery module to assist 
the C&#38;A process. Figure 1: DITSCAP-AT Conceptual Architecture In order to actively support the C&#38;A 
process, uniformly across the DII, we create a DITSCAP Problem Domain Ontology (PDO) that provides the 
definition of a common language and understanding at various levels of abstractions from several dimensions 
through the application domain concepts, properties and their relationships in the universe of discourse 
i.e. the DITSCAP domain. The DITSCAP PDO is a machine understandable, structured representation of the 
DITSCAP, enforced security requirements and DITSCAP related domain knowledge which is stored using an 
object-oriented ontological representation in the Requirements Repository (Section 4.2). In the context 
of the Process-driven Workflow module, the DITSCAP PDO guides the C&#38;A process through an organized 
flow of defined tasks and activities as well as identifies the cascading effects of changes in C&#38;A 
related data via its traceable rationales.  4.2 Requirements Repository The Requirements Repository 
module leverages several advanced knowledge engineering techniques to support representation of requirements, 
meta-knowledge creation, and ability to query and browse pre-classified and categorized information structures 
with inference functionalities. It is a specialized module built upon the GENeric Object Model (GenOM) 
[10], an integrated development environment for ontological engineering processes with functionalities 
to create, browse, access, query and visualize associated knowledge-bases. A self explanatory conceptual 
architecture of GenOM is shown in Figure 2.  4.3 Multi-Strategy Machine Discovery The Multi-Strategy 
Machine Discovery module supports network self-discovery capabilities that allow comparison of the intended 
and operational environments. It consists of a set of network tools selected on the basis of the information 
required for DITSCAP, such as 1) hardware, software and firmware inventories; 2) configuration information 
of network devices and services; and 3) vulnerability assessment using penetration testing. The multi­strategy 
machine discovery technique employs a combination of network discovery tools and scripts to gather and 
fuse aggregated information as meta-knowledge in the requirements repository, which is then suitably 
transformed for inclusion in the SSAA. In the next section we discuss some of the key models in the DITSCAP 
automation framework used to aggregate and analyze information related to the C&#38;A process to satisfy 
DITSCAP goals and objectives. 5. THE DITSCAP AUTOMATION FRAMEWORK Traditionally, software developers 
have restricted their focus only to the software system attributes, but the software system itself is 
embedded within an environment that caters to the real world goals of the associated business and organization. 
This concept is even more relevant for secure system engineering processes as security is not something 
that can be operationalized as a single module but rather it is the emergent feature of the software 
system, working as a whole, under a certain configuration in the given complex environment. Therefore, 
an integrated and comprehensive framework that adopts a system s perspective, encompassing organizational, 
business, process, technical and human perspectives for enabling secure systems engineering practices 
is inevitable to successfully exercise the DITSCAP. To cope with such necessities, the DITSCAP PDO is 
aimed to provide the necessary means to understand and evaluate the effects of system functions and constraints 
in light of the concepts, properties their relationships that exist in the application domain from the 
perspectives of the real world goals, technology, organization, and business/mission requirements. The 
DITSCAP PDO specifically includes structured and well- defined representations of: 1) A requirements 
domain model based on DITSCAP-oriented directives, security requisites and policies; 2) A risk assessment 
taxonomy that includes links between related risk sources and leaf node questionnaires with predictable 
answers that have risk weights and priorities assigned to them; 3) Overall DITSCAP process aspect knowledge 
that includes C&#38;A goals/objectives; 4) Meta-knowledge about information learned from network discovery/monitoring 
tools; and 5) Interdependencies between entities in the DITSCAP PDO.  Categorization (i.e. Systems, 
Software etc.) Classification (i.e. DITSCAP process etc.)  NL Requirements (Directives, Security Requisites 
and DITSCAP manual)  DITSCAP related Domain Knowledge    Figure 3: Populating the Requirements Repository 
The methods and features of deriving such a PDO for DITSCAP are described in Figure 3. It specifically 
involves categorization and classification of natural language requirements expressed in DoD directives/security 
requisites and DITSCAP related domain knowledge. The resulting hierarchical representation includes high-level 
generic requirements, mid-level domain spanning requirements and sub-domain requirements in the leaf 
nodes. Furthermore, advanced knowledge representation techniques supported by GenOM, enable modeling 
of DITSCAP related domain knowledge as well. Finally, all domain models obtained through this process 
reside in the requirements repository. We now discuss some important representations of the models in 
the DITSCAP PDO in further detail.  5.1 DITSCAP C&#38;A GOAL HIERARCHY The goals of the DITSCAP are 
systematically extracted from the well-defined tasks and activities in [2] to create a hierarchical representation 
of the overall DITSCAP process aspect knowledge using methods identified in Figure 3. Root Level Level 
1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Leaf Nodes Questionnaires Figure 4: Partial DITSCAP C&#38;A Process Goal 
Hierarchy The user/system criteria required to evaluate the satisfaction of C&#38;A goals in the leaf 
nodes of the goal hierarchy are elicited using carefully designed questionnaires presented to DITSCAP-AT 
users using wizard-based interfaces. A part of such a goal hierarchy is shown in Figure 4. Furthermore, 
a space of applicable requirements is created through the mappings between the goals in the goal hierarchy 
and the requirements in the Requirements  5.2 REQUIREMENTS DOMAIN MODEL From the analysis of DITSCAP-oriented 
security directives, instructions, requisites and policies, we identify that they are organized in a 
hierarchical fashion as shown in Figure 5. Policies Policies Policies specific to DoD for all Agencies 
specific to DoN Figure 5: Organization of DITSCAP-oriented Documents Using this inherent organization 
of documents and the methods and features identified in Figure 3, we create a hierarchical organization 
of security requirements, carefully extracted and annotated with several attributes to form a RDM. Such 
a hierarchical representation includes high-level Federal laws, mid­level DoD/DoN policies, and site-specific 
requisites in the leaf nodes. Also, there exists several non-taxonomic links that represent relationships 
within the RDM as well as with other entities in the PDO. A partial RDM related to requirements for a 
security plan for information systems is shown in Figure 6, which elaborates on Physical and Environmental 
Security Controls and Personnel Controls as an example. Such a RDM allows the use of a goal-driven elicitation 
strategy to determine the applicable security requirements by successively decomposing the high-level 
security goals to be achieved by the system into a set of specific applicable requirements from DITSCAP 
enforced directives and security requisites. Furthermore, the non­taxonomic interdependencies between 
different requirements can be utilized to identify related requirements from other categories that may 
be overlooked. The RDM, along with other models in the DITSCAP PDO, can effectively establish the extent 
to which an information system meets the DITSCAP specified security requirements by supporting the process 
of identifying and interpreting the applicable requirements based on user criteria. This becomes more 
evident through examples discussed in subsection 5.5. unclassified information that has established 
by the information individuals from not been cleared for reading the owner. requirements, release information. 
leaf nodes) Domain Model (RDM) (see subsection 5.2) at the level of Figure 6: A Partial RDM for a Security 
Plan corresponding abstractions. 5.3 RISK ASSESSMENT TAXONOMY Based on the DITSCAP goals for risk assessment, 
we identify the need for a methodology that aggregates risk information from the site and system, and 
relates it to the overall security posture. Also, such a methodology should be anchored in objective 
metrics and measures that can be evaluated and interpreted in a uniform way across the infrastructure. 
To satisfy these criteria we create a Risk Assessment Taxonomy in the DITSCAP PDO which aggregates a 
broad spectrum of possible categories and classification of risk related information in the DITSCAP domain. 
The risk assessment goals expressed in the higher level non-leaf nodes of this taxonomy can be achieved 
using specific criteria addressed in the leaf nodes. An example risk assessment taxonomy is shown in 
Figure 7. Such a taxonomy provides a structured and comprehensive view of various risk categories associated 
with the site and system from a variety of different perspectives. The risk taxonomy in the upper level 
non­leaf nodes consists of threat, vulnerabilities, countermeasures, mission criticality, asset value 
and other categories related to risk assessment. Each non-leaf node is then further decomposed into more 
specific categories. In our work, the scope of the risk related categorization is mainly based on the 
National Information Assurance Glossary [1] as well as other sources such as the DITSCAP Application 
Manual [2], DITSCAP Minimal Security Checklists [2] and network related vulnerabilities discovered using 
the multi-strategy machine discovery module. RISK ASSESSMENT TAXONOMY ROOT COUNTER MISSION MEASURES 
CRTICALITY VULNERABILITIES THREATS ASSETS OTHERS ENABLING INFRASTRUCTURE HUMAN /SOCIAL PHYSICAL CYBER 
 OTHERS NATURAL MAN-MADE UNAUTHORIZED PHYSICAL PHYSICAL OTHERS NETWORK &#38; TECHNICAL OTHERS OTHERS 
DISCLOSURE OF FLOODS EARTHQUAKE FIRE INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONSDAMAGE THEFT NETWORK COMMUNICATION OTHERS 
CONFIGURATION OTHERS INTERFACES LINKS TERMINALS WEB OTHERS SERVERS QUESTION: WHAT IS THE STATE OF NETWORK 
QUESTION: DO WEBSERVERS COMPLY QUESTION: ARE FIRE EXTINGUISHING RULE COMPLIANCE ANALYSIS? WITH THE PASSWORD 
POLICIES? EQUIPMENTS INTALLED? AN SWER S WEI G HT ANSWER S WEI G HT WEI G HT ANSWER S P A S S W O RD 
BR E A K A BL E BY -1 NO NE -1 BR U T E F O R C E A L G O RI T H M S IN TE R F ACES CLEA R L Y I D EN 
TIF I ED IN TE R F A C ES N O T C L EA R L Y D E F I N E D -1 A U T O M A T I C SP R I NK L E R SY ST 
E M 0 D E F A U L T SYS T E M PASSWO R D S 0  0 I N T E RF A C E S A N D DA T A F L OW I N G PE O 
P L E WI T H PO R T A B L E 1 ACR O S S THEM I D EN T I F I ED 1 RE P L A C E D W I T H S T R O NG 
EX T I N G UI S H E R S PASS WO R D S HA LO N D I S C HA R G E S Y S T EM 2 ON E A C H S I D E OF T 
H E I N T E RFA C E S SOURCE: DITSCAP C&#38;A REQUIREMENTS SOURCE: DITSCAP C&#38;A REQUIREMENTS SOURCE: 
MINIMAL SECURITY CHECKLISTS S E C U R I TY R E Q U IR EM EN TS I D EN T I F I ED 2 RE M O T E L O G 
I N D I S A BL E D 1 ANSWER SOURCE: NETWORK DISCOVERY ANSWER SOURCE: DITSCAP-AT USER ANSWER SOURCE: 
DITSCAP-AT USER AND MONITORING TOOLS Figure 7: Example Risk Assessment Taxonomy A predictable and quantitative 
risk assessment can be carried out using weights assigned to pre-classified answers for specific questionnaires/criteria 
in the leaf nodes. These answers can be elicited from a variety of sources such as DITSCAP-AT users, 
using network self-learned information, or other sources. Example leaf node questions under various categories 
are also shown in Figure 7. Higher weights are assigned to answers related to lower risk levels following 
risk reduction scoring techniques. Other auxiliary information such as source of question and answer 
can be used to associate additional priority/criticality and traceability for each leaf node. Also, it 
is worthy to note that the questionnaires/criteria in the leaf nodes usually relate to various security 
requirements in the RDM by expressing their testability in the form of criteria through which level of 
requirements compliance can be measured. As the risk assessment taxonomy gets populated with answers 
to questionnaires/criteria in the leaf nodes, a comprehensive collection of risk related information 
is available which can be used to perform complex risk calculations and form the basis for evaluating 
cost versus risk trade-offs.   5.4 VIEWPOINTS HIERARCHY Requirements usually capture ideas, perspectives 
and relationships at various levels of detail and they are interpreted differently from different viewpoints. 
Considering this and following the concepts put forth in [12], [9] and [7] we use the viewpoints hierarchy 
as a natural way to organize and structure the diversity of factors associated with requirements in the 
DITSCAP PDO. The higher level non-leaf nodes in the viewpoints hierarchy specifically consists of viewpoints, 
such as organizational viewpoints (In DITSCAP domain, an example would be The DoD Components that refers 
to all organization entities in the DoD [4]), which map to generic requirements in the RDM, and the lower 
level leaf nodes representing viewpoints such as those of system stakeholders or services that are related 
to site-specific requirements in the leaf nodes of the RDM. For each DITSCAP-oriented security requirement, 
viewpoints are extracted from the related documents by identifying associated stakeholders. For identifying/organizing 
viewpoints we adopt the abstract viewpoints classes as defined by the VORD [7] approach. In the next 
subsection we introduce, using examples, the concept of multi-dimensional link analysis. 5.5 MULTI-DIMENSIONAL 
LINK ANALYSIS (MDLA) The root of MDLA lies in the concept of the viewpoints model introduced in the PVRD 
methodology proposed by Lee [9]. Lee suggests that Individual pieces of information finally become valuable 
knowledge when they establish links with each other from various aspects/dimensions based on a certain 
set of goals . Following this paradigm, MDLA can be carried out from various aspects such as, business/mission 
requirements, regulatory requirements, user criteria, specific operational concepts, viewpoints and risk 
categories based on the DITSCAP C&#38;A goals. The DITSCAP PDO that resides in the requirements repository 
using a uniform representation scheme fosters such analysis due to its inherent properties and characteristics. 
Figure 8: Hypothetical Networked Information System The user criteria and system configuration captured 
using well designed questionnaires and network self-discovery capabilities of DITSCAP-AT act as trigger 
mechanisms for MDLA. The goals in the C&#38;A goal hierarchy project a certain search/applicability space 
of requirements in the RDM that includes potentially applicable requirements to the related user criteria. 
More abstract the goal, larger the search/applicability space of requirements is in the RDM. Once the 
search space has been identified from the goals, the related user criteria can be analyzed further to 
identify the applicable security requirements and their interdependencies with other entities in the 
DITSCAP PDO. Furthermore, for each  Figure 9: Multi-dimensional Link Analysis requirement in the RDM, 
the viewpoints associated with it, as well as the related risk information in the risk assessment taxonomy 
contribute to the ways in which the emergent behavior of the system can be comprehended. The example 
information system, as shown in Figure 8, is a web hosting site that makes available DoD policies and 
procedures on the internet for public access. We consider the following C&#38;A goals and the associated 
user criteria for analysis: 1) Identify Personnel Controls; 2) Gather Facility Descriptions; 3) Identify 
Physical Access Controls; and 4) Identify Logical Access Controls. Snippets of information collected 
by DITSCAP-AT about the user criteria and system configuration, to satisfy each of these goals, is shown 
in Figure 9. It should be noted that the information is gathered from DITSCAP-AT users in a way that 
avoids misguidance to attain C&#38;A. Figure 9 shows a simplified example of the mapping of specific 
user criteria to the applicable requirements in the RDM and the relationships of these requirements with 
other models in the DITSCAP PDO, modeled using ontology modeling constructs. By following the links associated 
with each requirement, they can be better interpreted and enforced from various aspects in light of the 
user criteria gathered to satisfy the DITSCAP goals. For example, the 6 requirement PEDI-1 Data Interception 
(marked as 1 in the RDM of Figure 9), Applies To the user criteria for C&#38;A goal of Facility Description 
for Location 2, of the network in Figure 8, which states that the Room Construction type is Cube partitions. 
This requirement is applicable as the user criterion contributes to display of sensitive information 
on monitors of end user desktops placed in open cubicles. Such links helps to understand what &#38; why 
a particular requirement is applicable to a system in a particular setting. To effectively assess and 
enforce this requirement in combination with several technical and non­technical factors in the environment, 
we observe the relationship of this requirement with other requirements in the RDM as well as entities 
in other models of the DITSCAP PDO. Within the RDM, the PEDI-1 Data Interception requirement has relationships 
with requirements under the Physical Access Control category as well as Logical Access Control category. 
Under the Physical Access Control category, it can be identified from the relationships that both the 
requirements PESL-1 Screen Lock and PEPF-1 Physical Protection of Facilities help to Prevent data interception. 
Furthermore, the PEPF-1 Physical Protection of Facilities requirement Applies To the C&#38;A goal of 
Physical Security for Location 2, whose user criteria indicates absence of guards and doors, which is 
in violation for that requirement. This violation in turn contributes to the risk associated with PEDI-1 
Data Interception in these settings. Under the Logical Access Control category, the ECNK-1 Encryption 
for Need-To-Know requirement Prevents data interception using the encryption of data in transit through 
network to other locations. The ECNK-1 Encryption for Need-To-Know requirement further Applies To the 
user criteria, for C&#38;A goal of Physical Security for Location 2, of Communication with other locations, 
indicating the need for encrypting the transmission of data between Location 1 and Location 2 to prevent 
data interception. The PEDI-1 Data Interception requirement is also related to the viewpoint of Confidentiality, 
which helps to understand the specific IA objectives satisfied by enforcing the requirements in terms 
of the IA services provided by the system. Furthermore, the risks associated with the PEDI-1 Data Interception 
requirement can be aggregated under the related risk category of Unauthorized Disclosure of Information 
in the risk assessment taxonomy, which in turn contributes to the overall risk calculation for the system. 
Similarly, several requirements for the C&#38;A goals of identifying Personnel Controls and Logical Access 
Controls (follow labels A to F in Figure 9) can be brought into focus and analyzed using MDLA method 
as shown in Figure 9. Such analysis can also reveal the missing requirements [9], that weren t apparent 
at the onset of the C&#38;A process by providing a comprehensive analysis of the information system under 
consideration. Through the theoretical foundations of the DITSCAP automation framework, complex interdependencies 
between the information systems and their environments can be systematically captured, modeled, analyzed 
and comprehended to realize secure systems engineering practices for critical infrastructure components. 
  6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we specifically focus on automating the C&#38;A processes, 
as prescribed by the DITSCAP. We identify that the contribution of DITSCAP-AT is two fold. Firstly, it 
provides a structured and comprehensive framework to aggregate and analyze C&#38;A related information 
at various levels of abstractions, using a uniform representation scheme, allowing for its reuse and 
evolution through all stages of a secure software engineering lifecycle. Secondly, it provides these 
functionalities through appropriate tool support for the C&#38;A process that facilitates its adoption 
and practice throughout the infrastructure. Although the scope and limited space of this paper does not 
allow us to discuss all aspects of our framework in detail, we have engineered our framework as an integrated 
and unique combination of techniques that facilitates eliciting and capturing of requirements and specifications, 
modeling of system environments and domain knowledge, managing software evolution and adaptability to 
change and, supporting analysis and design processes through decision support and traceability. Such 
a framework is inevitable for advanced software/system engineering practices to produce secure systems 
with a high level of trust in their services. Our on-going and future work includes the software realization 
of DITSCAP-AT conceptual design based on the requirements elicited using mock-up interfaces that provide 
a thorough understanding of the important aspects of its user interaction [8]. Furthermore, with the 
availability of an integrated environment for DITSCAP automation, the development of formalized metrics 
and measures for a comprehensive and uniform risk assessment in the DITSCAP domain is an area that requires 
significant attention in our future work for the success of this initiative. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work 
is partially supported by the grant (Contract: N65236­05-P-0597) from the Critical Infrastructure Protection 
Center, Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center, Charleston, SC. USA. The authors acknowledge the support 
from Scott West, John Linden, Bill Bolick, and Bill Chu. Finally, the authors thank Deepak Yavagal and 
Divya Muthurajan for their contributions.  7. REFERENCES [1] CNSS 4009. National Information Assurance 
Glossary. NSA, 2003. [2] DoD 8510.1-M. DITSCAP Application Manual. July 2000. [3] DoD 8500.1. Information 
Assurance. Oct. 2002. [4] DoD 5200.40. DITSCAP. December 1997. [5] DoD 8500.2. Information Assurance 
Implementation. Feb. 2003. [6] Kimbell, J. and Walrath, M. Life Cycle Security and DITSCAP. IANewsletter, 
Vol. 4(2), Spring 2001. [7] Kotonya, G. and Sommerville, I. Requirements Engineering with Viewpoints. 
BCS/IEE Software Engineering Journal, pp. 5-18, Vol. 11, Issue: 1, Jan. 1996. [8] Lee, S.W., Ahn, G. 
and Gandhi, R.A. Engineering Information Assurance for Critical Infrastructures: The DITSCAP Automation 
Study. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual International Symposium of the International Council on 
Systems Engineering (INCOSE 05), Rochester, NY, July 10-15. 2005. [9] Lee, S.W. and Rine, D.C. Missing 
Requirements and Relationship Discovery through Proxy Viewpoints Model. Studia Informatica Universalis: 
Int l. Journal on Informatics, Spring 2005. [10] Lee, S.W. and Yavagal, D. GenOM User s Guide. Technical 
Report TR-SIS-NISE-04-01, Dept. of Software and Information Systems, UNC Charlotte, Spring 2004. [11] 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-130: Management of Federal Information Resources, 
1996. [12] Sommerville, I. and Sawyer, P. Viewpoints: Principles, Problems and a Practical Approach to 
Requirements Engineering. Annals of Software Engineering, Vol. 3, pp. 101-130, 1997. [13] Swanson, M. 
Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology Systems. NIST Special Publication 800-18, 
1998.  
			