
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. ESTIMATES OF MULTICARRIER CDMA SYSTEM CAPACITY Tony Dean Phil Fleming Alexander Stolyar 
 Motorola, Inc. 1501 West Shure Drive Arlington Heights, Illinois 60004, U.S.A. ABSTRACT As CDMA systems 
reach capacity, infrastructure providers are extending them by offering multicarrier capability. The 
capacity of an n-carrier CDMA system should be at least n times the capacity of a single-carrier system. 
We estimate the additional capacity that can be achieved by using carrier assignment disciplines. We 
produce the estimates from the CDMA System Static Simulator by pre­processing the simulator inputs and 
post-processing its outputs. The estimates are of capacities of multicarrier systems using simple carrier 
assignment disciplines, and of wideband CDMA systems. The latter estimates constitute an upper bound 
on the capacity of a multicarrier system with any carrier assignment discipline. 1 INTRODUCTION As CDMA 
cellular systems reach capacity, cellular providers are offering multicarrier systems to extend capacity. 
Typical initial offerings assign mobiles to carriers at random, so the capacity of an n-carrier system 
is n times the capacity of a 1-carrier system. However, the potential capacity of a multicarrier CDMA 
system is a non-linear function of the number of carriers, because intelligent carrier assignment disciplines 
can exploit the trunking efficiency of the multiple carriers. In fact, up to 8% of additional capacity 
per carrier can be realized. Among the conceptually simplest of carrier assignment disciplines are: 
random carrier (RC): The system assigns an initiating (i.e., originating or terminating) mobile to a 
random carrier.  round robin (RR): The system maintains an ordered list of carriers, and an index of 
the next available carrier. The system assigns the next initiating mobile to the next available carrier, 
and increments the next carrier field. When incrementing takes the index  beyond the end of the list, 
the index is reset to the beginning of the list. least load (LL): The system maintains base site link 
counts (i.e., number of assigned walsh codes) for each carrier, and assigns an initiating mobile to a 
carrier with minimal link count. The assignment is random among carriers with minimal link count.  full 
sharing (FS): An imaginary discipline in which the system assigns the initial and each soft/softer handoff 
link request to the least loaded carrier, even if links are on separate carriers.  As LL is very simple 
to implement and promises to realize much of the capacity of the FS discipline, we concentrated our study 
on the LL discipline. Two other assignment disciplines of note are analogous to LL in that they assign 
initiating mobiles to a carrier with some minimal resource. These are: least power: The maintained resource 
is total allocated forward power.  least noise rise: The maintained resource is total reverse noise 
rise.  Simulation has shown the least power discipline to be little better than the LL discipline. 
The least noise rise discipline is probably the most difficult to implement, and we have made no estimates 
of its capacity benefits. In the interest of simplicity, we have restricted our investigation to ubiquitously 
deployed multicarrier systems. In contrast, many cellular operators are installing multicarriers non-ubiquitously, 
i.e., only in areas where traffic is heavy. As this involves rings of collar cells, pilot beacons, and 
other complications in support of hard hand­offs between the single and multicarrier zones, we will address 
non-ubiquitous deployment in a later study. In the meantime, the results for ubiquitously deployed multicarrier 
systems provide insight into the behavior of non-ubiquitously deployed systems, especially in the center 
of large multicarrier zones. 2 DEFINITIONS AND CONVENTIONS The capacity of a system refers to the maximum 
amount of service it can provide. For cellular systems, one usually measures service in terms of the 
number of mobiles served or coverage provided. We are interested in the number of mobiles served. In 
this context, we consider a mobile to be served if both averages of forward and reverse link frame error 
rates (FER) are 2% or less. The outage of the system is then the ratio of the number of mobiles not served 
to the total number of mobiles. The capacity of the system is the number of mobiles served at a given 
outage, typically 1%, 2%, or 5%. Typically, we quote capacity in mobiles served per carrier per sector. 
We use the word sector in its most general sense, i.e., the coverage of a single antenna. In this context, 
the sectors of an omni system are identical to its cells. 3 THE MOTOROLA CDMA STATIC SYSTEM SIMULATOR 
Earlier studies of multicarrier CDMA, such as (Fleming and Stolyar, 1998) and (Fleming and Simon, 1998) 
have estimated capacity by using analytic models. In this study, we used the CDMA Static System Simulator 
(CSSS) (Motorola Technical Education &#38; Documentation, 1996), which is a component of Motorola s Net 
Plan cellular planning tool. Parameters of the CSSS model include (but are not limited by) System characteristics, 
such as RF propagation, power control parameters, and target and outage forward/reverse FER thresholds; 
 Sector characteristics, such as position, pilot, page, and sync channel powers;  Mobile characteristics, 
such as statistical distributions of position, speed, power class, delay spread, and number in system. 
  The CSSS generates Monte Carlo snapshots of the model CDMA system in operation. Prior to each snapshot, 
the CSSS generates a random number of mobiles and places them at random positions with random speeds, 
power classes and delay spread characteristics. The process of creating the snapshot has come to be known 
as a drop , evoking the image of mobiles being randomly dropped into the geometry of the simulation space. 
Once the drop has been created, the CSSS attempts to solve the forward and reverse power control equations 
by iteratively modifying the forward and reverse powers and by making and breaking soft/softer handoff 
links. The output of each drop consists of system state descriptions of each mobile and base site, including 
fractions of mobiles meeting the FER criteria both by base site and over the entire system. The resulting 
outputs simulate what might be seen if one collected the same data at regular, uncorrelated intervals 
from an actual CDMA system. After each drop, the CSSS produces a Monte Carlo statistics file, which describes 
the state of the model after power control. The file is named desc.out<n>, where n is the number of the 
drop, and is comprised of the following sections: System data section containing information such as 
number of mobiles and number of sectors;  Mobile data section, which consists of detail lines containing 
position, speed, serving sectors, allocated power, etc. for each mobile;  Sector data section, which 
consists of detail lines containing position, power, walsh code allocations, etc. for each sector.  
 At the completion of all drops, the CSSS produces the Monte Carlo results file, MC_cdma_results, which 
summarizes, for each sector in each drop, the statistics: Total number of mobiles best served;  Total 
of the above operating below both FER thresholds;  Total traffic power allocated by the sector  In 
addition to these statistics, there is a summary line for each drop which contains the total number of 
mobiles in the drop and the fraction of mobiles operating below both FER thresholds. From this file, 
one computes the system outage as the ratio of the number of mobiles operating above either of the FER 
thresholds to the total number of mobiles in the system. 4 MOBILITY IN CARRIER ASSIGNMENT DISCIPLINES 
In this study, we considered only carrier assignment disciplines that assign carriers when the mobile 
makes its initial access link request. To reassign a carrier during the call requires what is called 
a hard handoff, which can result in brief audio interruption and occasionally a dropped call. Motorola 
systems reserve hard handoffs for crossing Central Base Site Controller (CBSC) boundaries. Carrier assignment 
disciplines improve capacity by reducing the variance of some sector resource, such as power or number 
of mobiles per carrier, at each sector. A sector receives two kinds of link requests, initial access 
and soft/softer handoff. Since the sector has a choice of carrier assignment for only the initial access 
link requests, the effectiveness of the carrier assignment discipline is a function of the mix of these 
two types. This mix is called the mobility of the system, which we will make more precise The mobility 
of the system is the ratio of the erlangs consumed by initial access link requests to the erlangs consumed 
by soft/softer access link requests. A typical mobile (see Figure 1) makes its initial access and N soft/softer 
handoff link requests at times T0,T1,...,TN , holding each link for periods .T0, .T1,...,.TN . The mobility 
for such a mobile is  .N . . E . ..Tk . k =1 m = E .T0 () where E is the expectation or averaging operator. 
If we assume that all .Tk are identically distributed and that their common mean is E .T, then, under 
suitable () 0  independence assumptions, it is not difficult to show that Cell . . . 2 1 0 time TTTT 
T 012 3 N Figure 1: Mobility m =E N () i.e., that the mobility is the mean number of soft/softer handoff 
link requests per mobile. 5 MODELING MOBILITY WITH THE CSSS Since the CSSS does not simulate the complete 
operation of a mobile from initial access to disconnect, there is no way to infer mobility data. However, 
it is possible to simulate the phenomenon of mobility without adding the details of adding and dropping 
soft/softer links. In principle, each CSSS drop generates random variables M = Total # mobiles in system 
L k = # soft / softer handoff links to mobile k, k =1,., M In an actual CDMA system one could estimate 
the mobility, m, by computing the average ratio of the numbers of soft/softer handoff links and initial 
access links across a large number of snapshots. In an arbitrary snapshot or drop, we would not expect 
every mobile to be still connected to its initial access link. To simulate this phenomenon, to each drop 
we introduce the Bernoulli variables .1, mobile k still connected to . Bk =. initial access link . .0, 
otherwise where for each k =1,.,M , Bk equals 1 with probability p. We make the further simplifying 
assumption that for each k =1,.,M , the Bk are independent of one another and of M. At each drop we then 
compute mobility as E(#soft / softer handoff links) m = E(# initial access links) M M . ... LBL E..( 
-). E... ( 1 ) k k k .k =1 ..k =1 . = = M pE M .. () E..Bk . .k =1 . Now, the quantity .M . E..L k ..k 
=1 . NL = E M () is the mean number of soft/softer links per mobile, and is easily computable from the 
CSSS outputs. Substituting NL in  ( 1 ) and solving for p we get NL p =  ( 2 ) 1 +m Hence, to simulate 
a CDMA system with mobility m, we choose p as in equation (2). 6 SIMULATING THE LEAST LOAD DISCIPLINE 
WITH THE CSSS The CSSS supports an additional capability which we have not mentioned as yet: Any Monte 
Carlo statistics file may serve as input (after minor modifications) to the simulator, providing mobile 
locations, speeds, delay spread, power class, and other characteristics. The CSSS then re-solves the 
power control equations for this collection of mobiles. This gives the cellular engineer an opportunity 
to examine how the system would react to perturbations in a given mobile configuration. This is exactly 
what is needed to model multicarrier effects with the static CSSS. Roughly speaking, the procedure for 
generating a multicarrier drop consists of producing a single drop for each carrier, reallocating or 
load-balancing mobiles between those drops in a manner similar to how the least load discipline would 
work in practice, and then feeding the resulting drops back into the CSSS for estimates of system outage. 
Figure 2 illustrates the process for two carriers. What we need to make more precise here is the exact 
nature of the load-balancing process. The first pair of drops in Figure 2 represents how the mobiles 
would be distributed in a multicarrier system with random carrier assignment. One would expect, on average, 
that mobiles which are still connected to their initial access links (Bk =1) are relatively recent arrivals, 
while other mobiles are relatively earlier arrivals. We assume that one may approximate a typical drop 
in a multicarrier system Bk =1 by reassignment of those mobiles k for which, after which one re-solves 
the power control equation for each carrier. One reassigns the mobiles using the carrier­assignment discipline 
of the system. (It is tempting to reassign all mobiles. However, this would imply all mobiles are still 
on their initial access links. This would give the system a mobility of N, which is incorrect.) L Drop 
2 Figure 2: A Multicarrier Drop A program external to the CSSS performs the reassignment of mobiles, 
although in the future it will be part of the CSSS. In order to describe the reassignment process in 
detail, we make the following definitions: n = number of carriers  d1,.,d = input Monte Carlo statistics 
files  n ** d1,., dn = output Monte Carlo statistics files  Matrix L(s,c) = #links to sector s on 
carrier c. Initially,  L(s,c) = 0 for all s,c The algorithm for simulating the least load discipline 
for one multi-drop then proceeds as follows (see Figure 3): 1. Select a detail line at random and without 
replacement from one of the files d1,.,d . n 2. Let s = the mobile s best serving sector. 3. Draw a 
uniformly distributed, random number r from the interval [0,1]. 4. If r <p, (i.e., Bk =1) then choose 
c at random in {}  1,.n such that Ls(),chas a minimal value. Otherwise, choose c randomly from entire 
set 1,.n {}. 5. For each sector s'to which the mobile is linked, increment L(s',c). * 6. Write the 
detail line (unmodified) to d. 7. Repeat 1-6 until the mobile detail lines of d1,.,d  c n are exhausted. 
 Once this process is completed, the CSSS is run once for ** each carrier using d1,., dn as input for 
carrier 1,...,n. This last step is necessary in order to re-establish valid links from mobiles to sectors 
and to compute outage statistics. We have used the same process to simulate other carrier assignment 
disciplines, such as least-power, by suitably modifying step 4. 7 SIMULATION RESULTS Engineers at Motorola 
have identified model CDMA systems for the purpose of specifying appropriate parameters for actual CDMA 
systems and estimating their effects. While these models are ideal systems, they are indicative of conditions 
in interior cells of actual CDMA systems. In order to provide a basis of comparison, we have studied 
the multicarrier capacities of a subset of these models. We present the results for these models in two 
types of chart: Comparative Outage Chart - plots the outage (fraction of mobiles operating above either 
of the FER thresholds) of the system against the mean number of mobiles per carrier per sector.  Comparative 
Capacity Gain Chart - plots the capacity gain (per sector per carrier) against outage that a multicarrier 
system achieves over single carrier system.   Figure 3: Least Load Algorithm Each chart presents curves 
for 1-, 2-, 4-, and 8-carrier systems. Some charts contain additional curves. The reader should be aware 
that capacity curves show capacities per sector per carrier. This means that the actual capacity per 
sector for an n-carrier system is n times the capacity read from the capacity curve. Carrier assignment 
disciplines tend to be better at improving systems with low per cell capacity. This is analogous to an 
Erlang B loss system, where capacity improvements are most dramatic when channels are first added to 
the system. Consequently, all our studies concentrate on 37-cell omni, CDMA rate set 2 systems. Since 
data applications will be implemented primarily at high bit rates, this concentration is reasonable. 
7.1 Mobility=2 If mobility is high, the gain from least load carrier assignment is minimal. This is because 
base sites spend most of their resources handling soft/softer handoff requests, which can t be carrier 
assigned. These charts (Figure 4 and Figure 5) show outage and capacity gains for a 37-cell omni system 
with rate set 2 mobiles and mobility=2. Capacity gains are low with 2 carriers and modest with 4 and 
8 carriers. 7.2 Mobility=1 With low mobility, base sites can carrier assign a higher proportion of link 
requests. Consequently, least load carrier assignment is more effective for the same system with mobility=1. 
Although capacity gains are still modest for 2 carriers, they are in the 5%-8% range for 4-8 carriers 
(see Figure 6 and Figure 7). 0.06 0.05 0.04  0.03 0.02 0.01 0 12  Figure 4: Comparative Outage, Mobility=1 
1.1 1.09 1.08 1.07 1.06 1.05 1.04 1.03 0.05  Figure 5: Comparative Capacity Gain, Mobility=1 0.06 0.05 
0.04  0.03 0.02 0.01 0 12 Figure 6: Comparative Outage, Mobility=2 7.3 Mobility=2, High Activity 
Factor Even if mobility is high, least load carrier assignment can be effective in recovering capacity 
in compromised systems. In this system (see Figure 8 and Figure 9), we have mobility=2, but high voice 
activity rates. This could reflect a high concentration of data users or systems in which ambient audio 
noise is high. For 4-8 carriers, least load Carrier Assignment can add as much as 10% of additional capacity 
over Random Carrier Assignment. 8 THE LIMITS OF CARRIER ASSIGNMENT DISCIPLINES It is certainly plausible 
that the average capacity achievable in any n-carrier system with any carrier assignment discipline is 
bounded by the capacity of an equivalent artificial wideband system (AWS). By this is meant a single 
carrier system in which the bandwidth is n times the bandwidth of the n-carrier system, and with n times 
the power for the page, 1.1 1.09 1.08 1.07 1.06 1.05 1.04 1.03 0.05 Figure 7: Comparative Capacity 
Gain, Mobility=2 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0  Figure 8: Comparative Outage, Voice Activity=80% 
  1.12 1.1 1.08 1.06 1.04 1.02 Figure 9: Comparative Capacity Gain, Voice Activity=80%  pilot, and 
synch channels. The term artificial is used because no one would want to implement such a system, since 
it is not optimized. It is presented solely for its usefulness in describing the limits of carrier assignment 
disciplines. We modified the CSSS to operate with 2, 4, and 8 times the 1.23 MHz bandwidth. The outages 
from runs with our wideband simulator are plotted (see Figure10) in dotted lines together with plots 
of least load outages for the 37-cell, rate set 2 system with mobility=2. Note that the 2-carrier least 
load outage curve is more than half way towards the outage curve for the corresponding 2 x 1.23 MHz artificial 
wideband system. This suggests that more subtle carrier assignment disciplines will not gain much additional 
capacity. 9 CONCLUSIONS Simulation studies using the Motorola CDMA Static Simulator with model, omni, 
CDMA systems have shown that least load carrier assignment can increase the capacity of multicarrier 
systems. Furthermore, it achieves approximately half the maximum additional capacity achievable by any 
other carrier assignment discipline. Least load is most effective in systems with low mobility or with 
low per sector capacities. Systems with low per sector capacities include those with a large proportion 
of rate set 2 mobiles or high activity rates, which we will expect to find as data applications proliferate. 
The proliferation of data applications will also tend to reduce system mobility, which will in turn increase 
the applicability of least load carrier assignment. 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0  2 x 1.23 MHz 4 
x 1.23 MHz 8 x 1.23 MHz ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We wish to thank Bob Love and Dennis Schaeffer of Motorola, 
Inc. for their help in conducting this study. In particular, we offer our thanks to Bob for his advice 
in modifying the CSSS and to Dennis for his advice in structuring the multicarrier experiments. REFERENCES 
Fleming, P., Stolyar, A. 1998. Fluid Limit for the Model of a Multicarrier Cell with Partial Load Balancing 
, (in preparation). Fleming, P., Simon, B. 1998. Diffusion Approximations of Join-the-Least-Loaded Infinite 
Server Station , (in preparation). Motorola Technical Education &#38; Documentation 1996. CDMA Static 
System Simulation User s Guide, 68P09236A70-O, Motorola Cellular Infrastructure Group, Arlington Heights. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES TONY DEAN is a senior staff engineer at Motorola, Inc., where he conducts performance 
analysis and modeling of cellular infrastructure systems. His research interests lie in the discrete 
event simulation of such systems. Prior to joining Motorola, he contributed in the development of a patented 
token-ring based voice and data communications system, engaged in software development for factory data 
collection terminals, and supported software products at Digital Equipment Corp. and Burroughs Corp. 
(now Unisys). He holds a Ph.D. degree in mathematical logic from Indiana University. PHILIP J. FLEMING 
received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Michigan in 1981. He spent 10 years at AT&#38;T 
Bell Laboratories working in the area of computer performance modeling and the last 6 years at Motorola 
concentrating on the performance analysis of cellular telephony systems. He is the supervisor of the 
Advanced Cellular Systems Analysis Group at Motorola and his research interests include queueing theory 
and high speed wireless data networks. ALEXANDER STOLYAR got his Ph.D. in Mathematics in 1989 from the 
Institute of Control Sciences, USSR Academy of Science, Moscow. From 1989 to 1991 he was a Research Scientist 
in the above Institute. He joined Motorola in 1992. His research interests include: stochastic modeling 
of computer/communication systems/networks, in particular wireless systems; queues, queuing networks, 
stochastic stability, asymptotic methods. 
			