
 Every Seventh Year: Sabbatical ~rtunities Danielle R. Bernstein, Moderator Mathematics and Computer 
Science Dept. Kean College of New Jersey Union, New Jersey 07083 DBERNSTE@PIIX)T .NJIN.NET Bill Marion 
Mathematics and Cowputer Science Dept. Valparaiso University Valparaiso, Indiana 46383 BMPJRION@EXODUS.VALPO.EDU 
Catherine M. Ricardo Computer and Information Sciences Dept. Iona College 715 North Avenue New Rochelle, 
New York 10801 CMRl@IONA.BITNET Joy Teague School of Conputing and Mathematics Deakin University Geelong 
Carq3us Victoria, 3217 Australia JOY I@DEXKIN.EDU .AU Lee Wittenberg Mathematics and Kean College of 
Union, New Jersey LEEW@PILCYT.NJIN Conputer New Jersey 07083 .NET Science Dept. What A sabbatical can 
you do leave on your is one of sabbatical? the great Start a benefits Ph.D. of aprogram, cademia. study 
 a new area, teach at another university, write a book or do real software development. The panel will 
explore the rewards and challenges of these and other options, point out practical and family demands 
and get you started in planning a sabbatical. IJq Teague -Studying for a Ph.D. How can one take a sabbatical 
when one has a spouse and child? ~ male colleagues pack up wives and families. Wives give up jobs or 
take leave for a year. But this is not so easy when a husband has a full-time, responsible job. How does 
one do a Ph.D. on top of a normal academic -job? With great difficulty! I will discuss my solution to 
these two problems, and the related challenge of convincing my university in my application that I was 
going to use my sabbatical effectively. 376 Bill Marion -Doing post-doctoral studies During the 1991-92 
academic year I had a full-year post­doctoral study sabbatical. I spent the year at the University of 
Wisconsin -Madison in the Computer Sciences Department to expand my background in theoretical computer 
science. why did I chc)ose this area of study and this particular institution? What did I actually study, 
what types of professional relationships dic~ I develop and what scholarly work ensued from this year 
of study? I shall conclude my remarks by offering some suggestions about how one might arrange such a 
sabbatical with the host institution. Denielle Bernstein -Teaching abroad Cowputing educators are in 
great demand and short supply all over the world. This provides an exceptional opportunity for those 
who would like to live and teach abroad. I spent six months as a visiting academic at Massey University 
in New Zealand teaching (or lecturing, as they call it) in the Information Systems Dept. I also did a 
great deal of hiking. How did I develop this opportunity? What preparations did I make? What were some 
of the biggest differences between teaching here and in New Zealand? And what did I do with my family? 
Cetherine RicardO -Writing a lmok A sabbatical affords a unique opportunity for writing a textbook. It 
provides the time and leusure necessary for the concentrated effort required for such a large project. 
I will describe the entire process of writing a prospectus, submitting it to publishers, negotiating 
a contract, working with an eclitor, setting up a schedule of deadlines, writing the first draft, responding 
to reviewers corrunents, editing, and final publication. Lee Wittenberg -Doing software development I 
spent a year with a small software firm to introduce them to academic techniques and to bring some concrete 
knowledge of what industry wants back to my students. At this firm, I became a one-person research department, 
looking into new software tools and techniques, because the re~lar employees were all too busy working 
on projects with deadlines. The experience was beneficial to both sides. me of the outcomes was that 
four papers were submitted to Borland s annual conference. I observed that mcxst of the techniques we 
re teaching such as structured programnin:~, data structures and formal analysis are useful in industry 
].f people will use them. Under deadline pressure{ all these techniques go out the window. Since a change 
MS as good as a rest, I came back ready and eager to teach again. 377 
			