
 Extreme Streaming:Business Optimization Driving Algorithmic Challenges William O Connell, Ph.D. IBM 
Software Group - Information Management Division boconnel@us.ibm.com Abstract Organizations are striving 
for competitive advantage. As a result, business optimization is being pushed to new heights in terms 
of volume and speed. Areas such as customer profitability, campaign profitability or customer insight 
for better service are driving new analytical challenges as well as new algorithms over large volumes 
of data. Using Telecom as an example, this talk will discuss business demands which are driving an evolution 
of analytics over extremely high volumes of streaming data being ingested into a warehouse -- this business 
direction is forcing algorithms to evolve. In this environment, we are forced to deal with (1) massive 
continuous ingest rates, data changes/updates while the same data is being consumed by applications, 
users and processes, (2) dealing with scalability without disruption, and (3) overcoming the physical 
limits of the infrastructure (e.g., IO). This talk will address both how these technical challenges are 
being addressed at a high-level, as well as known problem areas for further research. This talk will 
also highlight issues of new algorithmic approaches arising from the business needs and the research 
issues associated with them. Examples include (1) streaming analytics, (2) social analytical algorithms 
integrated into data mining approaches within these continuously streamed environments and (3) new data 
types such as voice and textual analytics for customer calling pattern and churn analysis. Categories 
&#38; Subject Descriptors: H.2.8 Database Applications General Terms: Algorithms, Design, Management, 
Performance Bio Bill O'Connell is a Distinguished Engineer and Data Warehouse (DW) Chief Technical Officer 
for IBM Information Management. Bill is responsible for the DW architecture and technical strategy across 
both the DB2 and BI Organizations. This includes aligning IBM Software and Hardware Systems Group as 
well as IBM Global Business Services. In this role, Bill owns the DW integration and technical directions 
for DB2 Server, Data Warehouse Tooling, and IBM Balanced Configuration Unit as an integrated stack. Prior 
to joining IBM, Bill was an Architect on NCR's Teradata Database System. Bill also has been an adjunct 
Professor teaching database engineering for over 15 years at such schools as Princeton University and 
University of Toronto. He received his Doctorate at Illinois Institute of Technology. Copyright is held 
by the author/owner(s). SIGMOD 08, June 9 12, 2008, Vancouver, BC, Canada. ACM 978-1-60558-102-6/08/06. 
 
			