
 Faculty Response to Classroom Use of E-Technology J. Michael Yohe Valparaiso University Kretzmann 134 
Valparaiso, IN 46383-6493 219-464-6763 E-mail: Mike.Yohe@valpo.edu  ABSTRACT Some of us are still wrestling 
with the question of how we can encourage and support faculty in the use of instructional technology. 
Faculty members are individuals with varying needs and desires, but they often resist becoming involved 
in situations that might reveal gaps in their knowledge or make them seem dependent on less-credentialed 
people. We examine several different faculty profiles in the context of their own expectations of those 
of students, and suggest ways of providing motivation and support in a nonthreatening manner. Keywords 
Academic Technology, Faculty support 1. INTRODUCTION The current wave of course support software packages 
both underscores the increasing need for IT organizations to provide academic support and increases the 
danger of a "we know what's good for you" image. College and University technology users are a diverse 
lot; different people have dramatically different degrees of technological sophistication. We are expected 
to serve them all, and this creates both challenges and opportunities. We explore this environment (from 
the IT point of view, of course): What are some of the faculty perspectives? Student perspectives? What 
are faculty and student expectations? Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 00, Oct. 29-Nov. 1, 2000, Richmond, VA. Copyright 2000 ACM 
1-58113-229-8/00/0010 $5.00. Marlane C. Steinwart Valparaiso University Schnabel 13 Valparaiso, IN 46383-6493 
219-464-5780 E-mail: Lanie.Steinwart@valpo.edu Finally, we consider how we can assist and, where appropriate, 
motivate faculty in their use of technology.  2. CATEGORIES OF FACULTY Faculty members being rugged 
individualists, any attempt to categorize them is dangerous. Nevertheless, in trying to address faculty 
needs with limited support staff, we've found that we can place them into about four main categories. 
2.1 The Bleeding Edge Blanche Edwards enjoys using available resources in creative ways. Within two years 
of the emergence of web graphics, Blanche was already posting course materials on the University's server, 
and assigning projects which involved creating web pages and posting work for others to review. Blanche 
has long used electronic mail and chat rooms in her classes, and looks for additional features of technology 
and ways to use them. She willingly assists other faculty; and tirelessly gives dog and pony shows of 
her work at the request of others. People like Blanche are risk takers; they are excited about (and want 
to use) new developments; they want to lead, and willingly make substantial personal investment. These 
"bleeding edge" people need innovative resources but relatively little support.  2.2 The Early Follower 
Earl Fowler saw benefits early on of putting information online. As a History professor, he enjoyed the 
benefits of virtual access to resources that were otherwise geographically widespread and in some cases 
physically fragile. Earl exercised new skills without fanfare, and only to the extent that it improved 
information delivery; not just for the sake of using technology. Earl and his compatriots are open to 
benefits of new developments and willing to change when they see an advantage in doing so. Like the "bleeding 
edge" people, they are willing to make significant personal investment; but only if they can foresee 
relatively certain payoff. These faculty members need up-to-date resources and moderate support  2.3 
The Mainstream Mae Engstrom has a computer on her desk and uses it quite a bit. She uses her word processor 
to create course handouts and within the past couple of years has started communicating with her students 
via e-mail. She uses the Internet occasionally to retrieve information suggested by colleagues she knows 
through her professional society. Mae is working on posting the course syllabus on the web and hopes 
also to add some reference materials, but she hasn't yet found time to learn how to create web pages 
and send materials to the web server. She has heard the college is going to acquire a course support 
software package and is looking forward to that as a vehicle for accomplishing her objectives. Mainstream 
people will change, sometimes reluctantly, to avoid obsolescence; they are willing to make moderate personal 
investment but want proof of benefits. Mainstream people are usually satisfied with moderate resources 
(unless they have fallen prey to the siren song of Madison Avenue) but need substantial support. 2.4 
The Late Bloomer Larry Blumberg doesn't use e-mail and doesn't want to. He has a vintage 1990 machine 
on his desktop, but doesn't have a network connection. Larry is perfectly content to use PC-Write to 
generate his handouts and class notes, and sees no reason to waste his time learning about Windows or 
the Internet. He hasn't yet reached the level of needing support; he still needs sufficient motivation! 
The Larrys of the world are risk averse and may not be willing to change at all. To effect any change, 
they will need extraordinary support. These are basic types, but anyone who has worked with people at 
all recognizes that it isn't that simple. It might be interesting to create a sort of Myers-Briggs four-dimensional 
cube based on the following properties: Enthusiasm for Technology  Acceptance of and Adaptability to 
Change  Willingness to Take Risks  Leadership Ability  To illustrate the diversity, we single out 
a couple of other types:  2.5 The Suspicious Ed Gee doesn't trust the Internet, or networks. He won't 
store files on the network because he is afraid others will hack into them (never mind the number people 
who carry keys that will open his office). Ed teaches about technology and makes good use of it, but 
he's pretty sure that most people neither need it nor use it well. 2.6 The Bleeder Wayne Cutter has 
the latest computer at home and is constantly angling for its counterpart at the office. In his own view, 
he is on the bleeding edge; or, at least, he would be if his equipment didn't give him so much trouble 
when he was installing new (unsupported) software and the IT staff wasn't so slow about repairing it. 
From the IT viewpoint, Wayne does plenty of bleeding, but it's mostly self-inflicted.  3. CATEGORIES 
OF STUDENTS We mention students because, after all, faculty members are concerned with them. The categories 
are similar to those of faculty; it's just that the scales are different. All but the least experienced 
students would likely rank as "Early Follower" faculty or better.  4. FACULTY EXPECTATIONS One factor 
that makes educational IT so challenging is that faculty of all categories have the same core expectations, 
although definitions are categorical or even individual. 4.1 Autonomy Juan Maionway is a power user who 
needs a UNIX workstation. Since UNIX comes with an on-board mail system, he sees no reason why he should 
use the institutional system, and has asked correspondents to address mail to his own machine (and, of 
course, sends his mail from it). He also "needs" to have full access to the campus network and complete 
freedom from any firewall restrictions. Juan's machine recently was invaded and converted into an illicit 
server for unlicensed software, until network monitoring discovered that and his system was disconnected. 
Academic Freedom is almost a religious doctrine, and it extends far beyond intellectual activity. It 
loosely (or maybe strictly) translates to a total absence of restrictions or limitations. Faculty members 
have definite pedagogical preferences, and those have become interwoven with technological preferences 
to the point of inseparability in some cases. Many faculty members also claim the freedom to seek advice 
from any source of their choosing, and that generally does not include those with less education or status 
(e.g., staff). 4.2 Ease of Use Ima Nuhrutt has used VAX mail for years. The university is trying to 
phase VAX mail out in favor of newer technology, but Ima remains loyal to VAX mail. She tried the new 
system once and found that it doesn't work; it just doesn't recognize Internet addresses, which everyone 
knows have the form "in%" "person@college.edu""" User interface should be familiar, or at least intuitive. 
Most people have little patience for scavenger hunts. In a nutshell, the technology should do what the 
faculty member intended it to do, not what it was told to do. At the very least, there needs to be a 
familiar user interface with clear pathways and progressions and meaningful on-line help. Response should 
be instantaneous, no matter whether at the desktop, on an institutional server or network, or on a server 
in the back closet of the remotest corner of the universe. One corollary is that familiar user interfaces 
should never be changed (see below).  4.3 Adequate resources Hedda D. Joanzess complained that her new 
machine was "useless" because it was delivered with Windows 95 instead of Windows 98. While we support 
Windows 98 when there is good reason, we default to Windows 95 for reasons of supportability and security; 
for most faculty members, the added features of Windows 98 would go unused and unrecognized. As far as 
we can tell, Hedda has no special need for Windows 98. Most faculty members can understand and live 
with the fact that resources can't always be the latest, but they should at least be adequate (whatever 
that means). Clearly, the definition depends on the discipline and the level of user sophistication. 
(Our challenge is to temper overactive appetites, whet flagging ones, and know which is which.) Desktop 
equipment, classroom equipment, software, servers, network, Internet connection should all be "up to 
snuff." That, in turn, means that all of this should be updated as often as possible. Without changing 
any of the interfaces, of course. See above. 4.4 Readily Available Assistance Em Portent has never 
attended an Excel workshop, but is now insisting that "someone" come "right over" to help him with a 
"problem." He worked three hours on a spreadsheet, then "something happened" and "now it's all gone." 
It turns out he inadvertently clicked on the "Sheet2" tab, and clicking on the "Sheet1" tab magically 
restores his work. People don't want to learn; they just want to know. Attendance at workshops and short 
courses is predictably sparse, but everyone wants immediate personal attention when the inevitable difficulty 
arises. One-on-one consulting (or training) is preferred. For this reason, most turn to colleagues first, 
and then to established contacts in IT. The Help Desk may be accepted, reluctantly, as a viable source 
of assistance. Training courses and workshops are sort of a last resort; they are most acceptable if 
led by faculty, less so if by IT staff, and regarded as a last resort if led by students.  5. STUDENT 
EXPECTATIONS Most faculty members respond to student expectations; in some cases, their own expectations 
are driven by those of their students. Thus, we outline briefly the kinds of student expectations we've 
experienced. 5.1 Unimpeded access Students seem to expect any resource will be available at any time 
with no difficulty and no delay (regardless of how much they impede their own access with their network 
activities). The same information should be accessible from "any" computer "anywhere" (including, or 
perhaps especially, their computers in their residence hall rooms) at "any time"; they expect to move 
seamlessly from one service to another (e-mail, courses, administrative, web, etc.). 5.2 Faculty will 
be "chip-hip" Dewey Moore wrote his own course support software, including an on-line grade book which 
his students love; they can't understand why all faculty members don't use Dewey's software. Dewey was 
willing to make his grade book available to other faculty until he realized the security problems involved; 
now he is looking forward to the institution's acquiring a commercial package. Students may not expect 
their professors to know more, or even as much, as they (think they) do about technology, but they do 
expect faculty members to be conversant with the basics ("basics" being a moving target). They expect 
faculty to use an appropriate amount of technology and to take advantage of its unique features, but 
most don't want faculty to sacrifice core values for the sake of technological image. At the same time, 
paradoxically, degree of polish seems synonymous with degree of credibility. 5.3 Readily Available Assistance 
Student expectations are similar to those of faculty, with the added impatience of youth and the added 
expectation that faculty will be able to provide technical assistance. At the same time, they have a 
larger peer group from which to draw, and fewer inhibitions about asking for assistance. 5.4 Consistent 
Interface Different interfaces for different courses don't seem reasonable (contrast this with the faculty 
expectation of autonomy); in fact, increasingly, web browsers ought to allow access to all aspects of 
the university network (coursework, library, administrative information, etc.) 5.5 Other Expectations 
Student expectations for adequate resources and ease of use are generally similar to those of faculty, 
though "adequate" may be on a higher plane, and students tend to be more adaptable and therefore regard 
a wider variety of resources as "easy to use."  6. MOTIVATION AND SUPPORT This diversity of abilities 
and expectations, coupled with the perception that IT plays a minor supporting role in the unfolding 
drama, raises questions of how we can best provide the needed motivation and support. 6.1 Motivation 
We have to accept that it is not IT s role to motivate the faculty, and thus we cannot do it. Overtly, 
that is. A wise mentor once said, "There's no limit to amount of good you can do if you don't care who 
gets credit." Only faculty can overtly motivate faculty; use of technology has to be the faculty member's 
idea. But we can broadcast seed, and hope some of it falls on fertile soil. Here are some methods: 6.1.1 
Set an example (quietly); use technology prominently but without fanfare in IT activities. 6.1.2 Showcase 
faculty technology activities. 6.1.3 Sponsor informal activities (e.g., "Faculty Fridays"). 6.1.4 Clip 
relevant material from electronic newsletters and forward to faculty as appropriate, without comment 
but with subscription information 6.1.5 Sponsor a campus information technology listserv; make sure you 
gratuitously add key people.  6.2 Support Motivation doesn't help much if motivated faculty can't get 
the support they need. For reasons noted above, and for pedagogical reasons, collegial support is best. 
Colleagues from the same discipline (local or at other institutions) can offer insights into use of technology 
that nobody else can, and their advice will be accepted as no others will. IT, then, needs to support 
the support system. Several possibilities exist: 6.2.1 Identify a key faculty member or members in each 
department and provide them with direct paths to IT experts. 6.2.2 Keep communication flowing to these 
key people. 6.2.3 Work with these people to establish a Teaching, Learning, and Technology Roundtable. 
They are the ones who need to be involved in setting directions, planning, and arguing for budget. 6.2.4 
If you haven't done so, build an IT/Library team to provide one-stop shopping on information technology 
questions. This will likely increase contact; Library staff are perceived as friendlier and more in tune 
with academic life, and are "trained" to lead people to resources. Faculty members accept them in this 
role.  7. CONCLUSIONS We've observed that faculty members at higher levels need and expect good resources, 
but can generally provide support for themselves and, sometimes, their colleagues. Faculty at lower levels 
generally need personal support to get started, though tend to develop rapidly. IT needs to deliver both 
resources and support, and the balance can be tricky. Technology is an important tool. Faculty members 
need to understand student expectations and temper those expectations with reality; they need to know 
how to use technology; and they need reliable resources and responsive help at the inevitable difficult 
times. All that said, technology is only a tool. Our educational mission has not changed much over the 
centuries, and we need to maintain our substance and our integrity. The glitz of technology is no substitute. 
Put another way, an elegant table setting doesn't improve inedible food.  
			