
 3:30 Monday FACULTY ORIENTATION PROGRAM Adrienne Critcher Assistant Director, Academic Services Computation 
Center Baylor University Waco, Texas 76703 There are two sides of the coin in any aspect of academic 
services. Benefit is derived by the one being served in learning how to use certain facilities more efficiently 
and effectively. On the other side of the coin, benefit results for the one who is serving in that it 
is much easier and more enjoyable to serve an informed client. Our university library has been aware 
of this fact for some time. Each fall, all new faculty members attend an orientation program in the library 
that acquaints them with the organization of and services available from the library. But the university 
computation center clearly rivals the university library in use by faculty in both research and instruction, 
and computation-center policies and procedures probably vary much more across campuses than do library 
policies and procedures. We have found this to be especially true as our center is a Honeywell site and 
most of our users arrive without prior Honeywell experience. Therefore, in the spring of 1978, we began 
developing a Computation Center Orientation Program for new faculty members to be imple- mented in the 
fall, 1978. Our basic plan was to offer separate sessions for the novice users and the experienced users, 
and, for the first year, to extend the program to include the entire faculty. CENTER OBJECTIVES We 
decided to set up this program in a top-down fashion, so it seemed appro- priate to first consider what 
we were trying to accomplish, both for the new user to our center, and for ourselves. Even though this 
program was primarily to benefit our users, we thought it might be more motivating to first enumerate 
objectives of the program which would benefit the Center. I. Kill many birds with one stone. Each semester 
many of the same questions are asked by new users to the system. We can give fewer and better-prepared 
answers by speaking to several new-user groups rather than answering questions on an individual basis. 
 2. Provide awareness of available ~cilities and services. Implicit l~ informing the user of what the 
Center can do for him is informing the user of what the Center cannot do for him. There is a big difference 
in "does not want to do" and "cannot do". The particular constraints of each center's organization will 
determine the awRilability of many facilities and services. At the beginning is a good time for users 
to be given a good explanation of what the Center can do for them, otherwise their expectations of the 
Center's role in their academic lives may be unrealistic and, at some point, unfulfilled.  3. Introduce 
the user to"manual' labor. T~roughout the'orientation program, direct use of and reference to manuals 
can make the user aware that with the help of manuals, he is capable of solving many problems himself. 
Encourage your users to ask which manual they need for some problem, rather than how to solve the problem. 
 4. Enhance our image. "Image" seems to 5~ an important word these days so we are concerned about ours. 
If the user's first contact with the Center is in a situation initiated by the Center in which'the Center 
is providing assistance for the user, then the user's first impression of' the Center is going to be 
favor- able. Invariably, the more the user understands about the operations of the Center, the better 
his relations are with the Center, and hence, our image is improved because we have, shall we say, raised 
his conscious- ness in our direction.  5. Aid in recruiting. Our installation is a Honeywell site and 
some users have no Honeywell experience and are concerned about moving to a new system (when they know 
how to use but really do not understand the old  M4B 40 ' one). The existence of an orientation program 
to welcome them should calm their fears. While "aiding in recruiting" may not be of direct benefit to 
the Center, it certainly pleases department chairs and administrators and you can never have too many 
of them on your side. So be sure that your orientation program gets the publicity it deserves. As stated 
earlier our prime objective was to serve the user, i.e., to orient him to our center. In order to provide 
the most effective orientation, we agreed that our program should have certain characteristics. CHARACTERISTICS 
 i. Com~ -the new faculty member is 5elng introduced to many new things at this time. He is in a new 
position, possibly with new responsibilities, and in a new community. ~nformation throughput for humans, 
low as it is, degrades under overload. Therefore it is advisable to plan sessions that are approximately 
one hour long, with additional time for user questions and experimentation if warranted. Several of the 
characteristics below also encourage compactness. 2. Pertinent -the compactness of your session should 
force, somewhat, the offering of only pertinent informa- tion. The human has a small, short-term memory, 
so pertinent information includes what is necessary to enable that human to start experiencing and experimenting 
with the system. "What is necessary" will vary, of course, for the novice and the experienced user. Information 
which the user does not need or, more importantly, does not anticipate needing, in the rather immediate 
future will not be retained anyway.  3. Well-documented - even though your session is compact and the 
informa- tion offered pertinent, the user will still retain only a portion of what is presented. Good 
documentation for the user will  a) allow him to listen to everything presented rather than trying 
to listen while taking notes b) make it easy for him to make only brief notes in the margins of hand-outs 
 c) give him good references for, thus encouraging, future experimenting d) allow you to present infor- 
mation which needs no formal discussion. Preparing good documentation will also force you to make a 
clear, organized presentation. 4. Desensitizing -an orientation session cannot inform a new user of 
all he needs to know but it can provide him with enough basic information to break the ice in ~ this 
new relationship. After the initial encounter with the system, which the orientation provides, the user 
will experience in subsequent encounters sparks of recognition of something familiar. These sparks will 
serve to keep at a minimum the frustration encountered in adapting to a new system.  5. Flexible - be 
flexible enough in your presentation to be responsive to the make-up of your group. Spend more time on 
the statistical packages if your group is composed of statistical users. If possible, encourage statistical 
and scientific users to attend different sessions, where the session emphasis can be shifted. In a homogeneous 
group, user participation may be greater and certainly, questions from users will be of interest to the 
entire group.  PRELIMINARIES Apart from the orientation program itself, scheduling and publicity must 
be considered. As mentioned previously, two different sessions will be conducted for the novice and the 
experienced user. These session formats will be discussed below. Depending on the number of new users, 
it will probably be necessary to schedule several times for each session. This will insure that even 
with conflicting schedules among users, all users can choose a session which fits into their schedule. 
In addition, it will keep the number of new users in each session smaller, allowing more opportunity 
for staff and machine interaction with the new users. Efforts in putting together a good program will 
be wasted unless the program is preceded by good publicity. Your university will probably be communicating 
with the new faculty member between the time of his acceptance of a position and prior to his assuming 
the position. Include in these communications (or if there are none send directly from the Center) information 
about your installation which would be useful and perhaps even necessary regarding the portabil- ity 
of programs and data, and also include publicity about the orientation program. This publicity should 
include a description of the two 41 M4B different sessions, so the new user can determine which one 
he should attend, and a schedule of session times. After the new faculty member's arrival send the same 
information to him with a return card listing the session times. Instruct him to check the session of 
his choice and place the card in the campus mail. We would suggest one follow-up with the same information 
for new faculty who do not reply to your first notice. ORIENTATION FOR THE NOVICE We consider the novice 
one who has never or only indirectly used the computer. Indirect use is use that is completely directed 
by someone else. For example, the user who uses canned programs but needs assistance in setting up system 
and program control cards for these canned programs would be considered a novice. The user does not need 
to be a programmer to be considered an experienced user, but he should be experienced in system use. 
 Listed below are the topics we felt were appropriate to introduce the novice to system use and, hopefully, 
to motivate him to start experimenting with the system. Each topic is discussed in the session and accompanied 
by documentation. i. How to apply for a computer account number. The procedure for applying f~ a computer 
account number for both individual and class use is presented and the application form is explained. 
The handling of computer charges which can vary according to the use of a number is also discussed. 
 2. Center policies. Center policies include a) hours of operation (including scheduled down times for 
preventative maintenance) b) availability and types of consulting services c) restrictions on system 
use (i.e., commercial use or game-playing may be prohibited) d) open and closed shop areas e) batch 
job submission and retrieval. 3. Computer ethics. Many users regard information stored on computer as 
different from information in someone's private possession. Ethical behavior for computer users includes 
 a) respect for the privacy of another user's computer files, even unprotected files b) respect for 
the value and privacy of another user's account number c) responsible and careful use of computer resources. 
Because of the power available to users and the difficulty of monitoring computer use, ethical behavior 
among users needs to be encouraged as early and as often as possible. 4. Available software'. Include 
with a list of the available software the area of application(s) for the software.  5. Short courses. 
Hand out a s~Ledule of short courses offered by the Center and make some recommendations on ones that 
would be appropriate for beginners.  6. Kt~c,punch demonstration. Demonstrate  use of a keypunch machine 
and have each user punch several cards. Keep your classes small enough so that each user will have a 
chance to use a machine.  7. Te~nninal demonstration. Demonstrate t~ use of a terminal in some fairly 
nontechnical application such as text preparation, text editing, or execution of a canned program. Then 
have each user sign onto a terminal and begin the CAI lessons on your machine. Go through one short les- 
  son with the entire group. Again a class small enough to allow each user some individual time on a 
terminal is preferred. Encourage the novices to experiment with dhe system and, as they gain exper- 
ience with the system, to re-enroll in the orientation program as experienced users. ORIENTATION FOR 
THE EXPERIENCED USER There are certain basics that any user beginning at a new installation needs to 
know. Therefore, some of the topics presented in the session for the novice must also be covered in the 
session for the experienced user. These topics can be covered much more rapidly and with less discussion 
and fewer questions than in the novice session however. These basics consist of topics 1 through 5 in 
the previous section, so topics 1 through 5 are the same for both sessions, but formal discussion of 
topics 4 and 5 is omitted for the experienced user. Just as in the novice session, documentation is given 
on each topic. Continuing with the remaining topics for this session: 6. Control cards. Have a hand-out 
on the control cards necessary to run a FORTRAN program and to invoke the standard statistical packages. 
Explain the purpose of each card thereby relating it to its general purpose in the deck. This should 
make it easier for the user to  M4B 42 assemble other deck set-ups himself. Select several commonly 
used control cards, such as cards referencing tape and disk files and the card setting limits, and guide 
the ~ser in determining these card formats by referencing the card descriptions in the appropriate manuals. 
 7. Timesharing command lan~uageo Demonstrate the procedure for signing onto a terminal and invoking 
the CAI lessons on your machine. Discuss briefly the basics of each of the following aspects of the command 
language with the appropriate manual (in addition to hand-outs) as the reference guide: a) file or document 
manipulation (i.e., creating, saving, referencing, purging files) b) text editing (i.e., string replacement, 
line deletion, line insertion) e) program execution in a timesharing environment.  ORIENTATION EXTENSION 
 Following the first orientation program for new faculty we plan to extend the program to the entire 
faculty so that all faculty members can benefit from the program. We will still have different sessions 
for the novice and experienced user. We will schedule each session to accommodate one or more departments 
(i.e., all novices in, say, chemistry and physics, will attend the same session) because, as mentioned 
earlier, a homogeneous group allows the session emphasis to be shifted to meet the group's interests 
and the questions from individuals in the group are more likely to be of interest to the entire group. 
It is somewhat questionable whether experienced users already on your system should attend a program 
designed to orient them to the system. These users may be better served by enrolling in short courses 
at the Center. Perhaps the best solution is to let these users decide for themselves by including 
a list (similar to the above list) of topics to be presented along with the program publicity. CONCLUSION 
 We have attempted to present here the motivation behind and organization of our faculty orientation 
program. Hopefully, sufficient insight and care have gone into the preparation of this program so that 
a similar program for any other university computation center could be implemented from this one with 
relative ease. 43 M4B 
			