
 Flow and Changes in Appearance y Julie Dorsey * Hans Køhling PedersenPat Hanrahanz Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology Stanford University Stanford University Abstract An important, largely unexplored area 
of computer image genera­ tion is the simulation of weathering and its effects on appearance. Weathering 
results from the interaction of the environment with the materials in the world. The .ow of water is 
one of the most pervasive and important natural forces involved in the weathering of materials, producing 
a distinctive set of patterns of washes and stains. This paper presents an intuitive phenomenological 
model for the .ow of water over surfaces that is capable of generating such changes in appearance. We 
model the .ow as a particle system, each particle represent­ ing a drop of water. The motion of the 
water particles is controlled by parameters such as gravity, friction, wind, roughness, and con­ straints 
that force the particles to maintain contact with the surface. The chemical interaction of the water 
with the surface materials is governed by a set of coupled differential equations describing both the 
rate of absorption of water by the surface and the rate of solu­ bility and sedimentation of deposits 
on the surface. To illustrate the power of this simple model, we show examples of .ows over com­ plex 
geometries made from different materials; the resulting pat­ terns are striking and very dif.cult to 
achieve using traditional tex­ turing techniques. CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.3.7 [Computer 
Graph­ics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques. 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: weathering, material mod­els, physically-inspired texturing, particle 
systems, light re.ection models.  1 Introduction Over time, the natural environment acts upon materials 
and changes their appearance. These processes and changes are termed weath­ ering. Through weathering, 
objects become tarnished, bleached, stained, eroded, and otherwise modi.ed. Weathering is unavoidable 
and therefore must be simulated to make realistic pictures of natural environments. For many years, computer 
graphics researchers and practitioners have been grappling with the problem of creating surfaces that 
have *NE43-213, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139. http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/.dorsey yCurrent 
address: NE43-218, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139. http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/.hkp z370 
Gates Computer Science Building 3B, Stanford, CA 94305-4070. http://www-graphics.stanford.edu/.hanrahan 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. &#38;#169; 
1996 ACM-0-89791-746-4/96/008...$3.50 a worn appearance. In the production of Pixar s recent computer­generated 
.lm Toy Story, for example, weathering effects such as scuffs and dirt were added to the surfaces by 
painting textures and compositing them within a programmable shader [6]. However, this process is very 
time consuming. Current tools for texturing geomet­ric models made from many surfaces are primitive; 
for example, it is very dif.cult to match textures across surface boundaries or account properly for 
area distortions caused by the parameterization. More fundamentally, the texture mapping approach does 
not take into ac­count the structure or properties of a given material or the processes in the surrounding 
environment that account for weathering. Our long range goal is to simulate the effect of the environment 
on com­plex material surfaces so that their appearance may be controlled semi-automatically. The focus 
of this paper is the modeling of changes in appearance caused by the .ow of water over complex surfaces. 
Figure 1 con­tains several photographs we have collected showing the weathering of various buildings. 
Inspection of these photographs reveals that many of the complex patterns on the surfaces are due to 
the .ow of water. Water may wash dirt from some areas and clean them; in other areas dirt and other materials 
are deposited, creating stains. The patterns produced by this process are visually rich and very dif­.cult 
to model with current texturing techniques. Exactly how water travels over surfaces is very complicated 
and is dependent on a large number of variables. Unfortunately, the workings of complex .ows are still 
not fully understood based on .rst principles [1]. However, for the purposes of this study, we are concerned 
with the patterns created by the .ow of water on surfaces, not the detailed appearance of the .ow itself. 
We therefore present a phenomenological model, based on particle systems and rate equa­tions governing 
the absorption of water by the surface and the sed­imentation of deposits. This model is simple and robust, 
and it is capable of generating a wide range of .ow effects. 1.1 Related Work Relevant previous work 
can be conveniently divided into two major categories: techniques for simulating .uid .ow and particle 
systems. In this section, we discuss our approach in light of these categories. Flow models. Kass and 
Miller presented an approach for an­imating water using a set of partial differential equations [8]. 
They used a wetness map to simulate the wetting and drying of sand as water passes over it. Miller and 
Pearce described a model for animating viscous .uids by simulating the forces of particles interacting 
with one another [12]. The focus of both of these works was on the realistic appearance of the .ow itself, 
both in terms of its motion and rendering. In addition, Musgrave et al. proposed a simple, heuristic 
erosion model that simulates hydraulic and thermal erosion processes on fractal terrains [14]. Particle 
systems. Particle systems represent an effective ap­proach to modeling objects whose behavior over time 
cannot be well-represented in terms of the surface of the objects [17, 18]. In such a system, a collection 
of particles evolves over time. The  (b) (a)  (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 1. A collection of 
representative flow effects.     evolution is determined by applying certain rules to the particles. 
Particle motion may follow either deterministic or stochastic laws of motion. Particle systems have been 
used to model trees, grass, fog, waterfalls, and .re [5, 16, 23]. In a related work, Small described 
a parallel approach to the prob­lem of modeling watercolor by predicting the actions of pigment and water 
when applied to paper .bers [19]. This model was cast as a complex cellular automata on the Connection 
Machine II. Small s model produces nice results, but it is limited to two dimensions and requires excessive 
processing power. The speci.c technical contribution of this paper is to combine particle systems with 
processes similar to those used to model water colors. This allows us to simulate the effects of material 
transport on complex surfaces. 1.2 Overview The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We 
.rst in­troduce the basic mechanisms of .ow and staining and give exam­ples of typical effects that inspired 
our work. We then describe our .ow model in detail, both the dynamics of particles and the coupled differential 
equations controlling absorption and sedimentation. Fi­nally, we illustrate the model with examples of 
.ows over complex geometries: a building facade, two statues, and a portion of a Gothic cathedral.  
 2 Background Figure 1 features photographs of real scenes that show many effects of the .ow of water 
over surfaces. In this paper, we will demonstrate that a number of these effects can be captured with 
a simple under­lying model. In this section we describe the motivation behind the development of our 
model with a discussion of the mechanisms of .ow and staining including a review of the major factors 
involved. We then discuss a series of speci.c representative effects that are associated with this process. 
2.1 Exposure and Runoff The basic factors affecting the rate of .ow over a surface are the quantities 
of incident water, the height, inclination and geometry of the surface, and the absorption of water by 
the material comprising the surface [1, 4]. One of the major features of the pattern of .ows on a building 
is the arrangement of water sources. From these sources, water .ows downward under the in.uence of gravity. 
This is often termed pri­mary .ow. This depends on which parts of the structure receive the most incident 
water and the effect of geometry on directing the .ow. Typically the .ow separates into streams, and, 
in a way similar to rivers, produces patterns that often become self-reinforcing. Fig­ure 1a shows a 
typical example of .ows on a wall of moderate expo­sure. In particular, the window sills and lintels 
above the windows serve to concentrate the .ow on both sides of the windows. The absorption of water 
by the surface is controlled by the ab­sorptivity, or rate of water uptake, and the absorption, or capac­ity 
to absorb water. Runoff occurs when the surface is fully satu­rated (i.e. has no more capacity to absorb 
water) or non-absorbent (i.e. has a low absorptivity). Figure 2 shows the relationship be­tween incident 
rain, runoff, and absorption for several materials [2]. Curve A represents a spongy material with high 
absorptivity and ab­sorption. This material has the capacity to absorb all the incident water over time, 
hence there is no runoff. Curve B describes a mod­erately absorbent concrete with high absorptivity but 
a limited ab­sorption capacity. Initially, from t0to t2, all incident water is ab­sorbed and there is 
no runoff. However, from t2to t3, because of Fraction absorbed A 100% B A: sponge tissue. B: concrete. 
C: concrete, higher absorptivity. D: window glass t0t1t2 t3 Time Figure 2: Simpli.ed diagram showing 
absorption over time for sev­eral materials assuming a constant rain. saturation, the amount absorbed 
is less than the incident amount; hence, some rain is absorbed but an increasing quantity runs off. In 
Curve C, which gives the behavior of concrete with a higher ab­sorptivity, runoff starts sooner, because 
the material becomes sat­urated more quickly. Finally in Curve D, which describes a very non-absorbent 
material such as glass, the amount of water that is ab­sorbed is very small and drops off slowly during 
the time span; thus there is signi.cant runoff. The exposed parts of a structure become saturated .rst, 
so the .ow starts there and proceeds onto dryer areas below. These lower surfaces absorb a proportion 
of the water until they too have a rate of incidence that exceeds the rate of absorption. Splashback 
is a phenomenon that occurs where a wall meets the ground. Here, water hits the ground adjacent to the 
building and causes dirt from the ground to be propelled up and deposited a short distance up the wall. 
This effect also occurs when water hits hori­zontal ledges higher up on a building. Figure 1b shows an 
excellent example of splashback at the base of a building. 2.2 Staining The washing and staining of 
surfaces are strongly in.uenced by ex­ternal, directional sources of dirt. These sources include a variety 
of airborne pollutants, such as exhaust from traf.c or smoke emissions from industrial plants, loose 
material on the ground carried against the base of the building by splashback, or dirt of a biological 
source ranging from bird droppings to plant growth. saturation. staining (a) Even deposit. (b) Water 
from. (c) ...redepositing. . of dirt . above picks. . it at the limit. . up some dirt... . of flow Figure 
3: The basic mechanisms of staining. In Figure 1h, the pattern of dirt on the spindles in the balustrade 
is due to a directional dirt source. The effect of an external source can also be observed in Figure 
1a. The right side of the building curves away from the street, which leads to a reduction in the exposure 
to dirt caused by street traf.c. Without the effects of rainfall, dirt would be distributed fairly evenly 
over vertical surfaces, with higher concentrations on hori­zontal regions such as window sills. Although 
large quantities of dirt are dis.guring (as is the case with buildings completely black­ened by soot), 
generally an even distribution of dirt due to exposure is not considered staining. However, a different 
picture emerges when water .ows over a surface. Dirt is picked up by water move­ment and redeposited 
elsewhere, so that its distribution becomes un­even. The areas that are exposed to a rapid .ow of water 
may be washed clean, whereas those where the dirt is redeposited have a greater accumulation. This basic 
mechanism is illustrated in Fig­ure 3. An interesting effect occurs at the locus of points on the surface 
where the runoff stops; this interface is critical with respect to stain­ing, since this is where any 
dirt picked up by the runoff water is redeposited [10]. A very similar stain occurs when water evapo­rates, 
leaving behind any soluble material. Another interesting ef­fect occurs when a non-absorbent surface 
is adjacent to a porous sur­face. In this case, the staining is limited to the porous material. In Figure 
1g, the top portion of the bridge is made of a non-absorbent metal, which causes a large portion of the 
incident water to run onto the porous stone work below, causing signi.cant staining. Another important 
effect in staining is differential .ow, which oc­curs when water running over one material dissolves 
small quanti­ties of the material and deposits them as stains elsewhere. A com­mon example, known as 
the spilt-milk effect, can be readily ob­served in places where runoff from concrete leads to white streaking 
on brickwork below. Other examples include green stains generated by runoff from copper [3] or rust stains 
from other corroded metals such as iron. If there are several materials present, even more com­plex patterns 
of stains may occur depending on the relative solubil­ities of the different materials. Figures 1c and 
1d depict examples of differential .ow. In Figure 1c the circled region shows the spilt­milk effect caused 
by the deposits from a limestone window sill. In Figure 1d the circled region shows an example where 
rust from an iron chain has been washed onto the street below. In areas that are exposed to water for 
long periods of time, sat­uration staining often occurs. Different materials have a different color response 
to saturation; most porous materials become darker due to a decrease in the average scattering angle 
caused by the inter­action of the water and the substrate. Figure 1f illustrates saturation staining. 
Here, water collects on the ridge at the base of the build­ing.  3 Flow Model In this section, we describe 
a model that qualitatively captures many of the .ow effects described in the previous section. The model 
has three basic inputs: surface geometry to create structures, materials for the structures and loose 
deposits, and the environment. Our .ow simulator is based on particle systems and rate equations. Particles 
are used to model water droplets both on the surface and in the air. The environment description speci.es 
the initial distribution of water droplets. Equations of motion describe the movement of each water particle 
over the surface accounting for gravity, friction, contact forces, and the in.uence of obstacles. The 
quantity of wa­ter in a particle decreases through absorption into the base material of the surface or 
evaporation. Water droplets may dissolve mate­rial, carry it to a different location, and subsequently 
deposit it there. This model is simple conceptually, is easy to implement, and only requires modest computation. 
Surface geometry is represented as a collection of parametric patches. The current system supports two 
types of patches: poly­gons and cubic spline patches. The geometric information is aug­mented with topological 
information that describes adjacency rela­tionships between all the patches; this is essential because 
the .ow must be continuous across a patch boundary. Each parametric sur­face also has a set of two-dimensional 
texture coordinates which is used to index a set of texture maps attached to each surface. For ex­ample, 
the amount of water absorbed by the surface is stored in a saturation map. In addition to water, the 
system also models other materials. Each patch represents a surface of a solid object made from a base 
mate­rial, which is coated with a mixture of loose deposits. The concen­tration of each loose deposit 
is stored in a texture map attached to the surface. Each type of material has an associated set of render­ing 
properties, e.g. diffuse and specular colors, shininess, and a set of physical properties, e.g. roughness, 
absorptivity, and other rate constants. These properties are summarized in Table 1. Material Properties 
Properties Notation Material Diffuse color Specular color Shininess Roughness Absorption Absorptivity 
Cd Cs s r a ka Deposits Diffuse color Adhesion rate constant Solubility rate constant Cd kS kD Table 
1: Attributes of the two major classes of materials: base mate­rials and loose deposits. Rate constants 
(properties beginning with k) are used in the differential equations controlling absorption of water 
and sedimentation of loose deposits (see Table 3). 3.1 Water Particle Model In our model water is represented 
as a collection of water particles. The attributes of each water particle are shown in Table 2; they 
in­clude the mass or volume of the particle, as well as positional at­tributes. Particle systems have 
been used widely in computer graph­ics and the techniques we use for modeling their motion are well de­scribed 
in the literature [20, 22]. Water Particle Properties Attribute Notation Mass Position Velocity Soluble 
material i m x v Si Table 2: Particle attributes. Water particles are created on the geometric model 
according to a distribution function for incident rain. This function depends on exposure to the prevailing 
rain direction. These distribution func­tions will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.4. The .ow 
of water particles along the surface depends on a set of forces: grav­ity, friction, self-repulsion, 
and diffusion. Gravity and friction cause the particles to .ow downward; self-repulsion prevents the 
particles from clumping and causes the motion to be more .uid-like (see Fig­ure 4). Normally the .ow 
of particles is constrained to lie on the sur­face; this is done by projecting the resulting force vector 
onto the Figure 5: The effects on the .ow due to surface roughness. The three .gures are generated with 
different surface roughnesses: the surface on the left is smoothest; the surface on the right is roughest. 
 In order to create more interesting .ows on surfaces that are ge­ometrically smooth, we have experimented 
with two simple rough surface models. In the .rst model, a scalar roughness controls a dif­fusion process. 
To simulate diffusion, each particle is subjected to a random force in the tangent plane to the surface; 
the magnitude of the displacement force is proportional to the roughness parameter. Figure 5 shows the 
effect of roughness on the .ow. As can be seen, increasing the roughness causes the particles to disperse, 
whereas decreasing the roughness causes the .ow to be streaky. In the sec­ond model, a displacement map 
is added to a surface. The displace­ment map is used to perturb the surface normal which in turn de.nes 
a perturbed tangent plane. When a displacement map is present, the resulting force is .rst projected 
onto the true tangent plane and then reprojected onto the perturbed tangent plane. This simple technique 
causes the particles to conform to the displacement map .owing more slowly across a bumpy surface and 
hence collecting in cavities and cracks, and streaming along cracks and valleys. To model the effects 
of secondary .ow, particles are allowed to fall off a surface. A particle leaves the surface if the angle 
between its velocity vector and the surface tangent exceeds a prespeci.ed critical angle. When a particle 
loses contact with the surface, it falls vertically under the in.uence of gravity until it hits another 
surface. Since computing such intersections can be computationally inten­sive, we pre-compute a table 
of positions where particles will land when they fall off the surface. This is an important feature, 
as our models consist of large numbers of patches. Together, these steps form a model capable of reproducing 
a suf­.ciently wide variety of effects to generate interesting weathered appearances. Complex .ow patterns 
arise naturally by constrain­ing particles to remain on the surface, thereby forcing the parti­cles to 
conform to the geometry. Collisions naturally divert parti­cles around obstacles and allow for non-local 
interactions between different parts of the model. Roughness and displacement maps change the look of 
.ows on different surfaces. A snapshot of parti­cles .owing over a complex surface is shown in Figure 
4. A  Figure 6: Absorption and deposition model. 3.2 Absorption Model The absorption of water by a 
surface depends largely on the proper­ties of void space, or pores, in the material. However, for practical 
purposes the following model is often adopted [2]: Three param­eters control the absorption: absorption, 
absorptivity,and satura­tion. Absorption is the maximum amount of water that the surface may hold, whereas 
absorptivity is the rate that the surface absorbs water. Saturation is the ratio of the actual water 
absorbed to the ca­pacity of the surface. The amount of water absorbed depends on the absorptivity and 
the duration of exposure, but it is limited by the ab­sorption. This effect can be modeled by adjusting 
the absorptivity as a function of the saturation. The absorption process is shown diagrammatically in 
Figure 6, and the equations that govern the process are contained in Table 3. As a water particle moves 
across a porous surface, its mass will de­crease due to absorption and evaporation. At each time step, 
after the position of the particle is updated, its mass is updated by numer­ically intergrating a differential 
equation controlling absorption and evaporation. When the mass of the particle falls below some thresh­old, 
it dies and is removed from the simulation. Absorption and Deposition Process Absorption @m @t .ka a=w 
a A m @w @t ka a=w a m A .Iwsun Sedimentation @Si @t .kSi Si+kDi Di m A @Di @t kSi Si A m .kDi Di+i ID 
 Table 3: Sedimentation equations. The top two equations control the absorption of water by the surface; 
the bottom two equations control the sedimentation of loose deposits. In this last set of equa­tions, 
the subscript iis used to signify different types of deposits. Si is the concentration of dissolved material 
in a water particle, and Di is the concentration of material deposited on the surface. All other parameters 
and functions are described in Tables 1 and 2. Figure 7: The effects on the .ow due to absorption of 
a porous sur­face. The two .gures show the amount of absorbed water on two surfaces with different absorptions. 
Because the surface on the left has a lower absorption than the one on the right, it becomes saturated 
sooner and the water streak is longer. In contrast, the surface on the left absorbs more water limiting 
the length of the streak. Since more water is inside the streak on the right, the streak is brighter. 
Figure 7 illustrates the .ow pattern from a pipe across a surface with two different absorptions. To 
make these images, the quantity of water absorbed at each point by the surface is stored in a satura­tion 
map. This saturation map may be used by the rendering sys­tem to modulate the appearance of the surface. 
Unlike this .gure, a saturation stain makes the surface appear darker; this point will be discussed in 
Section 3.5. 3.3 Deposition Model The last main category of surface attributes controls transport and 
deposition of various substances such as dirt. In our model, these sedimentation characteristics are 
captured by two parameters: solu­bility, describing the rate at which water picks up surface deposits, 
and adhesion, specifying the rate of redeposition from water parti­cles on to the surface. These parameters 
may vary for different ma­terials. The sedimentation process is shown diagrammatically in Fig­ure 6, 
and the equations governing the process are shown in Table 3. These coupled differential equations depend 
on the relative concen­trations of the materials in the water particle and on the surface. In the case 
of a water particle, the concentration is de.ned to be ma­terial per unit mass; in the case of the surface, 
the concentration is the material per unit area. Note that as a water particle s mass de­creases due 
to evaporation, the concentration of dissolved materials decreases. Thus, the rate of deposition naturally 
increases during evaporation, causing the dissolved material to be deposited on the underlying surface. 
The relative solubility and adhesion of deposits on a surface play a major role in the generation of 
stains. When water dissolves ma­terial from a surface, it has the effect of washing the surface. When 
water deposits material, it has the effect of staining the surface. The combination of these two effects, 
when coupled with the .ow, can generate complex stain patterns. Even more complex patterns arise if multiple 
materials with different solubilities are present. More ex­amples of this will be shown in the results. 
 3.4 Environment Model Environment attributes Attribute Notation Rain Sunlight Deposits Iwrain Iwsun 
IDi Table 4: Environment The external factors affecting the .ow are shown in Table 4. In this section 
we describe the models we used to generate the images in this paper. Although it should be emphasized 
that it is very easy to add more complex environmental models to the system. As described in Section 
3.1, the rate and direction of incident rain seeds the particle .ow process. We model this by creating 
rain sources that emit rain drops. In our model, the direction of rain is controlled by the direction 
of wind. This in turn is given by ran­domly perturbing the prevailing wind direction. These drops are 
traced until they intersect the model and are deposited in an expo­sure map. For ef.ciency reasons we 
precompute these exposure maps. During the .ow simulation the exposure determines the prob­ability that 
a water particle will be created at different points on the surface; however, once a particle is created, 
water sources have no effect on the particle s mass. The rate of evaporation is very sensitive to the 
orientation of the surface and whether it is shadowed. This effect may be modeled by computing the total 
solar irradiance, both due to the sky and the sun itself. In some of the experiments performed in this 
paper, the evap­oration rate is set to be constant. Finally, the initial distribution of deposits of 
various types may also be controlled with directional sources, or prestored in a texture map. 3.5 Rendering 
To create .nal renderings, we use simple methods to approximate the diffuse color of the loose deposits 
and to account for wet sur­faces and saturation stains. The color of the deposit layer is com­puted simply 
by summing the color of each deposit, weighted by the concentration of that deposit from the appropriate 
texture map. An alpha value is computed using a similar technique, and this is used to composite the 
deposit color over the base material. The color of a wet surface is modi.ed to make it look darker. To 
approximate this effect, we simply modulate the diffuse re.ectivity depending upon the saturation of 
the surface.  4 Results In this section we show results for four complex models: a building facade, 
two statues, and a section of a cathedral.  Figure 8: Building facade. Rendering without .ow patterns 
(left). Rendering with .ow patterns (right). 4.1 Building Model Figure 8 shows side-by-side renderings 
of the building, without (on the left) and with (on the right) the .ow effects. Figure 9 shows the changes 
in appearance due to the .ows in more detail. The building was modeled using AutoCAD and consists of 
approximately 450 polygons. All the .ow effects in this series were created in approxi­mately three hours 
on a Silicon Graphics Reality Engine2 with a 250 Mhz R4400 processor. In the center section of the building 
alongside the main window, there are several examples of primary .ows that continue until the water reaches 
the stone work comprising the base of the building. The .ow has the effect of washing dirt and soot from 
the brick and depositing it on the lower parts of the building. Note the difference between the patterns 
generated by the .ows on the yellow brick and grey stone below. This is caused by the greater roughness 
of the brick surface relative to the smoother stone. On the stone at the base of the building, there 
are subtle splashback effects making the lower part even dirtier. Notice the underside of the vertical 
panels that curve outward to the left of the yellow brick section: here there is evidence of saturation 
staining. There is also staining due to par­tial .ows on the sign below the lamp, in this case simulating 
a rust stain where the lamp meets the building. Similar staining and accu­mulation of a patina [3] are 
shown on the copper rain pipe on the left side of the building. Finally, on the sides of the upper window 
there is a pattern due to the differential .ow of the copper patina. To compute these images, the simulation 
results are stored in standard texture maps, and these are input into the rendering sys­tem. Each surface 
has nine texture maps, thus the .nal rendering uses over 4,000 texture maps (although a fair number of 
these are very small). In our system, we combine the texture maps using a shading language similar to 
the one used in RenderMan. In these images, displacement maps are used to vary the height of the sur­face 
of bricks and stones; ray tracing is used so that the displacement maps self-shadow the surface, which 
adds to the realism of the pic­tures.  4.2 Venus de Milo Figure 10 shows the development of washing 
and staining patterns due to .ows over a statue of Venus de Milo, a classic work of art. The model was 
created from a Cyberware scan and consists of approx­imately 260,000 small, evenly sized triangles. This 
data was then used to create 63 bicubic patches, which are input to the .ow simu­lation system. All the 
.ow effects in this sequence were created in a session of approximately twenty minutes in length. The 
left image depicts the original, white marble statue prior to the .ow simulation. It is pure white, with 
no imperfections, and is rendered with only diffuse re.ection and a single light source. The right image 
shows the results of applying a uniform coating of reddish brown dirt across the statue, followed by 
a .ow simu­lation to wash the surface. There are noticeable streaks in the dirt patterns due to the .ow, 
and a randomness due to the individual na­ture of each particle. Dirt accumulates in various parts of 
the statue where the surface is protected from the path of the .ow, such as un­der the left arm. The 
dirt texture conforms to the folds in the fab­  Figure 9: Closeups of .ow patterns on the building facade. 
ric below. For example, the upper surfaces of the convex parts of the folds are clean; the lower surfaces 
are dirty. The pattern is more uniform on the base of the statue and areas closest to the ground, since 
less water reached that part of the statue. It is not possible to achieve these effects with simple accessibility 
[11]. The image was rendered using a diffuse model for the marble, and the dirt layer was composited 
using the same technique as for the building.  4.3 Gargoyle Figure 11 shows a scanned model of a gargoyle 
before and after the application of a simple .ow pattern. The model was created from a Cyberware scan 
and consists of approximately 310,000 triangles. This data was then used to create 30 bicubic patches, 
which were input to the .ow simulation system. The re.ection function of the metallic surface was modi.ed 
to make the surface appear as if it were covered by a thin layer of soot that was partially washed away. 
 4.4 Cathedral Figure 12 shows a portion of a Gothic cathedral, which was simu­lated in our system. The 
cathedral and its statues and gargoyles were modeled using approximately 100,000 polygons which then 
had dis­placement maps applied to them, leading to a geometric complexity of over 6,000,000 polygons. 
The gutters and drainage system on the cathedral were carefully designed to be similar to those on actual 
cathedrals: water .ows down the upper roof to a gutter below the railing which directs the water down 
the main columns, and down along the top of the .ying buttresses [9]. Water exits the system be­low the 
statues of the saints. The gutter above the middle section of the facade was blocked, so that the gutter 
backed up and the particles spilled over the front of the building. As a result, there was much less 
.ow beneath the statue of the saint on the left than the statue on the right. All .ow simulations were 
performed using the displace­ment maps, so that the .ow conformed to the actual displaced ge­ometry; 
this is evident in the cracks between the stones.  5 Summary and Discussion We have described a system 
for simulating the .ow of water over complex surfaces. The .ow conforms to the geometry of the shapes, 
and the water interacts with the surface materials. Speci.cally, the system is able to simulate the absorption 
of water by the material and the transport of deposits by dissolving and carrying surface material, and 
later redepositing it. As a result, a wide range of .ow effects may be simulated, yielding complex patterns 
showing washing and staining. The system is simple, robust, and practical. By using particle sys­tems 
a wide range of phenomena are easily programmed. We be­lieve the system can be extended to include additional 
factors, such as windblown dust and biological growth. Also, by embedding the .ow model in an interactive 
system, the user can control the .ows to produce the desired images, which is required if a physical 
model is to be used for artistic purposes. Finally, the methods we use to de­scribe textures on complex 
surfaces are fairly general; they could be used as a basis for the creation and design of other complex 
patterns on these surfaces.  Water .ows are a major cause of the weathering of outdoor struc­tures and 
objects and must be simulated to create convincing pic­tures of such environments. The key to modeling 
weathering is to simulate the effects of the environment on the materials. Although our pictures have 
many effects new to computer graphics, it takes only a few minutes studying and comparing the real to 
the virtual examples to realize that there is still much research to be done. This is a challenging new 
direction for computer graphics. Acknowledgements Thanks to Jeff Feldgoise for modeling the cathedral 
and building facade, Matt Pharr for building much of the rendering system and for help with the .nal 
renderings, Craig Kolb for help assembling and printing the .nal images, Tamara Munzner for video assistance, 
and the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions. Thanks also to Brian Curless, Venkat Krishnamurthy 
and Marc Levoy for pro­viding access to the Cyberware scanner and their software for cre­ating complex 
models; their system was used to scan the statue of the Venus and the Angels in the cathedral niches. 
This research was supported by research grants from the National Science Foundation (CCR-9207966 and 
CCR-9624172) and the MIT Cabot and NEC Research Funds, and by equipment grants from Apple and Silicon 
Graphics Inc. References [1] ACHESON,D. J. Elementary Fluid Dynamics. Oxford Uni­verity Press, New York, 
NY, 1992. [2] ADDLESON,L., AND RICE,C. Performance of Materials in Buildings. Butterworth Heinemann, 
Boston, MA, 1991. [3] DORSEY,J., ANDHANRAHAN,P.Modelingandrenderingof metallic patinas. In Computer Graphics 
Proceedings (1996), Annual Conference Series, ACM SIGGRAPH. [4] DULLIEN, F.A.L. Porous Media: Fluid Transport 
and Pore Structure, second ed. Academic Press, New York, NY, 1992. [5] FOURNIER,A., AND REEVES, W. T. 
A simple model of ocean waves. Computer Graphics 20, 4 (Aug. 1986), 75 84. [6] FRENCH, L. Toy story. 
Cinefantastique 27, 2 (1995), 36 37. [7] JOHNSON,J.B., HANEEF,S. J., AND HEPBURN,B. J. Lab­oratory exposure 
systems to simulate atmospheric degradation of building stone under dry and wet deposition. Atmospheric 
Environment 24A, 10 (Oct 1990), 2785 2792. [8] KASS,M., AND MILLER, G. Rapid, stable .uid dynamics for 
computer graphics. Computer Graphics 24, 4 (Aug. 1990), 49 57. [9] LIPPERT, H. G. Systeme zur dachentwasserung 
bei gotischen kirchenbauten. Architecture: Zeitschrift fur Geschichte der Baukunst 24, 1 (1994), 111 
128.  [10] MASO,J.C., Ed. Pore Structure and Moisture Characteris­tics. Chapman and Hall, New York, 
1987. [11] MILLER, G. Ef.cient algorithms for local and global acces­sibility shading. In Computer Graphics 
Proceedings (1994), Annual Conference Series, ACM SIGGRAPH, pp. 319 326. [12] MILLER,G., AND PEARCE, 
A. Globular dynamics: A con­nected particle system for animating viscous .uids. Comput­ers and Graphics 
13, 3 (1989), 305 309. [13] MOSTAFAVI,M., AND LEATHERBARROW,D. On Weather­ing: The Life of Buildings 
in Time. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993. [14] MUSGRAVE,F. K., KOLB,C.E., AND MACE,R.S. The synthesis 
and rendering of eroded fractal terrains. Computer Graphics 23 (July 1989), 41 50. [15] PAZ,O. A Draft 
of Shadows and Other Poems. New Direc­tions, New York, NY, 1979. [16] PEACHEY,D.R.Modelingwavesandsurf. 
Computer Graph­ics 20, 4 (Aug. 1986), 65 74. [17] REEVES, W. T. Particle systems a technique for modeling 
a class of fuzzy objects. ACM Trans. Graphics 2 (Apr. 1983), 91 108. Figure 12: Simulated .ows on a Gothic 
cathedral. [18] REEVES,W. T., AND BLAU, R. Approximate and proba­bilistic algorithms for shading and 
rendering structured parti­cle systems. Computer Graphics 19, 4 (July 1985), 313 322. [19] SMALL, D. 
Simulating watercolor by modeling diffusion, pigment, and paper .bers. In Proceedings of SPIE 91 (Feb. 
1991), pp. 70 76. [20] TURK, G. Generating textures for arbitrary surfaces using reaction-diffusion. 
Computer Graphics 25, 4 (July 1991), 289 298. [21] WINKLER,E.M. Stone in Architecture: Properties and 
Durability. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1994. [22] WITKIN,A. P., AND HECKBERT, P. S. Using particles 
to sample and control implicit surfaces. In Computer Graphics Proceedings (1994), Annual Conference Series, 
ACM SIG-GRAPH, pp. 269 278. [23] YAEGER,L., UPSON,C., AND MYERS, R. Combining phys­ical and visual simulation 
 creation of the planet Jupiter for the .lm 2010 .Computer Graphics 20, 4 (Aug. 1986), 85 93. [24] YALIN,M. 
S. Mechanics of sediment transport, second ed. Oxford, New York, NY, 1977.  
			