
 .uff: Illuminating Blimps and Music HidekiYoshimoto* Koichi Hori Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics UniversityofTokyo UniversityofTokyo Keywords: Blimp, Balloon, 
Installation, Art, Illumination, Per­formance 1 Introduction This paper describes our exhibition named 
.uff, where multiple blimps with Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) illuminate the space to music. Blimps and 
balloons have been utilized in musical or dance performances. While the performers stage is clearly distinguished 
from audience in most performances, blimps and balloons could .y beyond the stage and blur the boundary 
between performers in­cluding the blimps and balloons themselves and audience. In the exhibition we aimed 
that multiple blimps scattered among audience would surround and mix the audience with themselves. Ourexhibi­tion 
included two different performances: installation and live per­formance.Wedescribethe implementationand 
brief observationof each performance. 2 Performances with Balloons or Blimps This section introduces 
some existing performances with balloons and our past work that focussed on interactive blimps for perfor­mances. 
Zygote is a helium .lled balloon which emits light in re­sponse to human touch [3]. Multiple Zygotes 
are released above audience s heads in a musical performance and the audience can activity touch and 
throw them. Helium Dance is an act of Corteo showby Cirquedu Soleil,in which an actor suspendedby balloons 
performs above audience s heads [1]. Audience can touch and push the actor, too. We proposed the concept 
of interactive blimps as puppets, which visualize performances from people to people with real time effects 
and motions [2]. We developed a blimp which in­teractively react to human input such as voice via mobile 
phones or manipulations of a physical controller, and put it into observation at a demo installation 
and a musical performance. In these perfor­mances and projects, representationsbyballoons and blimps 
are not limitedinthe separatedstagebutexpandedaboveaudience sheads. 3 .uff: Illuminating Blimps and 
Music We held an exhibition named .uff, where multiple blimps embed­ded with LEDs illuminate the space 
to music. Each blimp was composed of a helium .lled balloon of 110 cm diameter sphere, two propellersforverticaland 
horizontalmovements,a120cmtail of wires, and electronics including controller, wireless modem, and battery. 
Full color LEDs were installed in the balloon and the tail. Color and effects of the light including 
oscillation and blink were triggered by wireless signals from the host computer. Propellers werealsodriven 
accordingtothe wireless signals.We programmed asequenceof theseeffectsasaMusical Instrument Digital Interface 
(MIDI) track synchronizing with music so that the blimps could perform to music. The exhibition included 
two different performances: installation and live performance. In the installation, ten blimps performed 
to electronica music played by a computer. Audience walked around *e-mail: yoshimoto@ailab.t.u-toko.ac.jp 
the blimps, touched them, and threw them up. Theysometimes in­teracted with each blimp, and sometimes 
looked around the whole space illuminated by the blimps. In the live performance, a hu­man band played 
in front of audience and ten blimps were scattered among the audience. Audience enjoyed the musical performance 
on the front stage and the light illuminations scattered among them at the same time. Through the installation 
and the liveperformance, the .oating blimps could expand representations into the whole space surrounding 
the audience. The audience said, I felt as if I were surrounded by and absorbed into the lighting space, 
and The whole space was illuminating and beautiful. In this exhibition we had some troubles about propellers 
and could not move the blimps as we imagined. We have to .x them in the next exhibition. Figure 1: Exhibition 
 4 Conclusion and FutureWork We introduced our exhibition named .uff, where multiple blimps embedded 
with LEDs illuminate the space to music. It included the installation in which a computer plays the music 
and the live performance in which a human band plays the music. The .oating blimps scattered among audience 
couldexpand representations into the whole space surrounding the audience. Our interests for the next 
exhibition are in using sensors such as sonars or shock sensors in order to make the blimps more interactive 
against audience s touch. It would help audience engage in the performance more actively. References 
[1]Corteo. Cirque du Soleil. http://www.cirquedusoleil.com/ [2]Yoshimoto, H., Jo, K., Hori, K. Designing 
Interactive Blimps as Puppets.In Proceedingsof ICEC 2009(Paris, September 2009), Springer. (to appear) 
[3]Zygotes.Tangible Interaction. http://tangibleinteraction.com/ Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). 
SIGGRAPH Asia 2009, Yokohama, Japan, December 16 19, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-858-2/09/0012  
			