
 Form-making in architecture: performance and simulation based design approach Andrzej Zarzycki New 
Jersey Institute of Technology andrzej.zarzycki@njit.edu 1 Introduction Recent developments in digital 
design have brought new tectonic freedom into architecture. These innovative forms break away from the 
traditional or modernistic framework. In turn, they often relate to contemporary de­velopments in other 
design disciplines, such as product design. Emerging tectonic trends, combined with research into new 
material and fabrication technologies, make it possible to purse imaginative designs that were not possible 
a decade ago. While digital tools allow for a broader architectural reading, resulting in innovative 
and unique designs and new expectations regarding space and form, these emerging designs often exist 
exclusively as visual propositions, deprived of a deeper structural, constructional, or functional logic. 
Similarly, the proliferation of structural analysis software has helped engi­neers to calculate sophisticated 
structural models and understand the intri­cacies of complex tectonics. However, this ability seldom 
translates back into an architectural form or empowers the design process. Consequently, these two parallel 
developments, while promising in their individual ca­pabilities, fall short in the synergizing of an 
architectural form. Although attempts are being made to mitigate this separation with the use of building 
information modeling (BIM) software, these solutions still operate within classical, architectural-versus-structural 
paradigms and do not address the visual thinking dimension of building simulations together with design 
evaluation criteria. This sketch presentation discusses the integration of tectonic architectural studies 
with structural analyses and building performance simulations from an academic perspective, where the 
conceptual or visceral under­standing of structures a general and qualitative point of view is more important 
than quantitative and numeric. The ability to visualize structural performance stress, tension, shear 
and interactively study the impact of these forces on an architectural form, results in an integrated 
design process. Furthermore, these interactive simulations translate into a visually inspired, virtual 
hands-on experience for students and young practitioners by helping them to develop an intuitive knowledge 
of architecture. Finally, this presentation focuses on the strategies for generative design validation 
with the use of digital simulations, particularly dynamics-based modeling tools. Specifically, I focus 
on tools that employ rigid/soft body dynamics, such as cloth simulations, forward and inverse kinematics 
(FK/ IK), and particle interactions. This approach was used in a classroom set­ting and on research projects 
as an alternative to other methodologies, such as genetic algorithms (GA).  Copyright is held by the 
author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH Asia 2009, Yokohama, Japan, December 16 19, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-858-2/09/0012 
 2 Dynamic objects and digital simulations as a design opportunity The gap is narrowing between generative 
design tools, which are often used to pursue exclusively formal gestures, and BIM tools. Generative tools 
start considering the performance as well as the material behaviors of a form, while BIM tools define 
architecture as a parametric, spatially resolved object that can be freely manipulated and explored. 
This mutual convergence between generative and BIM tools is particularly effective in a scale of design 
components, where individual elements and properties can be parametrically interrelated. Both approaches 
also establish an active  link between an object (component) and the entire system (whole), mak­ing 
it possible to manipulate individual design characteristics. While each software environment achieves 
this in a different way, the ability to inter­relate a fragment with the entire design is common for 
both environments: generative dynamics and parametric BIM. For example a rigged, IK bone system can demonstrate 
behavior similar to that of a parametrically controlled composite beam-column. [Fig. 1, 2] Both are defined 
by degrees of freedom and controlled by a set of con­straints. These constraints can simplify a number 
and variety of individual subcomponents, while a parametric definition of the overall design can result 
in multiplicity of design implementations. While there is still a need to develop effective ways to bridge 
these two digital design environments, the strategies for forming this connection emerge with parametric 
simulations and dynamics playing key roles. Con­sequently, dynamics-based simulations not only create 
an opportunity for design validation but also form a natural stepping stone toward parametri­cally defined 
architectural models (details) that could be utilized through­out the entire design process. 3 Closing 
Thoughts This simulation based interactive approach shifts the designer s focus from the visualization 
of buildings or data to the visualization of physical pro­ cesses and behaviors. The benefit of approach 
is to give designers a good­ enough approximation of a model s behavior, as well as to set an overall 
design context and parameters. In the design process, particularly in the early formative stages, good-enough 
precision is satisfactory. Consequently, through the use of dynamics based software a promising di­rection 
of generative architectural designs emerges. An architectural form not only can be analyzed based on 
its structural performance, but also de­rived through the process of structural simulations. 
			