
 FOUR MONTHS A BUCKEYE: STUDY LEAVE AS A MEANS OF REVITALIZING STAFF AND FACILITATING CHANGE IN ACADEMIC 
COMPUTING SERVICES Greg Sprague Manager User Services University of New Brunswick Computing Services 
PO Box 4400 Fredericton, NB, Canada E3B 5A3 Phone: (506) 453-4571 Fax: (506) 453-3590 E-Mail: gls62unb.ca 
ABSTRACT The author spent four months in 1994 on study leave from his job as manager of user services 
in the Computing Services department at The University of New Brunswick, a Canadian school with an enrolment 
of 10,000 students. He spent the leave period working in the Academic Computing Services department at 
The Ohio State University which has an enrolment of more than 50,000 students. This paper discusses what 
he hoped to gain from a study leave, describes his experiences in a large, computer-intensive, resource-rich 
environment and examines the benefits of the study leave to the universities and individuals involved. 
INTRODUCTION Have you ever attended a computer conference, heard someone from another university present 
a success story full of terrific new ideas, and said to yourself this is exactly what I have been looking 
for! ? But when you get back home, a sceptical little voice in the back of your head (the voice of experience 
from all those times you have been disappointed by the promise of technology-based miracle cures in the 
past) reminds you that there are no quick and easy answers. At this point, you wish you had the time 
to engage in some serious fact finding. Wouldn t it be wonderful to have an opportunity to visit the 
other school, to investigate not only the new approach they put in place but also to see for yourself 
why they chose the solution they did, to discover how this solution was implemented, and to explore the 
differences between the political, financial, and technical situations on the two campuses. In other 
words, could their solution be tailored to fit your problem? And does that solution really work or are 
you hearing just one side of the story: the biased report of the system developer? I am the manager of 
user services in the Computing Services depa~ment (CSD) at the University of New Brunswick (UNB), a Canadian 
university with an enrolment of 10,000 students. UNB has a seldom used personnel policy which makes sabbatical 
leaves, a time-honoured tradition normally reserved for faculty members in institutions of higher education, 
available to staff members (known as a staff study leave). This year I was granted a study leave in order 
to do an in depth investigation of computing at a larger, more techno­logically advanced school, a university 
which hopefully owned a clearer crystal ball than ours. The objectives were simple: to assist UNB implement 
technology change by stealing as many good ideas as possible and by avoiding mistakes others had made 
along the way. After negotiating a leave from UNB, I set out to find a school willing to act as my host. 
Through a contact made at a previous SIGUCCS conference, I arranged to spend four months, January through 
April of 1994, as a member of the Network Information Centre (NIC) in Academic Computing Services (ACS) 
at The Ohio State University (OSU) in Colum­bus, enrolment 52,000 students. This paper discusses my four 
months as an Ohio State buckeye. It examines the issues facing computing at UNB and OSU, the study leave 
deal negotiated, the good ideas found, the changes we plan to implement at UNB as a result, and the benefits 
of the study leave to the two universities as well as to me, both professionally and personally. The 
paper also looks at some general issues. Is the study leave a good method for revitalizing staff and 
facilitating change in academic computing organizations? Can solutions that work at one institution be 
scaled up or down to fit a different institution? Has the move to open systems made sharing between schools 
more feasible now than in the past? It is not my intention to try to describe all the good ideas that 
I saw at OSU nor will I try to explain in detail all the changes that I hope to make at UNB as a result 
of my time at Ohio State. Rather I will give a few examples of things I liked and things that I didn 
t like about computing at OSU so that you can judge for yourself whether or not study leaves area useful 
management tool. WHY TAKE A STUDY LEAVE? I have worked at UNB Computing Services (off and on) for almost 
20 years, in administrative computing, systems programming, operations and now user services. About 10 
years into my computing career I took time off to go back to school to study for a masters degree and 
to do some consulting in Africa. That was a good decision and recently I have been feeling the need to 
get away again. I also have been looking for ways to increase my knowledge of the one area in which I 
have never worked: data communications. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is 
granted provided that the copies are distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice 
and the title of the publication appea~ and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery, or to republish, requires a fee anaYor specijic permission. not made or and 
its data to copy otherwise, 01994 ACM 0-89791-656-5/94/459940 $3.50 Meet the Shadowy Future 79 I have 
always been envious of faculty members who travel to exotic places like Australia and China to pursue 
their research. It occurred to me that it should be easy to persuade the management of a university where 
sabbaticals are an accepted part of academic life to provide staff members with similar opportunities. 
I saw the study leave as a way to take advantage of the experience of others, to avoid re-inventing the 
wheel. If I could find a large university that had the resources to try new approaches we had not yet 
explored, it would be an inexpensive way to gain valuable knowledge. By spending several months at such 
a school I hoped to come away with a full understanding of not just what their solutions were but more 
importantly why they worked, as well as what they had done previously, the alternatives considered, and 
how they would solve the problem if they had to do it all over again. I wanted to hear from users and 
students as well as from the managers and developers. I wanted to be able to compare their whole situation 
to UNB s environment to see if the solution was transportable. Did financial, historical, size, cultural, 
political or other differences mean that solutions which worked at one school could not necessarily be 
implemented elsewhere? Frankly, I was feeling in a rut, running out of good ideas of my own, looking 
for fresh approaches. The pace of change was overwhelming me and my staff was starting to get on my nerves. 
Didn t someone out there have a vision of where computing in higher education was going? I wanted to 
try new things, to catchup with the changes that were occurring, to develop new skills, to take the time 
to under­stand the microcomputer on my desk the way I had once understood the mainframe world. I needed 
to be recharged personally and professionally, to read, to write, to think, to get away from it all for 
just a little while. And four months away from the Canadian winter was too attractive an opportunity 
to pass up! Checking the literature using the ProQuest CD-ROM service in our library, I have found no 
references to com­puter people in universities taking study leaves. However, Nancy Austin writing in 
the March 1994 issue of Working Woman states that between 1470 and 24?10of U.S. compa­nies offer leaves 
to employees. Gary Strack, describing his sabbatical in the January 1994 issue of Modem Healthcare reminds 
us that we are ... involved in a marathon, and not a sprint and then goes on to say ... how important 
it is to have a tremendous amount of stamina and staying power. That has made me appreciate this opportunity 
to recharge my batteries . WHY OSU? When trying to decide whereto spend my study leave, the first thought 
that crossed my mind was some place warm! The second thought was to find a school with similar issues 
and a similar strategic plan for addressing these issues. Thinking back to previous SIGUCCS confer­ences, 
Ohio State came quickly to mind. I had been im­pressed on several occasions by the quality of their people 
and the relevance of their presentations to UNB. It seemed like a good fit. I contacted Jerry Martin, 
author of There s Gold in them thar Networks ! (Internet FYI: 10) and arranged to visit OSU on the way 
home from the ACM SIGUCCS Management Symposium in St. Louis. That visit confirmed OSU S commitment to 
open standards. The issues at OSU were similar to ours and surprisingly, the tools being used were very 
familiar: GOPHER, NuPop, UNIX, TCP/IP, SLIP, Windows, WINSOCK, all the same products we were using or 
were to implement at UNB. Jerry s willingness to have me join him in the NIC, a part of the ACS communications 
group, clinched the deal. Columbus, Ohio wasn t Arizona or California but it looked like a very interesting 
and productive place to spend my leave. THE DEAL NEGOTIATED UNB already had a staff study leave policy 
in place to encourage its employees to develop further their job skills so that they may strive for a 
higher level of accomplishment and thereby enhance their ability to contribute to the University. An 
employee could be granted a leave at full or partial salary for a period of up to six months after having 
com­pleted four years employment. With the enthusiastic support of the director of computing services 
I made a proposal to the vice-president and was given a four month study leave at full salary. In addition 
UNB paid my travel and a few days in hotel just as if I were attending a conference. I was responsible 
for my own living expenses during the rest of the leave (mostly groceries, phone calls home, and rental 
of an apartment within walking distance of campus). I also agreed to return to UNB as a CSD employee 
for at least four months after the study leave and to write a report of my experiences. Ohio State agreed 
to provide me with an ofiice, projects to work on, access to computing resources, and cooperation in 
meeting my objectives. I brought my own 486 lap top computer with me. OS-U provided a network connection 
and a colour monitor. In planning for my leave, the issue of who would replace me as manager of user 
services had to be addressed. There were four groups reporting to me: microcomputer support, LAN project 
management, general consulting and ACM SIGUCCS XXII library automation. It didn t make sense to appoint 
an interim manager for such a short period so we decided that the head of these groups would report directly 
to my boss, the director of CSD, while I was on leave. Consulting did not have a head so a senior person 
was assigned these duties temporarily. This arrangement provided an opportunity for the four people involved 
to gain management experience and for the director to work with them more closely. It is not easy to 
be away from friends and family for four months but having access to the Internet made the situation 
far more tolerable (and less expensive) than would have been the case otherwise. My 15 year-old daughter 
became an Internet surfer while I was away and in turn taught my wife and son how to drive that lonesome 
high­way. It was a joy to go to work in the morning, sign on to the network and find a detailed account 
of last night s titanic girls junior high school basketball struggle between the Albert Street Lady Eagles 
and their dreaded rivals, the George Street Crusaders. TWO SCHOOLS, A COMPARISON The Ohio State University 
is located in Columbus, the state capital, which has a population of 1.5 million people. Ohio itself 
has a population of 10 million and an area of 30,000 square kilometres. The University of New Brunswick 
is located in Fredericton, the provincial capital, which has a population of less than 50,000 people. 
New Brunswick, Canada s only bilingual province, is slightly smaller in area than Ohio but has less than 
one tenth the population. OSU, founded in 1870, has more than 51,000 students (the largest single campus 
population in North America), more than 4,000 faculty members and a support staff of close to 13,000 
people. The sprawling urban campus ( 345 buildings, 1,644 acres not counting the airport and golf course) 
includes schools of medicine, dentistry and agricul­ture, a cancer research hospital and a 90,000 seat 
football stadium. UNB, founded in 1785, has 10,000 students, 535 faculty and fewer than 800 support staff. 
The hillside campus (65 buildings, 151 acres not counting the woodlot) features a large regional forestry 
complex but other univer­sities in the Maritime Provinces house the medical and agricultural schools. 
At Ohio State, ACS has a staff of approximately 80 people and a budget of $8.5 million ($Canadian). When 
University Systems, the administrative computing group, is included the total computing staff increases 
to 180 people with an annual budget of almost $20 million. At UNB, CSD has 55 people with an annual operating 
budget of almost $5 million ($ Canadian). The computer hardware platforms in use at UNB and OSU are very 
similzm IBM mainframes, UNIX servers (DEC at OSU, SUN at UNB), PCs, Mats, and UNIX workstations. The 
software environment is also very similac TSO, CICS, SAS, IMS and SYSBASE (OSU), MARKV and INGRES (UNB), 
Windows, System 7, UNIX, WordPerfect, Gopher, Eudora, Quattro (UNB), Lotus (OSU), Pine (UNB), Elm (OSU), 
and all the other common application packages. In the communications area, both schools use TCP/IP over 
ethernet with 10baseT wiring within buildings which are interconnected by fiber. UNB has standardized 
on Novell whereas a variety of LAN products are in use at OSU. UNB uses Kermit and CUTCP. OSU uses ProComm 
and PC/TCP. In general the differences between the hard­ware and software installed at the two schools 
were remark­ably few and turned out not to be significant. COMPUTING ISSUES AT UNB AND OSU As manager 
of user services my main interest was in academic computing, which happens to include library automation 
at UNB. CSD is also responsible for administra­tive computing and data communications so I wanted to 
examine those areas as well. After compiling a list of issues to explore I discovered that my counterparts 
in Ohio were facing exactly the same challenges as we were in New Brunswick. General issues included 
moving toward a paperless campus, acceptable use policies, doing more with less, the role of the central 
computing organization, cutting support for old paradigms, shifting to using client-server applica­tions, 
outsourcing, technology assessment, encouraging expertise at the department level, implementing standards, 
reorganization, financing new technology, and staff retrain­ ing and redeployment. Items of specific 
interest to academic computing included studentifaculty access from home, managing/ building student 
labs, software distribution, promoting multimedia and instructional technology, student ownership, second 
level support, providing user accounts, and user training and support. In the library automation area 
the issues included utilizing Internet resources, Z39.50 standards, and access to CDROM over TCP/IP networks. 
The major administrative issues were building client­server applications, building versus buying software, 
charging for services, giving students and faculty access to marks and other administrative data, staff 
restraining and decision support. Communications related issues included wiring standards, increasing 
bandwidth in support of multimedia, SLIP, providing help to off campus users, and LAN stan­dards. FOUR 
MONTHS A BUCKEYE-WHAT I DID AT OSU While at Ohio State I was designated a visiting scholar but was treated 
as a full fledged ACS staff member, not just observing but participating in and contributing to life 
at OSU. It seems that no matter how large a school is, you can always make use of a free pair of hands. 
I was given one major project in the NIC to develop a handbook for departmental network administrators, 
those individuals charged with first level network support in departments. This was an excellent project 
because it allowed me to travel the campus visiting departments and their local computing operations, 
gathering opinions on what such a handbook should look like. In addition, I helped ACS staff members 
teach workshops, tested software, consulted with users, gave talks to several user groups as well as 
to ACS staff, learned to use the computing facilities at OSU, researched topics such as protocol stacks 
and SLIP, and of course talked to users as well as management about computing issues. Setting up my own 
computer on the OSU network complete with operating system and application software was a major challenge 
and learning experience for an old mainframe who has been in management for the last several years. The 
ACS staff members (as with all the OSU people I met) were extremely cooperative and thoughtful during 
my whole study leave, being careful to explain jargon and acronyms in project meetings so that I would 
understand and making me feel part of the group by asking for my opinions and input. I would start a 
typical work day at OSU by touching base with Jerry (anything unusual happening today?) and reading the 
Lantern (the daily campus newspaper, in paper form). Then I would point NuPop at the OSU Pop server and 
read my E-Mail. A couple of times a week I would point to UNB s Pop server and read that E-Mail to keep 
in touch with situations back home. Next I would check out the NetNews newsgroups and follow interesting 
threads by surfing the Internet. This might be followed by loading some new software into my machine, 
working on a project, interviewing someone somewhere on campus to discuss computing issues, or attending 
a team meeting. I would end the day by reading the latest pile of computer periodicals. Note the absence 
of phone calls, user complaints, paper mail, conferences with superiors, meetings with sales representatives, 
and visits from subordinates. If this sounds too good to be true, it was! My time really was my own. 
GOOD IDEAS Given all of the above background, did I find any good ideas to steal? Yes, many, ranging 
from small changes that can be implemented immediately to large items that will take policy changes, 
resources and physical renovations ! ! Can solutions from a large school be applied to a smaller one? 
Absolutely, some modifications may be required, but we are all in the same business. It is beyo nd the 
scope of this paper to provide a complete list of the good things I saw at OSU but let me give a few 
examples. HomeNet is the name of OSU S service that allows client­server access from home via SLIP. It 
is a packaged collection of pre-configured client software. I was very impressed by all aspects of this 
service: the design, documentation, testing, ease of installation and use, training and marketing. UNB 
is just now making deci­sions related to providing off-campus 1P access. My experience with HomeNet will 
be very valuable and timely as we decide which road to follow at UNB. I also noticed how giving a service 
a name (HomeNet is just one example of this) greatly simplifies the marketing and documentation effort 
required. . At UNB we have a consulting room, staffed by students, that is our first line of support. 
Users drop in with questions and then if additional assistance is required they are referred to one of 
five full-time staff members who act as duty consultants. However we never know what advice users are 
being given by our student consultants and I have been uneasy with having our lowest paid, least trained 
employees (students) dealing with customers. Also the load on the five duty consultants is very heavy 
so they get little other work done (like writing documentation). OSU operates a micro consulting area 
(MCA) which is staffed by students but there is always one ACS full-time person on duty to hear what 
is being said and to provide guidance to students employees in dealing with custom­ers. Full-time staff 
spend two hours per week in the MCA. This makes sure that almost everyone in ACS spends a portion of 
their time talking to real live users, face to face. I much prefer the OSU approach but implementing 
it will require physical renovations to the consulting room and a policy change to involve more than 
just user services staff as consultants. . One small item, easily implemented at UNB, is a form that 
faculty members complete requesting ACS to acquire a site license for a piece of software. It asks how 
much money the user can contribute, who will be the package expert, and who else on campus might want 
to share the cost of the software. This is a great idea that we just never thought of! Another relatively 
easy item to implement is local NetNews newsgroups. Until now we have relied on E-Mail lists at UNB. 
At OSU there are many local newsgroups which are informal, easy to use, and everyone including students 
are encouraged to participate. Staff members are assigned to monitor specific groups (for example ACS.HOMENET.NOVICE) 
and participate in the discussions. Local newsgroups also allow everyone on campus to share their expertise 
and be a consultant, a definite help to an overloaded consulting staff. OSU makes a wide variety of 
campus information available on-line via a gopher called OASIS as we do at UNB with a gopher called INFO. 
But at Ohio State they have a monthly meeting of OASIS data providers to discuss recently added menu 
items and suggestions for new items. This meeting is very valuable to new providers and encourages existing 
providers to expand the scope of their information. While I was away, the president of UNB wanted immedi­ 
 ate action on a multimedia project in support of distance education and instructional technology. One 
of my staff members on the newly formed multimedia committee sent me an E-Mail message asking for ideas. 
I talked to those involved in a similar project at OSU and sent several reports back home. We are currently 
in the process of building a multimedia lab where faculty can develop course materials, very similar 
to the facility in place at Ohio State. I often felt like the proverbial kid in a candy store while 
at Ohio State. There were so many exciting ideas and new approaches to solving the exact problems that 
were facing computing specialists at UNB every day. I kept a journal of everything I saw and did during 
the study leave and it turned out to be a very thick and very useful document. Good ideas in the academic 
computing area included a multimedia classroom, the extensive use made of student help (over 3,000 hours 
per week), regularly scheduled user group meetings, the quarterly training bulletin, the NIC itself, 
and the whole approach to software distribution. Other great ideas included the library s self-constructed 
CDROM server, and the whole approach to building client­server systems being taken by University Systems 
(the administrative computing group). PATHS TO AVOID AND DIFFERENCES IN PHILOSOPHY There were of course 
some things I saw that I did not like, that is, I preferred the approach in use at UNB. Many of these 
are recognized as problem areas by computing management at OSU but are difficult to change for budget 
or workload reasons. For example I prefer to have academic and administrative computing combined in a 
single depart­ment sharing a pool of technical experts in areas such as communications. At OSU academic 
and administrative computing are in separate facilities on separate campuses but now share a common IBM 
mainframe. In other cases OSU is quick to admit that they have gone down a dead-end path and that UNB 
should avoid making the same mistake. I find computing at OSU to be too distributed, too autonomous, 
resulting in a lack of standards which greatly compounds support problems. They have recently put a CIO 
(chief information officer) in place to address this and other problems. In still other cases we disagree 
on the right approach. For example we both believe that the central computing group should provide second 
level support and departments should have local experts providing first level support. However, I feel 
that this cannot be a harcl and fast rule and that it is important to go out to departments to provide 
assistance in special cases. I find that whenever we do so, we learn as much as the department does. 
OSU disagrees and feels they simply cannot meet the demand for on-site visits and are very reluctant 
to open the flood gates. There are some interesting differences in the role of computing services at 
the two schools. CSD and UNB feel it Meet the Shadowy Future is important to offer microcomputer dealership 
and repair services to the whole campus. OSU and ACS leave these very time consuming functions to the 
campus bookstore and local dealers. At UNB every computer related purchase order is sent to CSD for comment. 
We have no veto power but are in a position to give advice (which often saves departments money), set 
standards in an indirect fashion, and keep good statistics on computer purchases campus­wide. OSU provides 
little support to secretarial and clerical staff whereas this is a major functional area at UNB. OSU 
devotes large amounts of energy to marketing its services and writing good documentation but these activities 
have unfortunately never heen a high priority at UNB. LEARNING FROM EACH OTHER Can a school as large 
and diverse as Ohio State learn anything from a small Canadian school? Yes, they can. In the lectures 
I gave, I always included something about Canadian culture, history and geography but beyond that there 
were several times when OSU people were impressed by UNB S approach. For example we have two training 
sessions with our student consultants per term. At the beginning of term session we feed the students 
pizza and talk about customer service. At the end of term we feed them more pizza and they tell us how 
to improve our customer service. Another example is the UNB World Wide Web server which I demonstrated 
to the WWW user group at OSU. The group liked the section on local authors, built by our systems librarian, 
where you can read about the authors, see a picture of each author, see the covers of recent books, and 
then listen to them read from their own works. In general, the people at OSU were always interested in 
fresh ideas and new ways of looking at problems. The fact that I was from a small school really wasn 
t relevant. PERSONAL BENEFITS OF THE STUDY LEAVE I returned from Ohio State full of enthusiasm, ready 
to make big changes. It was just what I needed to jump start my career. It certainly wasn t a vacation, 
I worked hard while away, but the change was revitalizing. I re-established my technical skills and no 
longer felt as overwhelmed by the rate change in our industry. I developed new work habits (like keeping 
up to date with my E-Mail daily) which I am determined to maintain. The people in the MC were genuinely 
sorry to see me leave OSU which was great for my self esteem, like having made a major league team. Back 
home, everyone wanted to talk about my experiences: in the hallways, at coffee, and in managers meetings. 
This has presented a golden opportunity to implement change at UNB. Best of all, the study leave was 
fun. Away from the office I attended all manner of OSU cultural and sporting events (their basketball 
teams are awesome but our hockey team would give them a run for their money). I read, took courses that 
I have been meaning to take for years (creative writing for one), started keeping a personal journal 
which I have always wanted to do, hiked the Ohio countryside, and discussed issues like healthcare and 
free trade with my new American friends. And when I returned to UNB after four months, I had a fresh 
perspective on my own school. Being away made me realize that UNB isn t so badly off after all. We have 
problems but so does everyone else. CONCLUSIONS The study leave was a tremendous success. Not only did 
I come home to The University of New Brunswick with a long list of good ideas, I was able to contribute 
to The Ohio State University while away. I discovered that computing at UNB can be improved in several 
ways but it is generally quite healthy. Issues tit into one of five categories. At UNB we are doing: 
* things right (which is very reassuring). * things wrong (and can now see a better way).  nothing 
but had better start soon.  nothing and that is OK since there is no good solution yet.  * things differently 
but just as well or better. OSU was exactly the right school for me to visit. They were wrestling with 
the same issues UNB was already facing or about to face and using tools that were available to us. Their 
size allowed them to tackle new technology sooner than we could so we were able to learn from their experi­ence. 
The OSU staff were extremely cooperative which facilitated the exchange of ideas. The fact that both 
schools were committed to open, vendor independent solutions made it relatively easy to understand what 
the other school was doing and to discuss how solutions might be modified to tit a different size institution. 
The length of the study leave is important. A few weeks would not be enough to fully understand the complex 
computing infrastructure that exists in most universities. Nor would it allow you to make friends and 
establish good rapport. By staying four months I was able to get involved in major projects and to see 
a complete cycle of computing activity from the time students arrived for the start of the winter quarter 
through to graduation and spring break. The study leave has put me in a far better position to initiate 
change at UNB. In fact, my staff seem to expect that I will make changes as a result of my leave and 
look forward to seeing me do so. I feel much more confident discussing technical issues, particularity 
communication related ones, than I did prior to the study leave. I see much more clearly where we should 
be headed and what the priorities should be. I encourage you to approach your manager and ask for a study 
leave. If one of your employees asks for a leave, help them make it happen. If your school doesn t have 
a staff study leave policy, start the ball rolling. If another school asks you to host one of their staff 
members who wants to go on leave, look on it as a golden opportunity to learn from them, and agree to 
participate. If anyone would like to come to UNB, just send me a mail message. We are sold on the study 
leave concept. THANK YOU I would like to take this opportunity to formally thank all of my new friends 
at Ohio State who made my study leave the experience of a life time including Jerry Martin, Brent Curtiss, 
Gwen Funchess-Whatley, Claudia Jordan, Bob Dixon, Charlie Smith and everyone else I met in the buckeye 
state. REFERENCES Austin, Nancy. Why Sabbaticals Make Sense. Working Woman, March 1994. Strack, Gary. 
Getting away for a while maybe the best way for busy execs to go. Modem Healthcare, January 31, 1994. 
Wilford, Dan. CEO Sabbatical: Prescription for a healthier organization. Trustee. July 1992. O Reilly, 
Brian. John Sculley on Sabbatical. Fortune, March 27, 1989. Ridgeway, Patricia. Sabbaticals Relieve Employee 
Burn­out. Small Business Report, December 1987. 
			