
 Global Multi-User Virtual Environments Organizer: Wolfgang Felger, Fraunhofer Institute for Computer 
Graphics Panelists: Lennart E. Fahlen, Swedish Institute of Computer Science R. Bowen Loftin, NASA Johnson 
Space Center &#38; University of Houston Michael R. Macedonia, Fraunhofer Center for Research in Computer 
Graphics Gurminder Singh, National University of Singapore Summary: Wolfgang Felger Research and development 
activities are facing a continuing globaliza­tion. Networks are getting more important than companies 
or institutes. Main reasons for this trend are: (Faster) access to new knowledge and technology and 
its improved transfer.  Economic reasons.  Use the particular advantages of multicultural work environments. 
 Together with a steadily improving technology, the global informa­tion society is not far away. In 
particular, the networking and virtual environment technologies are making much progress and are ready 
to enable shared, distributed, cooperative activities. This panel addresses network infrastructure, systems, 
and applica­tions related to multi-user virtual environments, especially the global (intercontinental/international) 
aspects of these issues. The panelists will summarize their lessons learned, will highlight latest activities, 
and share with the audience their short/mid-term vision on global, multi-user virtual environments. The 
panelists intend to enrich their presentations with (multicontinental) live demonstrations. Furthermore, 
specific applica­tions are showcased at Digital Bayou (Where No Man Has Gone Before). Lennart E. Fahlen 
The objective of this panel is to discuss the long term development of future large-scale social electronic 
spaces. In this time and age, this means networked computer systems that exploit the idea of a place 
inhabited by users who communicate with one another using the natural and informal means appropriate 
to a range of social situations (e.g. work, family, leisure, etc.). Ideally, such systems should support 
many thousands of users engaged in real time interaction with one another. Below are a number notions 
relevant to the above goals: Users as inhabitants of electronic spaces. Users should experience a sense 
of immersion within a computer system, as opposed to only interacting with it.  Infrastructures need 
to support real-time events similar in scale to gatherings of people in the physical world (e.g. on the 
scale of today s largest sports and entertainment events). The construction of such large scale electronic 
spaces introduces critical problems of scale. Some issues to be considered are network-, processing­and 
perceptual scaleability and the unavoidable latencies caused by the geographical separation of users 
and nodes.  The network and software infrastructure required to deliver such applications to the general 
citizen. Today the WWW provides for large scale multimedia information access and distribution. But seen 
from the perspective of users being social beings inhabiting an electronic space, the Web carries severe 
shortcomings: asymmetry between information provision and consumption, the environment is strangely uninhabited, 
users are only visible through the information they provide or through a number-of­visitors statistic, 
there is no provision for real-time interaction and feedback, etc.  Interaction metaphors and techniques 
which seamlessly combine information visualization, and access with social interaction. How should socially 
inhabited electronic spaces be structured, and what tools are needed to construct them? Furthermore, 
how should people be supported in exploring and navigating such spaces, and how might the structure afford 
possibilities for social interaction?  Spatial metaphors seem to present solutions to some technical 
issues such as access to computational resources, as well as to other people. These alternatives are 
more promising than traditional solutions (i.e. password protection, passing of tokens etc.).  How to 
provide a sense of personal presence and awareness, both direct and peripherally, with other people within 
an electronic space, and how to achieve this through user embodiment and other representation techniques. 
A number of social studies show the importance of mutual and peripheral awareness phenomena to the coordination 
of social interaction. Most current systems have major difficulties conveying presence of other users, 
awareness of what these other users are doing, and providing mechanisms to represent a user as an embodiment 
within a single application.  Techniques for integrating electronic spaces with physical spaces, including 
notions of shared augmented reality and shared augmented virtuality.  Intelligent agents as inhabitants 
of social computing environments  (i.e. in the presence of many humans and other agents). To see such 
real and virtual information spaces as inhabited social environments, capable of supporting participation 
in many different activities and social relations. Also, one should not forget that such environments 
must be expressive, aesthetic, dramatic, motivational, and inherently enjoyable to use and inhabit. In 
summary my position is very much defined by terms such as inhabited, social interaction, awareness, 
 spatial metaphors, and mass participation. Furthermore, it has very little to do with photo realistic 
rendering, and concerns itself much more with a paradigm shift that views virtual reality and related 
technologies as providing inhabited social spaces and by conceiving of users as citizens and social beings 
both at work and play. R. Bowen Loftin Opportunities to exploit shared virtual environments abound. 
Collabo­rations in art, business, education, engineering, and science could all benefit from the ability 
of collaborators to share the same environments and the same experiences while directly interacting with 
information displayed in useful ways. Endeavors in all these spheres of activity are increasingly global 
in scope, challenging the ability of communications technologies and display/interaction metaphors to 
enable the sharing of complex environments in real-time. This panel presentation will describe a successful 
demonstration of a shared virtual environment for training an international astronaut team, and will 
conclude with an overview of current applications in computational chemistry and science education. Historically, 
NASA has trained teams of astronauts by bringing them to the Johnson Space Center in Houston to undergo 
generic training followed by mission-specific training. The latter begins after a crew has been selected 
for a mission, often as much as two years before launch. While some Space Shuttle flights have included 
an astronaut from a foreign country, the International Space Station will be consistently crewed by teams 
of astronauts from two or more of the partner nations. Not surprisingly, the international partners in 
the Space Station program would prefer to significantly reduce the need for their citizen astronauts 
to travel to and remain in Houston for training. As a means of demonstrating the feasibility of using 
shared virtual environments to support the training of international astronaut teams, an experiment was 
conducted on September 20, 1995. Astronaut Bernard Harris (physically located at the Johnson Space Center 
in Houston) entered a virtual environment with Astronaut Ulf Merbold (physically located at the Fraunhofer 
Institute for Computer Graphics in Darmstadt, Germany). Their shared environment consisted of models 
of the Space Shuttle payload bay and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). The two astronauts spent over 
thirty minutes performing the major activities associated with the changeout of the HST s Solar Array 
Drive Electronics (SADE). Their work included the real-time hand-off of the replacement SADE in exchange 
for the original SADE. At the conclusion of the task the two astronauts shook hands and waved good­bye. 
The positive reaction of both astronauts to this experiment, has led to plans for the development of 
applications in support of future international missions, and an increase from two to three sites. Before 
the end of this century, efforts will be made to support shared environment between the ground-based 
installations and Low Earth Orbit for both just-in-time training and performance support for maintenance, 
science, and emergency medical services. Applications are also under development that will support the 
training of multi service military teams assigned to Operations Other Than War (such as the current peacekeeping 
operations in Bosnia, or humanitarian relief). Finally, this same technology is being explored as a means 
of allowing students from widely separated geographical locations to jointly perform experiments and 
observations in simulated environments. The computer graphics community must not believe that the only 
barriers to the effective use of shared virtual environments are bandwidth and rendering performance. 
A multitude of psychological, cultural, and human-computer interaction problems must also be successfully 
solved. The task of creating the technological infrastruc­ture for sharing virtual environments on a 
global scale is surpassed only by the task of understanding how best to utilize applications built within 
the context of this infrastructure.  Michael R. Macedonia This presentation will describe the infrastructure 
required to support VR in a global environment. Moreover, it will discuss a project that CRCG is participating 
in to develop that infrastructure the MAY project. CRCG has focused its research efforts toward determining 
how computer networks can be made to transform the workplace into a shared environment, allowing real-time 
interaction among people and processes without regard to their location. It is this illusion that allows 
the use of VR and telepresence for applications like distance learning, distributed interactive simulation, 
and group entertainment. Emerging international broadband networks will enable the use of VR for applications 
that span the globe. These tools will support communication among multiple users in order to bridge long 
distances and different times. Common research, and business and social contacts across continents will 
become as simple as meetings between partners in one room. For example, the goal of manufacturing enterprises 
will be able to design, develop, prototype, and test new products in a seamless virtual environment with 
engineers in Detroit, designers in Munich, and managers in Milan. This is one of the goals of the MAY 
project. The MAY project will test emerging communication facilities between research and industrial 
sites in Germany and the United States of America. The communication makes use of advanced collaboration 
tools like BERKOM, GroupX and Mbone over a high-speed interconti­nental ATM link. MAY comprises several 
different goals: MAY is intended to gain experience with multimegabit communi­cation facilities bridging 
large geographical distances and grossly different time zones. The usefulness of group applications for 
research and industrial activities under the above circumstances will be evaluated.  MAY shall provide 
solutions for problems that occur using long distance links like echo in headset-free environments, and 
the small working time overlap in continuous development around the clock scenarios.  Data load patterns 
of the link will be monitored to gain knowledge about the resource allocation requirements for these 
advanced high speed applications.  Gurminder Singh Nearly half the world s computers are idle at any 
given time. But at the same time, people face serious deficiency of computing and network resources when 
it comes to running large scale multi-user virtual worlds. We have been developing architectures to support 
large numbers of concurrent virtual world users on off-the-shelf PCs and Internet. The first system we 
developed, called WorldNet, is currently being used to develop several commercial products. Based on 
the WorldNet experience, we are currently developing an architecture, named NetEffect, to support and 
run large scale multi-user virtual worlds that span across continents. The idea is to utilize idle computers 
located around the world to facilitate communication among virtual worlds. Our architecture is based 
on using distributed cooperat­ing servers that are able to migrate from one workstation to another. People 
around the world are able to volunteer their workstations to act as servers when they are not using them. 
For example, a person in Vancouver, Canada can volunteer his workstation from 7PM to 7AM every day; this 
is the time slot when he does not use his machine and is happy if it can be put a better use. We run 
a collection of master servers around the world on fixed Internet addresses which know about the availability 
of volunteered machines. The master servers ensure that when a particular server workstation s free time 
is up, the server is migrated to another available machine; all virtual world clients connected to that 
server are also migrated to the new server. The client virtual worlds, during their session keep moving 
around from one server to another without being affected in any significant way. Based on the above architecture, 
we are developing interactive discovery learning applications for children. These applications enable 
children to learn new, useful information through interaction with a game-like interface, and through 
collaboration with other children on the network. Collaboration among children is supported by enabling 
and encouraging them to share objects and information with one another.  
			