
 GPGS A Device-independentGeneral Purpose Graphic System for Stand-alone and Satellite Graphics  van 
Dam J. van den Bos Informatica/CcmputerGraphics Group Program in Computer Science Faculty of Science 
Brown University University of Wijaegen Providence, Rhode Island ABSTRACT GPGS is a subroutine package 
offering powerful and versatile support for passive and interactive vector graphics, for time-sharing, 
batch, and stand-alone minicomputer systems. The package is computer, language, and operating system, 
as well as display device independent. Its key purpose is to allow of programs and programmers by providing 
easy to learn, high level features. The applications programmer  device-independent part invoked by 
the applications programmer, and internal, 0device  writes his program once and then ezecutes it on 
any supported graphics equipment without or relinking it. Device-independence uas implementedby dividing 
GPGS into a one per display device. Like the GSPC "Core System" whose design it influenced, GPGS is 
a general purpose package. It has a subset of graphics facilities to handle output of line and character 
primitives with attributes such as line style and x and function keys. It also supports 2D and 3D window 
to viewport mapping, and coordinate transformations.  These are distinguished frca normal, device (DPU) 
dependent ERiceUr segments into which primitives and their attribute-value settings are ordinarily compiled. 
These masters may be instanced subject to affine transformations (translate,rotate, and scale) to create 
a typical master-instance hierarchy. The hierarchy may be stored in a disk based library or compiled 
into a normal picture segment for output to a display device.  Unlike the GSPC Core System, GPGS also 
includes a set of basic features for modelling objects which alloas definition of device independent 
masters called picture . The images of objects stored in device dependent picture segments may be transformed 
on the display surface by These typically allow use of or tumbling object images. Host/satellitegraphics 
is accommodated by having the device independent part of GPGS in the host and splitting the device drivers 
across host and satellite. At the source code level it therefore makes no difference on which.configurationa 
program will be executed. Among the existing implementationsare versions written in assembler for the 
IBE 360/370 and the PDP 11, in both stand-alone and satellite mode, and under a variety of operating 
They support plotters, storage tubes, and high performance refresh displays. based implementations exist 
for the Univac 1108, the PDP 10, and a Harris minicomputer. Keywords and Phrases: interactive graphics, 
device independent graphics, graphics subroutine package, satellite graphics CR Categories: 8.2, 4.29 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Siggraph 
77, July 20-22 San Jose, California   112 1 INTRODUCTION GPGS offers high level graphics support easily 
accessible to high level language programs. The subroutine call mechanism has been employed in preference 
to new language primitives as the easiest extension mechanism. Thus any (mini) computer with FORTRAN 
is a possible candidate for a GEGS implementation. GPGS interfaces to the operating system and handles 
all ccmmunications and data conversion problems for passive and interactive physical devices. The resulting 
environment and device independent graphics application programs may be transported without change (given 
 identical The design started as a joint effcrt of the Universities of Nijmegen and Delft, with consulting 
provided by Cambridge University. It was meant to supersede  such device dependent packages as for 22_0»s 
and Calcomp's well  GSP Cambridge and several other locations in the O.K., experience with machine 
and device known plotting subroutines. independent graphics had already proved successful, with the 
Cambridge GINO-3 [2] system. Rather than reiapleoent GINO for new hardware being acquired by all three 
Universities, it was decided to provide more extensive facilities and improve begun in  1971 on an 
IBH with a PDP-11/45 PDP-11/45 in standalone aode at Delft. In  satellite at Nijmegen and on a Parallel 
the graphics group at the computing center at the University of in Norway, made an ANSI PORTRAN implementation 
fcr the Univac 1108 of a large subset of GPGS. Their GPGS-F is based on the Delft PDP implementation. 
Additional versions of GPGS exist in countries as fax apart as Germany and India (the latter on a PDP 
10); the official version is being licensed at nominal cost. Altogether the system runs in production 
in several dozen installations. 2 GIOBAL   primary GPGS design decision was to create a instead of 
a new graphics language cr graphics extensions to an existing language. A subroutine package is easier 
to design and implement than language extensions, simpler for programmers to learn, and easily extended 
by adding more subroutines. The ease of implementation also allowed for more efficient assembler language 
implementations on different computer systems. The obvious disadvantage of a subroutine package is its 
limited, awkward syntax. The subroutines included in GPGS were chosen to be just far enough removed 
from the hardware to provide device independence and still allow the applications programmer to control 
the hardware of an advanced CRT display reasonably efficiently. An additional guideline for choosing 
which features to include in GPGS was to make the package general and rich [3, 4]. At the same time, 
the design would be modular, to minimize the cost of learning and using a limited subset of the full 
system. The features included are those required or generally useful for implementing a powerful graphics 
"Core System" Unlike the designers of the GSPC Standard, the GPGS designers felt a basic modelling component 
to be generally useful as well: both subsystems are overviewed in Sections 4 and 5. The graphics subsystem 
includes line and text output primitives and their attributes (line style, intensity, character size, 
etc.), 2D and 3D windowing  and clipping, and perspective and projections. The modelling subsystem 
allows specification of an object as a hierarchy of previously defined picture segments, with inclusion 
of picture segments controlled by placement (instancing) transformations (translation, rotation, and 
scale) and a transformation stack. The hierarchy is always compiled to a single device dependent picture 
segment for output purposes. To aid viewing and/or modelling, (clipped) images of objects may be post-transformed 
on the display surface with hardware facilities for dragging or tumbling, using Provisions for more 
specialized facilities such as hidden-line removal, data structure support beyond n-level segment hierarchy, 
and animation were not included. Note that GPGS is a rich, stand-alone package with over a hundred subroutines, 
which may have special purpose packages built on top. GPGS-F, for example, supports a high level plotting 
package (6]. When designing the subroutines themselves, the key concept was simplicity. The mnemonic 
name of a subroutine indicates what its function is, and what type of 113 entity it operates on; for 
example, means select SELLIB(I) means select library I. Each  subroutine has as few arguments as 
 GPGS supplies reasonable default values to allou the unsophisticated user to have to learn only a few 
calls.   To avoid having to urite and load a complete device dependent package for each output device 
on uhich a picture is to be displayed, GPGS as a device independent package has a common, shared device 
independent part and as many device dependent device (to be loaded at execution time) as there are devices 
for that implementation (see figure 1)o To the applications programmer this means in that he can write 
his graphics program once and use it uith different graphics devices without changing the source code 
or relinking his program.  The applications programmer defines objects in user coordinates as Ejiclte 
composed of primitives (picture These include lines and text and previously defined sub-objects pseudo 
 He then specifies of objects (images) to be plotted on an idealized output device. In reality, the device 
independent part of GPGS uses the setting of the vie transformation parameters (including type of projection 
if 3D. clipping vieuport) to compile a (clipped) device independent image of the object. This intermediate 
form is then further mapped by a specific device driver onto a of an actual output surface.  include 
plotters, microfilm storage tube displays and steered beam CRT refresh displays. By specifying "normalized 
device coordinates" which are fractions of actual physical dimensions of the displaysurfaces, the applications 
programmer need not be concerned about real device dimensions and can dram device independentpictures 
in user coordinates.  DEVICE  The idealized device concept is also appropriate for describing the GPGS 
scheme for handling input from the console operator. Unlike most other high level packages which are 
primarily oriented touards plotters and storage tubes with limited input capability, GPGS designed to 
handle powerful refreshed s with a wide variety of input tools such as lightpens, joysticks, tablets, 
and compatibility from simple displays to pouerful ones is achieved automatically since GPGS handles 
the superset of facilities of the most powerful commercially available vector displays. compatibility 
from more complex to simpler graphics devices is provided through sigulatiPo of higherlevel (harduare) 
facilities carried out bydevice drivers. For exaaple, a lightpen may be simulated with cursor crosshairs, 
a dial with a keyboarded value, etc. In this way, an applications program oay still run essentially 
unchanged on a simple device, but with an altered slower) operator interaction. The GPGS idealized 
device includes all the basic input devices proposed by Ballace It supports the following single  
input tools: refresh clock, alphanumeric lightpen for picking, and alarm. It also has at least one tool 
in each of the following classes of function switches, dials (1 tracking cross and data tablet (2 dimensions), 
and joystick (3 Each single tool or class of tools (including the simulated ones) returns appropriate 
information to the applications program in a specific format; function switches return their dials return 
fractions 0 and  the lightpen returns a name stack, etc.   MANAGEMENT the segment has been defined. 
The segment as a whole is the GPGS unit of As part of solving the problem of interfacing graphics programs 
to the operating envircnment, GPGS performs applications prcgrau requested manipulations of the following 
graphics resources: graphics devices with their associated drivers, picture buffers, and picture libraries. 
The sanipulations include initialize, select, clear, release, and status inquiry. Output buffers and 
devices nay be sequentially selected as the current one; multiple input tools may be simultaneously enabled. 
Pictures may be stored off-line in picture libraries which are controlled by the applications programmer 
much in the same way as the device and buffer resources. Indeed libraries can be thought as extensions 
of buffers. Thus one can build a picture on disk rather than using a core buffer, and subsequently either 
send the picture directly from the library to a storage tube, or overlay a piece of the applications 
program to create a refresh buffer. Libraries are therefore particularly useful for making large pictures 
on small computers, or saving standard menus or standard drawing symbols (picture parts). To allow the 
applications program to find the properties and status of its currently allocated resources, and to retrieve 
previously established attribute settings, GPGS has inquiry facilities for returning execution environment 
information to the applications program. Inquiry can be used by an optionally specified applications 
program subroutine which receives control on the occurrence of an error condition. E ITS.__I PCTOIR_SGgEBTS, 
  Using GPGS, an applications programmer specifies an object as a ccllection of output primitives called 
ntug-. defined by manipulating an idealized drawing stylus in a 2D or 3D user coordinate system. Among 
the picture elements are individual lines and polyline sequences, character strings, and markers (special 
characters used for point r  plotting). like line style and width, character size and spacing, color, 
intensity, or blinking are used to modify the output characteristics of these basic picture elements. 
All picture elements and their attribute-value specifications are collected in one or more named picture 
egetial. Individual elements in the picture segment may not be altered after manipulation, for purposes 
of deleting or extending its set of elements as a logical unit. To alter the contents of a segment the 
programmer has to regenerate it. The only other manipulation of a picture segment allowed is to change 
its associated segment attributes (visibility, lightpen sensitivity (pickability), and viewport transformations). 
These attributes are global for the picture segment and may be changed any time after the creation of 
the picture segment has begun and before it has been deleted. Objects specified to GPGS as picture segments 
are compiled by device independent GPGS and the appropriate device driver into display device dependent 
code. This display file (for refreshed displays) will typically be a chain of buffers, each linearly 
segmented into picture segments. Each segment contains a header where the segment attributes are stored 
for subsequent modification. 4.2 VIEHING TRANSFORnATIONS  To produce one or more "snapshots" or views 
of an object on an output device(s), the applications programmer first sets the proper viewing transformation 
conditions' and then defines the object as one or more picture segments. For 3D, he specifies the type 
of projection to be used (perspectiveor axonoaetric), a window and a viewport. The window is a rectangle 
in 2D, or a parallelepiped or rectangular pyramid in 3D, determining the limits of the user coordinate 
space in which the object is defined that will be displayed (if clipping is enabled). the portion of 
the display surface on which the contents of the window are going to be mapped on. Viewport boundaries 
are specified device independently in fractional normalized device coordinates. As explained in Section 
2.2, the picture elements in each picture segment are successively passed through the GPGS viewing transformation 
pipeline where they are (optionally)clipped to the boundaries of the window, and then mapped to the viewport 
by a device driver which produces actual device dependent coordinates. Viewport Transformations are 
a facility introduced by GPGS primarily for refresh displays to take advantage of hardware facilities 
for translation (most displays  115 support relative vectors), or even 2D or 3D rotation (via hybrid 
cr digital transformation hardware) Since typical transformation hardware affects only DPC it can be 
 used only after the entire device independent viesing transformation pipeline described above has 
been applied to produce DPO code consisting of clippedpicture elements mapped to a viewport. The picture 
segment contains in its header instructions to load transformation registers. The vieuport transformation 
changes only these instructions in the header. As an example, in the simple case of 2D translaticn (for 
dragging) using relative coordinates, the picture segment of relative DPU primitives have an initial 
absolute move it its header. It should be noted that even for DPU°s  lacking transformation hardware, 
viewport transformations are a limited but efficient facility because they affect a clipped image 
of an object, with typically many fewer picture elements than the original object bad, Thus  the console 
 operator can select a piece of his object using the viewing transformation pipeline thereafter manipulate 
it on the screen with vieuport transformations, rather than with the more expensive viewing transformation 
pipeline.  If the user has a hierarchical object data may mirror this application oriented hierarchy 
in device independent  GPGS definitions of pseudo These may be inserted as many times as desired in 
a normal picture segment. they may be arbitrarily nested,,  ith a classical master/instance reference 
scheme, including the ability to use translation, and scale transformations to properly place a subpicture 
instance in a higher level one.  High level facilities for stacking, saving, and restoring 4 x homogeneous 
coordinate transformations  exist, as as pre- Bell for and post-oultiplying for matrix composition 
and matrix vector multiplication, Pseudo picture segments, ouch like macros, may be copied directly 
(subject to the instancing transformation) as they are specified inside the higher level (pseudo) picture 
segment, or this inclusion may be postponed until an entire hierarchy is built up and then is instanced 
in a real picture segment. Thus an entire device independent hierarchy, with all (pointer) references 
and transformations may be stored as a standard symbol in a library.  While GPGS allots the definition 
of a hierarchy of objects as a tree of pseudo picture segments, they must ultimately be  compiled 
to a linearly segmented displayIn order· to allow mapping (correlation) from picture elements on the 
display surface to the original application data structure from which they were derived, n-level naming 
for picking/correlation is supported. within named picture segments, picture elements may be given unique 
names as part of their and may additionally be grouped with another unique name using These group names 
may be nested to reflect the original hierarchy, and will be returned as a name hierarchy (stack) by 
the correlation mechanism. Note that GPGS only supports a single level of device dependent picture segmentation 
for manipulation purposes, but at least allows hierarchical If the hierarchymust be preserved for manipulation 
of individual subobjects, each should be compiled to its own picture segment, to be individually highlighted, 
deleted, or transformed. FACILITIES The approach to provide the programmerwith hardware or simulated 
interaction tools such as lightpens, keyboards,joysticks and function keys explainedin Section 2.3. To 
support these tools, the device driver will sample or be interrupted by each tool to see if it has been 
used by the operator. It does this independent of (possibly asynchronous to) the device independent part 
of GPGS and the applications program. To communicate this asynchronous activity (i.e.,  to simulate 
tool interrupts) to the applications program GPGS maintains a PIFO  interrupt queue. The device driver 
fills the queue with event reports, which the application program can interrogate using the IBUAIT function, 
at its convenience.  The applications program calls the INBAIT function with a list of identifiersof 
the tools that it wishes to accept information GPGS then looks at the interrupt queue to see if the 
console operator has used any of the specified tools. If he has, the tool identifier and the event report 
for that tool is returned to the applications program,  The interrupt queue can be polled for any past 
tool activity or the applications  program can into a go wait state to be tool as a of the time parameter. 
If the time parameter is positive, GPGS will return to the applications program either when the time 
expires or the console user uses a requested tool, If the time parameter is zero, information is returned 
from a tool only if the console user had used the tool prior to the call to INUAIT,  otherwise GPGS 
returns immediately without providing any tccl information. If the time parameter is negative, INBAIT 
returns to the applications program only after the console user uses one of the tools in the list. Though 
not all iuplementations currently support INIAIT is designed to wait for informaticn frcm more than one 
display at the sane time. The gueueing discipline used by GPGS is to allow each tool of each initialized 
device to make at most one entry at a time in the interrupt queue common to all GPGS devices. Thus the 
first interrupt from a tool stays in the queue until it is either passed to the applications or flushed 
by INWAIT because it was not requested by the applications program. The entire interrupt queue may also 
be cleared (flushed) by the applications program. when INHAIT returns to the applications program it 
gives tack the information from only one tool. So allow the applications program to sample tcol values 
without using the more expensive INRAIT interrupt queue mechanism, GPGS has the REATOL  subroutine 
which has a tool identifier as parameter and returns information in the same format as INEAIT.  6 SATELLLTEI_ 
Pi fED2Si!_QoUESTIONS Standard implementations of GPGS were visualized either fcr a host or dedicated) 
suffi- ciently powerful to run the entire applications procram and its environment, or for a host/satellitesystem 
where the application would run on the host and the satellite would need to be only sufficiently powerful 
tc implement an terminal capable of supporting local graphics housekeeping. genuine "cooperative distributed 
to processing" between host and The satellite processor in GPGS therefore only holds the part of a 
device driver that deals directly with the physical device ccnversion, tool interrupt handling, and 
viewport transformaticns). The communication between the host and the satellite is in the fcro of messages 
between two parts of a driver. The primary consideration in designing the satellite support to get the 
best response tine pcssible for the console user. Typically, the determining factor  on time is the 
opportunity for (dispatching) of the program on the multi­programmed host processor. with this in mind 
it is clear that the response time (and link traffic) is optimized by minimizing the total number of 
messages having as small a number of large messages as possible. Each picture segment that is created 
must be sent to the satellite for display. To minimize the number of messages it is better to send the 
whole picture segment after it has been closed rather than sending each picture element in a separate 
message to the satellite. The situation for interaction is less advantageous than for sending picture 
segments because each request must be sent to the satellite as a separate message, and the reply from 
the satellite is, of course, another message. Each message requires operating system intervention for 
I/O, and potential loss of execution control, with the need for subsequent redispatching. Interaction 
is therefore likely to be slow on a busy host. Another question in designing satellite support is why 
the division between host and satellite code was put inside the driver. This leaves the whole work of 
the device independent picture processing pipeline to be done by the host processor. Although it would 
be possible to put some part of the pipeline (say, clipping) on he satellite, it would probably violate 
the goal of minimizing message traffic. For example, if a small window would result in very few lines 
to be displayed, it would be very inefficient to send the entire (set of) segment(s) to the satellite 
for local clipping. Splitting the pipeline between any of the other stages of processing simply adds 
additional overhead the total processing by gathering the half-processed picture elements into a message 
on the host which must be split apart again for further processing on the satellite. Given our assumptions 
about the limited power of the satellite, the best strategy is thus to create complete device dependent 
(clipped) picture segments on the host and send them to the satellite for display and local manipulation 
(e.g., changes in segment attributes or viewport transformations). 7  Transportability of highly interactive 
programs through device independence has been achieved with GPGS. Plotter programs can make the sane 
picture on a storage tube and on a refresh CRT, with only minor variation due to character font, etc. 
 117 Programs which use all the interaction tools of a 3D Vector General display can be debugged (with 
somewhat painful simulation) on a simple storage tube with  But in order to allow this, the plotter 
or only cursor crosshairs and a keyboard. storage tube programs have been forced to abide by the same 
picture creaticn and manipulation rules as a refresh CBT  program.  In our experience in writing device 
drivers we have seen that a driver for a simple output device like a plotter or line printer is very 
easy to write, while the driver for an interactive device, though much more work, is certainly simpler 
than creating a whcle new package and conversion interfaces for other devices. Simulating interacticn 
tools and viewport transfcrmaticns for devices lacking adequate hardware is the hardest job. Making 
a new driver is usually a matter of modifying the lowest level of some existing driver.  Full assembly 
language implementationsexist for PDP 11 (under RSX, PT-11, and Unix operating systems) and for IBM 360/370 
-PDP 11 and Onix)  satellite systems. The GPGS-F ANSI subset implementation supports Tektronix 4010-4015 
and Kingmatic plotters Currently the following graphics devices are supported by the assembly language 
versions: stand-alone:  Vector General on PDP 11 GPGS was designed without general data structure 
support and as a highly modular package in which sophisticated features such as input tool simulation, 
viewport transformations, and device independent picture hierarchies are optional code segments, loaded 
only when needed. This has resulted in basic packages which take little memory space and run quickly. 
with a basic driver (no tool simulaticn) for the Tektronix 4014(4015), the RT-11 version of device independent 
GPGS and device driver takes a total of only words of PDP 11 storage, less than the batch system nucleus. 
A 370 system with PDP 11 satellite and full 3D Vector General display takes 32k bytes for device independent 
GPGS, the 370 portion of the device driver, and a picture segment buffer. far as performance is concerned, 
for highly interactive (not much computation) applications programs on the IBE implementation, the CPU 
utilization and response time are comparable to that of text editing programs.   The following comments 
pertain to how "general purpose" GPGS has proven to be,that is, how easy it is to write applications 
programs. For computer-aideddesign programs, where a fairly low level interface is needed along with 
multipledevices (interactive CRT and plotter),GPGS has proven to be very effective. GPGS has the primitives 
needed for makingstatic data plots but it does not have anyutilities to draw graphs. Therefore, a set 
of graphing routines to go on top of GPGS has been designed [6]. Applications that have proven to be 
unreasonableto attempt with GPGS have had to do with a picture which oust be structurally changed in 
real time in response to console operator input. Due to the requirement that a picture segment must 
be completely rebuilt each time it is changed, even if the building of the next version of the picture 
is overlapped with the displaying of the previous version, it is difficult to achieve real time changes 
with anything but the simplest of pictures. Where a device has transformation hardware, however, a program 
accessing this hardware through GPGS can produce real time motion of arbitrarily complex picture parts. 
 From our experience to date we can conclude that for satellite use with GPGS, a fairly simple satellite 
processor is sufficient. a PDP-11/10 is probably sufficient for all satellite work required by the current 
design. The amount of memory required by the satellite is determined by the amount of picture that can 
be refreshed flicker-free by the graphics device. A very high speedcommunications link (600K baud) is 
certainly nice for GPGS because it means that picture segment (message) length really isn't much of a 
factor in the response time. Even with a slower communications link, say 9600 baud, GPGS satellite support 
would still be useable. Because all decision making must be done by the applications program as to how 
to respond to the interactive tools, the limiting factors for the response of GPGS satellite graphics 
are the speed with which the applications program can be dispatched on the multiprogrammed host  message 
 and the speed  transmission.  GPGS has largely achieved its original design goals of being a device 
independent, easy to use subroutine package to allcw program portability. GPGS provides applications 
programs with access to multiple, diverse graphics devices through the same subroutine calls. The GPGS 
design has been shcwn to be implementable alike, on small and large computers with an implementation 
effort required from one to four or five man-years as a function of the language operating system support, 
number and sophisticationof device drivers, etc. The FORTRAN implementation took approximately one man-year 
for device independent GPGS and simple device drivers. coded GPGS is the only generally available graphics 
system that prcvides high level support for the whole range of devices from plotters to high perfcrmance 
vector displays, with device independence for both output and input facilities. Because of this, GPGS 
has had a significant influence on the design of the GSPC Core System. Many people have contributed 
their efforts to the design, implementation, and critique of GPGS. we list them here with their present 
and/or former affiliations: Ed Anson, tan Bergercn, Jan van den Bos, Steve Carmcdy, Caruthers, Marty 
Michel, Martin Mueller, John Dave Rice, Julie Schuartz of University; Andy van Dam of and Broun Universities 
(U.S.A.);  Thijs, Guns van der Wal, Peter Dik Groot, Lex Hensels, Edwin Hermans, Delft University; 
Charles Lang  and Peter icodsford of Cambridge University; Dick Newell, Martin Nevell, and Tom Sancha 
of the Cambridge Computer Aided Design Center. The helpful revievs of this paper by Ingrid Carlbom, 
Dan Bergeron, and Jim Foley are also much appreciated. REFERENCES 1. IBM -Graphics Subroutine Package 
(GSP) for FORTRAN IV, COBOL, and PL/I; form GC27-6932. P.A., The Design and Implementation of the GINO 
3-D Graphics Software Package, Software ­and Experience, Vol. 1 (October 1971), p. 335. 2.  3. Caruthers, 
L.C., and van Dam, A., GPGS User's Tutorial, Informatica, Faculty of Science, University of Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands,October 1975.  4. Groot, D., Hermans, E., Caruthers, L.C., and Schwartz, J., GPGS Reference 
Manual, Rekencentrum, T.H. Delft and Informatica, Faculty of Science,  University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 
May 1977. 5. SIGGRAPH GSPC, First Report on Graphics Standards, Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 77, San Jose, 
July 1977. High-Level Graph-Plotting Routines for GPGS-F, Preliminary Specifications, RUNIT Report, 
University of Trondheim, Norway, 1976.  6. Skaland, M., Zachrisen,  7. Wallace, V.L., The Semantics 
of  Graphic Input Devices, Proceedings ACM Symposium on Graphic Languages, 26-27 April 1976, Miami 
Beach, Florida, pp. 61-65. 8. Foley, J.D., Picture Naming and Modification: An Overview, Proceedings 
 Symposium on Graphics Languages, 26-27 April 1976, Beach, Florida, pp. 49-53.  9. GPGS-F User's Guide, 
RUNIT Computer Centre, University of Trondheim, Norway, September, 1975. 119 
			