
 GROUP-AUTHORING IN CONCORD m A DB-BASED APPROACH Norbert Ritter University of Kaiserslautern, Department 
of Computer Science P.O.Box 3049, 67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany e-mail: ritter@ informatik.uni-kl.de 
 Keywords: Groupware, Collaborative Editing, Cooperation, Transactions, Concurrency Control. ABSTRACT 
CONCORD provides processing support for concurrent design/ engineering. As an extension of the well known 
transaction par- adigm used in database systems, design transactions, design- flows as well as cooperation 
between designers are supported. In this paper, we argue that group authoring and group editing can also 
be supported by CONCORD; a corresponding group editor will be presented. We show that the isolation property 
of conven- tional transactions is not inherently contradictory to cooperation. Due to consistency reasons, 
isolation is still necessary (at lower levels) and, therefore, can be considered as the foundation of 
co- operation, provided activities are adequately structured and suit- able mechanisms are used to enforce 
isolation. Our group editor CGE proves that both, adequate working in the text document (in the sense 
that the processing principles visible at the interface fit into the user's mental model) as well as 
adequate cooperation (in the sense that users may exchange intermediate results) can be reached under 
exploitation of isolated transactions as a basic means. INTRODUCTION Motivation The CONCORD processing 
model is a database-oriented pro- cessing model for design applications and has been proposed for and 
evaluated in design applications such as VLSI design, me- chanical design and software engineering. It 
exploits the well- known transaction paradigm as a basic means for consistency maintenance. At the first 
glance, this might seem contradictory to cooperation requirements, but, as we will see, together with 
an adequate structuring of processing and adapted mechanisms real- izing the ACID properties of transactions 
(ACID stands for ato- micity, consistency, isolation and durability [9]) cooperation can be supported 
appropriately. In this paper, we show that the basic principles of the CONCORCD processing model can 
also be ef- fectively applied in group-authoring applications, which are typ- ical CSCW [8] applications. 
"'Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without lee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the lhll citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of 
this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is perlnitted. To copy otherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a tee.'" C 1997 ACM 0-89791-850-9 97 0002 3.50  "158 In [ 11 ] the major requirements for a group editor 
are summarized. Concerning individual work a user may wish, on one hand, to be free of technical access 
restrictions, and, on the other hand, to be supported by private areas, adjustable granularity, and the 
free- dom of making updates public at any time. We think that, due to consistency maintenance, we cannot 
afford excluding technical protocols completely. Using social protocols exclusively and, thereby, degrading 
the system to a conflict detector without reso- lution (or avoidance) capabilities may too often provoke 
users to spend more time in resolving recently caused conflicts and incon- sistencies than in working 
productively and forward oriented. Thus, technical protocols are acceptable, as long as they are 'com- 
patible' with social protocols. Consequently, we claim that tech- nical protocols can effectively be 
exploited, as far as they allow natural processing and do not exhibit bothering effects at the in- terface. 
 Related Work and Overview of the Paper Approaches towards support of collaborative writing proposed 
in literature can be divided into two major groups. First, there are systems supporting synchronous editing, 
e. g. GROVE [3, 2], DistEdit [10], CAVEDRAW [13], PREP [16]. Supporting syn- chronous editing means providing 
changes to cooperating team partners in real-time. The second group contains asynchronous writing tools, 
such as DUPLEX [18], PREP [15] and MESSIE [23]. As stated in [I l], especially the synchronous tools 
are not fre- quently used, because they do not reflect the natural way of co~)p- erative writing adequately. 
We think that there is definitely a need for WYSIWIS ('What You See is What I See'), but that does not 
mean that users want to modify overlapping text fragments simul- taneously and it, furthermore, does 
not mean that WYSIWIS is re- quired in all phases of a document production process or during all modifications 
on all parts of the document. Asynchronous tools have primarily been proposed to tackle the problems 
of large scale environments being highly distributed, heterogeneous and having to care for 'secure' net 
communication and especially fault tolerance. Asynchronous approaches can be further classified in those 
exploiting a central data repository, e. g. PREP [15], and those exploiting replication, e. g. IRIS [1 
l], CES [7], PREP [161. Our approach exploits a central database to manage document data and process-management 
meta-information. It integrates fa- cilities for synchronous as well as asynchronous cooperation. Synchronous 
cooperation, however, is kind of restricted, since there are no simultaneous write operations. Nevertheless, 
there  In the group-authoring context, we decided to consider document data to be unversioned. The reason 
is that versioning is contrary to flexible locking granules, which, as we will see, is a major foundation 
of our approach. Furthermore, this avoids the problem of semantic merging of versions, which cannot be 
supported by automatic mechanisms. Tool-Execution Level (TE Level) CONCORD provides long ACID transactions 
(see Fig. 1). In this context, long does not necessarily mean long duration, but refers to the concept 
of checking out data from the server into an object buffer at the workstation, processing it there, and, 
eventually, propagating back the modified data within a final checkin step. Schema-consistency and persistency 
is guaranteed by a central system component, called transaction manager. It is also respon- sible for 
the isolated execution and for recoverability of transac- tions, which are indispensable properties for 
a level-specific fail- ure handling. Design-Control Level (DC Level) The transactions mentioned above 
are used to map design-tool applications to system processes. The DC level incorporates a de- sign-flow 
model allowing the flexible pre-specification and scheduling of design-flows as well as of ad-hoc design-flows. 
The design-flow model is state/transition b~sed, where the states stand for design-object states and 
the transitions, in the simplest case, are design-tool applications or transactions, respectively. Since 
we think that group-editing applications do not require workflow capabilities, we do not detail this 
layer. Administration/Cooperation Level (AC Level) At the highest level of abstraction, we reflect the 
more creative and administrative part of design work. There, the focus is on the description and delegation 
of design tasks as well as on a con- trolled cooperation among the design tasks. The key concept at this 
level is the design activity, also called cooperative activity (CA). A CA is the operational unit representing 
a particular task or subtask. During the design process, a CA hierarchy can be dy- namically constructed 
resembling (a hierarchy of) concurrently active tasks. All relationships between CAs essential for cooper- 
ation are explicitly modeled, thus capturing task-splitting (coop- eration relationship type delegation), 
negotiation of design goals (cooperation relationship type negotiation), and exchange of de- sign data 
(cooperation relationship type usage). The inherent in- tegrity constraints and semantics of cooperation 
relationships are enforced by a central system component, called cooperation manager. Especially the 
protocols which are associated with us- age relationships are interesting in the context of database-sup- 
ported cooperation. Explicit cooperation relies on the fact that each CA is associated with local design 
data. Between CAs ac- cess rights can be explicitly and dynamically granted. For techni- cal applications, 
where design-flows can be pre-planned, explicit cooperating can also be pre-planned. A third kind of 
cooperation. implicit cooperation, exploits the mechanisms proposed in [17] 160 to control design-tool 
applications issued by cooperating CAs on shared object pools. Since this way of cooperation is not relevant 
for group editing, we do not detail it. BASIC CGE FEATURES CGE follows the mentioned CONCORD principles. 
It is not a tool designed to be used within the CONCORD activity frame- work; CGE directly implements 
those parts of the three (AC-, DC-, TE-) subsystems, which we found to be relevant for group authoring. 
In the following, we discuss these features. During de- veloping CGE processing-control, we emphasized 
fulfilling the following requirements: in order to provoke as few conflicts as possible, manipulation 
operations must not access document data (text), which is not semantically affected by the modification; 
 there must not be implicit blocking of user activities;  conflicts must be detected early, i. e. foresighted, 
and conflict resolution must be very flexible.  Close Cooperation CGE allows to create single-user CAs 
as well as multi-user CAs. The principles of working within a CA are: users dynamically invoke text-manipulating 
functions pro- vided by CGE;  each function, e. g. reading text or manipulating a part of the text, 
is a database transaction, i. e., read/write operations are isolated against each other;  results of 
manipulation steps can be directly accessed by users associated with the same CA;  the current state 
of a text (segment) associated with the CA can be made accessible to cooperating CAs by issuing explicit 
cooperation operations (as mentioned in Sect. 2.4).  Imagine a group of persons is to write a paper. 
For that purpose, CGE can be used to create a CA all group members can be asso- ciated with. An 'empty' 
text is created, may be named "paper", and its completion is considered being the task of the newly cre- 
ated CA. Now users start working on the document by applying CGE functions. Usually they start with agreeing 
in a certain structure of the text and with delegating parts to members of the group. Initially the text 
consists of a single segment. Working in CGE means manipulating a segment being part of the text asso- 
ciated with the team. We distinguish explicit segments from im-plicit segments. Explicit segments are 
created for cooperation purposes; this matter will be discussed in the following subsec- tion. An implicit 
segment is the part of an explicit segment cur- rently accessed by the CGE modify-function. Thus, implicit 
seg- ments cope with synchronizing actions of users closely cooperat- ing with each other, i. e. (so 
far), belonging to the same CA. Let us assume for the remainder of this subsection to only consider actions 
initiated by members of the same CA. Reading segments just means transferring the data to the CGE frontend 
and commit- ting the read transaction immediately. Thus, multiple users may read the same segment. During 
text modifications the following rules are observed: The part of the segment to be manipulated must 
be explicitly or implicitly marked; it is important to mark exactly that ex- cerpt which is semantically 
concerned by the intended modi- fication; this can usually only be decided by the user who ini- tiates 
the modification function; marking explicitly is done by mouse, marking implicitly means that a pre-setting 
leads to expand the cursor position to the corresponding word, sen- tence, paragraph or user-defined 
excerpt, e.g. the text between two headers of a certain format.  The frontend tries to create an implicit 
segment containing the marked text. If the frontend realizes that the user has marked within an out-of-date 
version (this occurs, if the user's fron- tend content is not in accordance with the corresponding con- 
tent of the database w.r.t, to that segment) his frontend repre- sentation is brought up-to-date and 
all parts currently under modification by other users are correspondingly visualized  (i. e. the user 
can get the information, which cooperating user is currently working on that part). The system keeps 
read locks on the (remaining) segment-data for a certain duration within which the user has to decide 
whether or not the intend- ed modification is still reasonable. The user may now choose free parts of 
the current segment sate for manipulation; he may also choose from parts current- I,, in work by a cooperating 
user; this leads the frontend to si- multaneously visualize the actions issued by the cooperating user 
(provided the latter permits 'observation'); in this way, the user can see, what the cooperating user 
is doing, but can only manipulate that part of the text he write-locked. Text: "paper" Level 1 ~ (I 
'~Title" t / 4 5--1/ Intr째ducti째n / Level 2 ~l Chapterl I ,, Chapter2 Section2.1 Section2.2  ~ C째nclusi째ns 
I Now we can summarize the principles of manipulating text with- in a group of closely cooperating users, 
e. g. the users associated with the same CA: Short read transactions: a segment-reading transaction 
is committed as soon as the frontend received the content.  Modifying semantic units: the processing 
structures rely on the assumption that the user is able to mark exactly the part of the text, which is 
semantically concerned by the intended modification.  Demand-updating offrontend representation: since 
the fron- tend contents can become outdated with the release of manip- ulations done by cooperating users, 
the topic version is re- loaded as soon as required.  'Looking a cooperating user over the shoulder': 
A user can watch the modifications of a cooperating user, but can only change text he has currently write-locked. 
 Loose Cooperation An explicit segment is created by issuing the corresponding CGE function, extracting 
the (marked) part of the text and establishing a sub-segment of the one currently opened by the user. 
For exam- pie, creating a sub-CA usually requires to extract a sub-segment and to delegate it to the 
newly created CA. Thus, the new CA is aimed at fulfilling the task of completing the received segment 
and passing it back as enforced by the protocol underlying the delegation relationship type. In this 
way, a hierarchy of CAs can be dynamically established corresponding to text decomposition and team structure 
(members of the team need to be associated with certain CAs in order to fulfill the task of completing 
the seg- ment). Fig. 2 visualizes the creation of a sub-CA. Suppose, a top- C;; . ~ CGE: "paper" Fig. 
2: Text Decomposition and Team Structure 161 level CA (CA1) has been created to write the text "paper". 
After having determined the structure of the paper (note that the text structure is not a kind of meta-data), 
chapter2 is supposed to be delegated. For that purpose, CA2 is created, one or more team members are 
associated with the newly created CA, a corre- sponding explicit segment chapter2 is created and delegated 
to CA2. This constellation is depicted at the left-hand side of Fig. 2. The right-hand side of Fig. 2 
illustrates, what members of the dif- ferent CAs may see after having read the document. The (explic- 
it) segment structure is shown on the screen, an info-bar gives in- formation about the corresponding 
segment, but contents, which are not in the scope of the CA, cannot be accessed (black text bars in Fig. 
2). Now users can work on the text (segments) which is (are) associated with their respective CA in the 
way described in Sect. 3..1. After having finished chapter2, CA2 is expected to pass back the corresponding 
text to be integrated again into the overall document. By use of the text-segmentation functions and 
the functions al- lowing to manipulate sub-CAs, a hierarchy of concurrently active tasks can be dynamically 
established. So far, we reported on the cooperation possibilities between users of the same CA. In the 
following, we will report on the facilities enabling cooperation between CAs, i. e. facilities for loose 
cooperation. Provision of State Information Since users associated witha particular CA may not access 
data assigned to another CA, they are at any time allowed to acquire (meta-) information about the current 
state of the overall process. This contains information about the current CA hierarchy, the us- ers associated 
with CAs, the tasks of the CAs (responsibility for particular text parts), and the state of a text segment 
in work by a particular CA. The state gives some idea of how far the CA is away from finishing the segment. 
Each segment delegated to a CA gets the default states start, preliminary and finished. Users may refine 
the state information and attach a textual description/ explanation to the state identifier. For example, 
a state 'almost finished' may stand for 'text must only be supplemented by some further literature references'. 
During work users should set text states to show others whether or not the text fulfills qualitative 
prerequisites for a cooperative exchange. Communication / Notification Thus, CGE provides functions 
to get the information which text states are defined for a particular segment and which state is cur- 
rently set for that segment. Now, if the segment is in a state prom- ising any benefit to cooperate on. 
a user of another CA may send a request to the owning CA, applying for getting access (in read mode or 
even in write mode) to that segment. If, on the other hand, the segment is not in the wanted state yet, 
CGE may be in- structed to send a notification as soon as the particular text state is reached. Cooperation 
(Granting Access) After having received a request, a user has to decide on whether or not access can 
be granted, and, if so, which mode (read or write) is supposed to be provided. CGE allows to grant (and 
re- voke) certain access on own segments to certain cooperating CAs. Thus, due to cooperation facilities, 
not only the users associated with the CA owning a segment may access the text, but also users of a cooperating 
CA, which got corresponding access rights. If write access has been granted, the users of the involved 
CAs co- operate with each other (w.r.t. the corresponding text) as de-scribed in Sect. 3.1 (Close Coop.). 
 Further Features Due to space restrictions we can only report important features of CGE. Besides the 
mentioned cooperation possibilities, CGE pro- vides a rich spectrum of functions for manipulating the 
CA hierarchy, user associations (team struc- ture) as well as text structures;  manipulating text; 
 notifications, direct communications, and messages;  annotating text;  logging and providing history 
information (which users read/ modified which segments at which time).  CONCURRENCY CONTROL AND CONSISTENCY 
MAINTENANCE After having introduced major CGE functionality, we now want to report on the concurrency-control 
aspect. Mapping CGE Functions to Database Transactions Obviously, user sessions cannot directly be mapped 
to transac- tions, since the DBMS provides ACID transactions, which would completely isolate users from 
each other. Therefore, we decided to chose a smaller operational granule and mapped single CGE funcuons, 
such as reading a segment or modifying a text frag- ment to transactions, respectively. This ensures 
basic consisten- cy, but introduced two new problems: editor and database representation of a segment 
may differ, due to concurrent manipulations;  locks must be acquired on flexible text granules, in order 
to lock as few data as necessary and, thereby, enable as much concurrency as possible.  In the following, 
we will outline, how these problems of data rep- lication and flexible locking granules have been solved 
in CGE. editor block: [ segment-no ] segment-level [ version-no ] text ] database block: ]segment-no]segment-level] 
version-no ] lock ] text [ Fig. 3: Blocks Modeling Editor Blocks and Database Blocks Blocks are portions 
of text (implicit or explicit segments) and serve as data manipulation units. There are editor blocks 
shown ~3i:f;'Sl ~ 0 :0::~:::A........... ::~!i Si 0 0 0 A ..... 331::i~~ i::! Sl ~0 " 0[A I s2 l o 8CDE 
s21 o 01BCD .Ii; I 3 S2  ng. 4: ra ls atXnOfa i:::,t s, I o Io I lii !i :isl Io Io/o i f'!i! i!S'l 
ol 01 I to the user and manipulated by the CGE frontend as well as data- Let us now assume that userl 
starts a modification on text CD. base blocks. These blocks embody the structures illustrated in Since 
there are no conflicts, the modification can be allowed. As Fig. 3: a consequence, $2 is implicitly segmented 
(see database blocks depicted in Fig. 5). Implicit segmentation can be recognized by segment-no: number 
of an explicit segment; note that creating a equal segment numbers and negative version numbers. The 
latter sub-segment means pulling out a text part; this implies that the indicate that the considered 
block does not correspond to an ex- original segment keeps the text parts, which were before and plicit 
segment and, therefore, has only been created for synchro- after the cut out part; nization purposes. 
segment-level: refers to the level of the explicit segment w.r.t, the Next, user2 intends to modify the 
text part DE. The system now overall text structure; has to perform the following steps. version-no: 
to each block (also blocks representing implicit seg- I. Version-Check: It has to be checked, whether 
or not the user's ments) a version number is assigned, which is incremented by frontend representation 
is up-to-date. This is found out by com- each successful write operation; paring the version numbers 
of the frontend representation and of lock: indicates, whether or not the corresponding block is current- 
the corresponding database segment. Since these are equal in the ly locked by a modify operation; actually 
the lock entry is giv- example, it can be concluded that the user sees the current text en as the pair 
(CA-Id, User-Id) in order to provide information version and that the frontend representation does not 
need to be to other users if necessary; due to simplicity we will consider brought up-to-date. it in 
the following as a flag; the lock entry is only important for 2. Lock-Compatibility-Check: Checking Compatibility 
requires database blocks, since it must be decided, whether or not the finding the concerned text part 
(possibly an implicit sub-seg- contents may be delivered to a frontend after a request; ment) at the 
database side, what has to be done by text compari- text: refers to the contents of a block containing 
text and format sons. In this way, the system determines the last two implicit sub- information. segments 
(CD, E) of explicit segment $2 (BCDE) to be checked. Concurrency Control It is detected that part D is 
currently under modification by userl (see lock entry). In the following, we want to outline the concurrency-control 
3. Conflict-Resolution: Since a conflict has been detected in step mechanism exploited in CGE by considering 
a sample scenario 2, the system provides the information to user2 that part D is cur- illustrated in 
Fig. 4. The database contains a text ABCDEF, rently in use by userl and offers him to manipulate the 
last im- where the capital letters stand for arbitrary contents. Thus, ex- plicit sub-segment of $2 (E). 
During the decision period the cor- plicit segment S I refers to the overall text. A sub-segment $2 has 
been cut out containing text BCDE. This leads to segmentation of responding segments are locked so that 
no third user can invali- date the offer. User2 now has to decide whether or not thethe text into database 
blocks depicted in the middle of Fig. 4. Let intended modifications are still reasonable. He has the 
possibili- us assume, there are two users performing CGE sessions editing ties to reject the offer or 
to accept the restricted modification area the text. Both users issued the CGE read function on the overall 
(last implicit sub-segment with contents E). Furthermore, he can text and got the complete contents, 
so that both frontends manage request a window showing him the current manipulations done editor blocks, 
each equivalent to a database block (see Fig. 4). Userl (Frontend) DB (Backend) User2 (Frontend) -Note- 
~3espite- i-mpli-ci-t ] segmentation of $2. the I first S2-database-block I (B) does not get a nega- 
t tire version number, because it is con- I sidered to be the representative of $2. J .................... 
a Fig. 5: Situation after Request of Userl 163 P Note: If user2 would I I I I have marked only an J 
I ! f excerpt of text E, CGE j I would have created a n I t sub-segment of $2, corres Fig. 6: Situation 
after Requq by userl on the second implicit sub-segment (referring to text CD). Note that conflict resolution 
does not apply blocking, but asks the requesting user to do a dynamic (manual) resolution [21]. 4. Managing 
Modification Area: Supposing, user2 decides to modify part E, he is enabled to do so, i.e., the constellation 
shown in Fig. 6 occurs. Note that this step does not require data transfer between backend and frontend, 
since contents are al- ready equivalent (at the latest since step 1). Next, userl finishes his modifications. 
The system releases the lock on the second implicit sub-segment of $2 (CD) and tries to merge it with 
(unlocked) neighbored, implicit sub-segments. In our example, this leads to a merge of the first (B) 
and the second (CD) sub-segment. After user2 also finishes his modifications, .--..d the situation illustrated 
in Fig. 7 is given, in which all implicit sub-segments mentioned above are again integrated into the 
ex- plicit sub-segment $2 and the text CDE has been modified. The fonts used in Fig. 7 illustrate, which 
(parts of) editor blocks are up-to-date and which are not. Suppose, userl next wants to modify part E. 
The system then finds out by comparing the ver- sion numbers that the frontend representation is outdated. 
Thus, the frontend representation is brought up-to-date and the user must decide again, whether or not 
the intended modification is still reasonable. The example shows the basic principles used in CGE to 
control processing: the lock granule is flexible (implicit segments) and is deter- mined by the intended 
modification;  implicit blocking of user activities does not occur;  conflict resolution can be done 
early (foresighted) and in a flexible manner, since besides automatic reactions also users can be involved 
to resolve conflicts dynamically (manually);  Userl (Frontend) SI 0 ( A [ ---"""-I~" [ S 1 JL ~P modifications 
are propagated to other frontends in a lazy fash- ion, i. e. not before they are meaningful and, therefore, 
impor- tant for the corresponding user. In this way, an adequate harmony of cooperation support and en- 
forcement of data consistency is achieved. Implementation CGE has been implemented in C++ on SUN workstations 
run-ning the operating system UNIX. Tk/TcL has been used to pro- vide the frontend (state information 
is visualized by using col- ors), data is managed by the object-oriented database manage- ment system 
ObjectStore. CONCLUSIONS CGE exploits a similar document decomposition as used in the DUPLEX approach 
[18]. But in addition to explicit segmenta- tion, implicit segmentation is introduced to support the 
technical concurrency-control protocol. Cooperation facilities, which are installed at a higher abstractional 
layer as the concurrency-con- trol mechanisms, deal with user operations and user objects (ex- plicit 
text segments), and, additionally, are explicit and dynamic. Thus, cooperation control fits into the 
mental model of users. In the same way, concurrency contro_l does not lead to bothering ef- fects at 
the interface, although basic (text-manipulating) opera- tions are isolated against each other. The CGE 
concurrency-con- trol mechanism fulfills the requirements mentioned at the begin- ning: no implicit blocking, 
early conflict detection, flexible resolution by involving users into the conflict management pro- cess 
as far as concurrency control on user objects is concerned. Thus, the used mechanism enforces isolation 
only in situations in which users want to be isolated (and to work undisturbed) and en- DB (Backend) 
User2 (Frontcnd) 0 0 o I i I IF " I'  I ,1o o Fig. 7: Resulting State 164 ables cooperation in situations 
they want to exchange prelimi- nary information. First experience in using CGE confirms that the used 
technical protocols are not contrary to natural processing but agree with so- cial protocols. Nevertheless, 
in the future additional case studies will be performed. Furthermore, we want to deal with problems occurring 
with decentralizing data management and using heter- ogeneous data management facilities. Up to now CGE 
can just be used within a LAN (local area network) environment. Extending CGE to be usable in large-scale 
networks will also mean to cope with problems of communication delays, node crashes and data- transfer 
failures. Acknowledgments The author would like to thank T. H~irder and H.P. Steiert for their helpful 
comments on an earlier version of this paper and T. Krech for managing the CGE implementation. Literature 
1 Barghouti, N.S., Kaiser, G.E.: Concurrency Control in Advanced Database Applications, ACM Computing 
Sur- veys, Vol. 23, No. 3, September 1991. 2 Ellis, C.A.; Gibbs, S.J.: Concurrency Control in Group- 
ware Systems, in: Procs. of ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data, Portland, OR, 1989, pp. 399-407. 
3 Ellis, C.A.; Gibbs, S.J.; Rein, G.L.: Design and use of a group editor; Engineering for Human Computer 
Interac- tion; Cockton, G.. Ed., North Holland, Amsterdam, 1990, pp 13-25. 4 Georgakopoulos, D., H.ornick, 
M., Sheth, A.: An Over- view of Workflow Management From Process Modeling to Infrastructure for Automation, 
Journal on Distributed and Parallel Database Systems, 3(2), April 1995. 5 Gray, J., Reuter, A.: Transaction 
Processing: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann Publ., San Mateo, CA, 1993. 6 Greenberg, S., Marwood, 
D.: Real Time Groupware as a Distributed System: Concurrency Control and its Effect on the Interface, 
in: Proc. ACM 1994 Conference on Com- puter Supported Cooperative Work, Chapel Hill, NC, 1994, pp. 207-218. 
7 Greif, I., Seliger, R., Weihl, W.: A case study of CES: A distributed collaborative editing system 
implemented with Argus. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 18(9), pp. 827-839. 8 Grudin. J.: 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: His- tory and Focus, IEEE Computer, May 1994, Vol. 27, No. 5. pp. 
19-26. H~irder, T.. Reuter. A.: Principles of Transaction-Oriented Database Recovery. ACM Computing Surveys 
15, 4, 1983. pp. 287-318.  10 Knister. M.J., Prakash. A.: DistEdit: A distributed toolkit for supporting 
multiple group editors, in: Procs. ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Los Angeles, 
CA, 1990. 11 Koch, M.: Design Issues and Model for a distributed Multi-User Editor, Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, International Journal, 5(1), 1996. 12 K/lfer, W., SchOning, H.: Mapping a Version Model 
to a Complex Object Data Model, Procs. 8th Int. IEEE Data Engineering Conference, Tempe, Arizona, 1992. 
13 Lu, I.M., Mantei, M.M.: Idea Management in a Shared Drawing Tool, in: Procs. 2nd Europ. Conf. on Computer- 
Supported Cooperative Work, Amsterdam, The Nether- lands, 1991, pp. 97-112. 14 Mitschang, B., H/irder, 
T., Ritter, N.: Design Manage- ment in CONCORD: Combining Transaction Manage- ment, Workflow Management, 
and Cooperation Control, Proc. 6th Int. Workshop on Research Issues in Data Engi- neering: Interoperability 
of Nontraditional Database Sys- tems (RIDE-NDS), New Orleans, 1996. 15 Neuwirth, C.M., Chandhok, Kaufer, 
S.D., Erion, P., R., Morris, J.H.: Flexible diff-ing in a collabortive writing system, in: Procs. ACM 
1992 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Toronto, Canada, 1992, pp. 147-154. 16 Neuwirth, 
C.M., Kaufer, S.D., Chandhok, R., Morris, J.H.: Computer Support for Distributed Collaborative Writing: 
Defining Parameters of Interaction, in: Procs. ACM 1994 Conference on Computer Supported Cooper- ative 
Work, Chapel Hill, NC, 199 ~-, pp. 145-152. 17 Nodine, M.H.; Zdonik, B.: Cooperative Transaction Hier- 
archies: Transaction Support for Design Applications; VLDB Journal 1, 1992, pp. 41-80. 18 Pacull, F., 
Sandoz, A., Schiper, A.: Duplex: A Dsitributed Collaborative Editing Environment in Large Scale, in: 
Procs. ACM 1994 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Chapel Hill, NC, 1994, pp. 165-174. 
19 Ramamritham, K., Chrysanthis, P.K.: Executive Briefing -Advances in Concurrency Control and Transaction 
Pro- cessing, IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, 1996. 20 Ritter, N., Mitschang, B., H~irder, 
T., Gesmann, M., Sch6ning, H.: Capturing Design Dynamics -The CON- CORD Approach; Procs. 10th Int. IEEE 
Data Engineering Conference, Houston, Texas, 1994, pp. 440-451. 21 Ritter, N., Mitschang, B., Harder, 
T.: Conflict Manage- ment in CONCORD, 6th. Int. Conference on Data and Knowledge Bases for Manufacturing 
and Engineering, Tempe, Arizona, Oct. 1996, pp. 81-100. 22 Rusinkiewicz, M., Klas, W., Tesch, T., Waesch, 
J., Muth, P.: Towards a Cooperative Transaction Model - The Co- operative Activity Model, in: Procs. 
21. Int. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), Zurich, Switzerland, Sept., 1995, pp. 194-205. 23 Sasse. 
M.A., Handley, M.J., Chuang, S.C.: Support for Collaborative Authoring via Email: The MESSIE Envi- ronment, 
in: Procs. 3rd European Conference on Comput- er-Supported Cooperativc Work, Milan, Italy, 1993. pp. 
249-264. 165  
			