
 Guidelines for Multimedia Usuge Roberta Hartley, SystemsEngineering NCRCorporation, San Diego, CA robefta.harlley@andiiaoncr.com 
Introduction For the first time in the history of the written wed, animation, sound, graphim, and scripting 
are read­iiyavailable,and affordable, on thepmcmalconnpu­ter. This collection of tools, known as mukimdia, 
provides communicators with the ability to present their messages as never before. These wonderful and 
mystic gadgek ... [allow us] to put ideas into a form that letsthembeunderstood and used by other people. 
1 However, with mukimedia come a number of cti­ acteristics and/or enhancements to communication that, 
when improperly used, can impede the me+ sage and make its understanding and use difficult. So then, 
the question that begs asking is at what point, or saturation level, do these enhancements becomedetrimental 
andactuallyimpair theleanning process and obscure the message? ] Lola Zook, Working as a Communicate 
Then and Now; The Editorial E= Vol. 14, No. 4,1993 p. 1. Permission to mpy without fee all or psrt of 
this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for directcommeraal advantage, 
theACM copyright notice and the title cf the publimtion and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying isbypermksion of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fee and/or specific permission. @ 1993 ACM 0-89791 -630-l/93/oolo@9S $130 In an attempt to 
answer that question, this paper explores the use of rmmy multirndia featwes as they apply to on-line 
computer documentation and trainin&#38; and muhirnedia presentations. This paper employs primary and 
secondary research and gen­erates guidelines which are designed as recommen­dations. Research The primary 
-mhconsists of surveys conducted on three contemporary multimedia presentations Gmpton sMultiMedti%. 
Encyclopedti,ALookat 0S1: EnterpriseDirectoy, and NCRS Line-ffp/br 1991. As the sole researcher, I developed 
an instrument that could be completed in four minutes or less. The main emphasis was the effectiveness 
of a presenta­tion, subject progression screen fonts, color mmbi­nations, terminology, tone of voice, 
presentation, usefulness, and whether or not a partiapant would recommend it to others. The scale was 
numeric, using values 1 through 5, with explanations ger­mane to the question for the low, medium, and 
high numbers. For example, Does the presentation progress through the subjects logically? 1 = no, 3 = 
somewhat, and 5 = yes. I conducted the survey within a axporate business unit and invited forty-eight 
members from two or­ganizations to participate. Those individuals who were surveyed had a background 
in either marketi­ng (direct sales) or technical writing and had a minimum of two years experience with 
mmputer­related products. Hence, there was a relevant inter­ est incomputer-based docume ntation, on-line 
train­ ing or multimedia presentations for each partici­ pant. Anonymity for the participants wa5 imperative 
be cause two of the three presentations were politically very sensitive. Individuals were instructed 
to view the presentations at their convenience, thenlogonto a computerusinga dedicated account for the 
survey, complete the instruments, print their responses, and drop them into a mailbox I received verbal 
confir­mation from three women and eight men that they completed the survey and remived a total of 18 
printed responses. I conductwi secondary msearchusingjournds, peri­odicals, treatises, and other publications 
on the sub­@t. I went from the general to the specific by ad­dressing the topic of multimedia and the 
successful use of its components.  I?esuttsand Findings The findings were both predictable and surprising. 
The stuwyresultsof thepresentatiorts were predict­able presentations that lacked sound design princ­iples 
scored poorly, and presentations that were professionallyexecutd scored well.%mecornments were surprisingly 
acerbic, and some participants seerned absolutely hostile toward one design (SF cifically, A Lookat 0S1; 
Enterprise Directoy). One notable finding concerned viewer wphistica­tion. A viewer does not have to 
be a professiomlly trainedcommunicatorto appreciateawelldesigned, well-orchestrated presentation. Viewers 
are visually more sophisticated and critical, traits that can be attributed to a visual literacy generated 
by so much exposure to television and other graphic media. Communicators wishing to capture an audience 
must recogni2e that their technical presentations will be compared by viewers (either consciously or 
unconsciously) withcommercialpn2sentations.They must, therefore, compete for the viewer s attention with 
television shows, movies, MTV, etc. Ergonomic factors that impair a viewefs under­standing presentation 
because of eyestrain or gen­eral discmnfort were also notable. Behavioral op­tometrists (optometrists 
who have conducted ad­vanced studies in visual performance) have found that prolonged reading from a 
computer screen can haveanadverseeffecton both the adult and juveniIe eye. This condition, known as uesophoriu, 
or over­convergence of the eyes, can result in skipping lines, difficulty in focusing and fatigue. Another 
ergo­nomic factor is viewer comfort. When working with on-line presentations for prolonged periods of 
time, viewers reported muscle stiffness and /or soreness (especially in the neck and back), fatigue, 
headaches and nausea in some instances.z The consequence for the student of computer-based training is 
missed information. Ergonomic design factom (such as rest breaks, chahthatprovidegood support, tableheight, 
lighti~ or alternating the use of on-line with other media) should reincorporated to prevent thiscondi­tion 
and ensure the success of the presentation. Conclusions and Recommendations Communicators should be 
wary of using multirre dia features because they are neaL Gimmickry, or doing things just for the fun 
of it: can be just as counterproductive as being clinically correct. Nei­ther should a communimtor refrain 
from experi­mentation; however, results obtained t%om experi­mentation should be applied judiciously. 
A second opinion, either as a usability test or an experience user s asessment, regarding the effectiveness 
of a feature and its application, not its radical mture or value as a toy, can be most beneficial when 
impk­menting a design decision for an on-line presenta­tion. Satisfying the user s needs isa communicator 
s most important goal. Addressing it foremost should result in a superior multimedia presentation. Conducting 
Preliminary Analysis Cornrmmicatorsshouid notassume that multimedia is suitable for every application; 
i.e.,using muhim~ dia for all on-line computer documentation and 2 Working W~th VIY1 s, The Human Interface, 
(Daly City, CA Krarne5 Communications, 1984), p. 2. training. Such an assumption can be mily under­stood 
since we area televisiondented society and since many cmnrnunicatom consider almost any fonnof electmnicd 
ocumentationuseful ...l hemost fundamentaldesigndecision ...is what toputon-line and what to leave on 
paper [off-line]. The best docu­mentation is a well-mnsidemd combination of both print and on-line material, 
using each medium to its best effect. s Acommunicatorshould evaluatewhetherornot the presentation is 
well suited for on-line (multimedia) and use the presentation only if the rnzlueof on-line placement 
exmeds the production cost. Although such an evaluation maybe nothing mom than com­mon sense, it can 
be all too easily overlooked by the on-line/mukimedia enthusiast. Therefore, by an­swering the following 
questions, a cornnumkmtor can judge the value of presenting material on-line before committing valuable 
resources to thepnject. Affirmative answers to five of the following ques­tions indicate that a project 
is a good candidate for traditional media and not a good candidate for on­linebaauwof twhnical lirnktionsorsecurity. 
%me explanationsareincluded tohelpthecommunicator in evaluating the potential for on-line or off-line 
presentation. 1. Isthematerialmorevaluableofi-line(inprint) to the reader than on-line because it lends 
itself better to a user s working or traiining environment? 2. Does the documentation require lengthy 
or detailed reading?  Reading text on-line is slower and less accu­ratethanmadingfrompaper. Also, prolonged 
reading [on-fine] has been reported to in­crease eyestrain or succude(a twitching ctf the eyes)? 3. Is 
the documentation used or needed aiway from the computer? 3William Horton, Designing and Writing Online 
Docwnen­tation, H21p FiZesto w, (New Yorlq N.John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1990), p. 15. 4 Leon F. Miller, 
Student Doctor, Southern CaliiDrnia College of Optometry, Tldeo Display Units, What s the FUSS?: (Duncan, 
OK, 1982), p 5. An example of such a documen t would lx repair instructions for the space shuttle. 4. 
k thiS ]q@ documen tation? Ccmrtsystemsarepaperbasecl and have well­established rules for such documents. 
Rules for on-line docurnen tsamless clear. Ahard copy may be more appropriate. 5. Is the user prepared 
or trained to use a com­puter?  Though personal computers are ubiquitous, not everyone is able to use 
them comfortably or effectively. The audience is the paramount consideration for the proposed on-line 
pre% entatio~ willthemedia fit the... needsorwill it beadistraction? s Iftheaudience comprises people 
who are technically naive or unso­phisticated, older, orpoorlyeducated, an on­line presentation could 
fail miserably if not desigmxi with a great deal of cam. Perhaps a presentation prepared for such an 
audience should require no interaction on the part of the viewer and resembles commercial televi­sion 
presentation. 6. Will every user have a compatible mmputer so only one on-line version of documentation 
can be prepared? 7. Doesthepresentationcontain highly detailed or very large graphics?  The limitations 
of the computer screen must reconsidered. Graphics which are not suited for display include those with 
fine details, small type, or faint lines. In on-line docu­ ments, such minute details can literally be­ 
come lost in the space between the pixels on the screen: (Computer displays, or screens, are typically 
72 dpi while printers are 3(XI dpi and above.) 8. Does the documentation contain secret or confidential 
information? 5Ronald H. Anderson and Angus Reynolds, Selecting and DecelopingMedia for Instructwn, Third 
Editwn, (New York NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992) p. 2. 6Wdliam Horton, Designing and Writing Online 
Docwnen­f.afion, Help Fiks to Hypertext, (New York ~ John Wiley &#38; %ns, Inc., 1990) p. 27. The priva~ 
of the individual and the corpo­ration, especidy when developing applica­tions for personnel, tax, or 
financial depart­ments, must be carefully protected. Affirmative answers to at least four of the following 
questions indicate that a project is a good candidate foron-iinebecause therewouldbesornebenefitfrom 
the use of computer storage, retrieval, and display capabilities some explanations are included to help 
thecornmunicatorin evaluating the potential for on­line or off-line presentation. 1. Isthematerial morevaluableto 
the mderon­line than off-line (in print) because it lends itself to the user s working/training environ­ment? 
 2. Doesthedocumentation contain timely and/ or critical information and require quick n2­trieval that 
makes it more useful on-line than off-line (in print)? 3. Is the material always evolving (dynamic) 
and updated frequently? 4. Must the information be located in one place, for the sake of consistency, 
but available to many people at the same time? 5. If printed, would the information need to be put in 
several volumes, not one? Anon-linemode facilitates theeaseof update and guarantees the user the latest 
version of a document; thexefom, it would assist users in situations coverfxi in the previous three ques­tions 
 6. Is this a large reference work (such as an encyclopedia) that is mad a little at a time or that is 
systematically searched?   Guidelines Ifa communicator decides on-line documentation is desirable after 
thorough analysis, a great deal of attention must be devotd to its design. The follow­ingguidelinescontain 
recommendations for design­ing a user interface, writing for on-line, using pic­tures and sound, responding 
to the user, and plan­ning the optimum length. -* the Inteffcce The interaction between a person and 
a computer can behkened toa dialoguebetween two people. Yet often what tra.nspimsbetween many users and 
their computers is more like an argument. n Theinterfacecreatesalookand feel about theon-line presentation 
in the mind of a user. Poorly designed interfaces (dialogues) have the potential to confuse, frustrate, 
bore, panic, or damage credibility with users, espdally with on-line computer training. Such interfaces 
result in slower performance, more errors, and negativeattitudeson thepartof the users. As a consequence, 
not only can subjects presented on-line be pemeived poorly but also learning can be impeded. The guidelines 
in this section are pre­sented in order to improve the general dialogue between theuserand thecomputerand 
to maximhe the specific leamingprocess ina muhimedia presen­tation. Dm maninterfiwe thatallowsausertowrkwith 
theleast @. An on-line presentation can be made easy to use bygivingtheusera clear view of the information 
being sought or manipulated. Controlling the mm­putermustnotdistract theuserorimpairthepercep tion of 
the data or presentation in anyway. If there is some doubt as to the clarity of an interface, an uninitiated 
user should view the presentation. Should that person become confused or need to ask questions to navigate 
the presentation, features that resolve such issues and increa~ user independence can be incorporated 
into the interface. Careful analy­sisof the user/audience is one of the most important steps in creating 
a good deign. Dm gn aforgiving, predictable,and consistent inteqface. Under the best of cinmrnstances, 
users will make mistakes, and under normal circumstances, users willrnakemany,rnanymistakes. Scmwusersactually 
prefer the trial-and+mur method of learning rather than any formal training. A communimtor should d=ignaninterface 
whichaccornmodates thistypeof exploration and take care to keep the interface con­sistent Such a design 
feature enables the user to navigate the presentation, without having to learn 7William Horton, Designing 
and Wn ting Online Documen­tatwn, Help Files to F@rtext, (New York NY: John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1990) 
p. 31. different interface techniques, when using different parts of the presentation. This capability 
is particu­larly important Ixixause usem begin to tn.wt the presentation and their ability to use it. 
Control fk user s wcevtwn of the interfhce. When working on a computer, users interact with an im­age-their 
mental model (or mncept) of the compu­ter-not a machine. Therefore, care must be taken to plant the correct 
model in the minds of users. When possible, acommunicatorcanu sea rnetaphorthat is suitable to theuser 
senvinxunent and the tasks to be performed, such as a desktop with papers, file fold­ers, and printers. 
Project the tight personality. Regtudless of the rneta­phorused, thetoneand style of thedialoguegivethe 
computer a definite personality. An appropriate tone to project would be friendly but not patroniz­ing. 
Few people react favorably to glowing praise fromacomputerapplication; suchartificeisevident. The user 
s mental model should be that the colmpu­ter is intelligent, possibly clever or witty, but never servile 
or stubborn. Making a computer seem too human would be a serious design error that could impair the usefulness 
of a presentation in the eyes of the user. An example of such a recommendation is that a communicator 
... not use the [user s] ... lnarne in interactive messages because that practice has a negative effect 
on readers. 8 ~w othe .Thepowerandflexibility of the mmputer can be used to tailor the dialogue to the 
needs of the individual. A flexible design lets users choose what they want to read, whenever possible, 
and presents the material in the user s language, not computerese or technical jargon. Dinzt tkuserun 
th navi~ationalaids.13ndinginfcmna­tion in on-line documents differs fmm finding infor­mation in off-lined 
ocuments (printed). The colmpu­ter s capabilities make information retrieval mom powerful and efficient. 
This type of retrieval isespe cially pertinent when searching for information in large documents. Quality 
Documentatwn Proms; Conducting and Intqret­ing User Suroeys, (Dayton, OH: National Cash Register Corporation, 
1990), p. 376. Guidelines tor Multimedia Usage Ifort-line information is not found quickly and can­not 
be tbund mnveniently, users will seek other sources of information and abandon the use of the computer. 
UseXS, therefore, have high expwtations of on-line documents for information access and retrieval, and 
navigational aids play art extremely iinportant part in satisfying such expectations. Navigational aids 
are not something tangible; so an on-line mode requires a different design than the paper-oriented counterpartofinfomation. 
Elements to be considered when on-line navigational aids are developed centerona streamline, direct approach. 
 Providetheshortest,simpkst pzfh tothetqic ofinterest. %menoptionsshouldbelirnited so that theinforma­ 
tionbeingpresented doesnot lend itself to grazing bytheuser. Grazingisamethod of ~kinginforma­ tion wherein 
the user passively observes what is presented until the desired information appears. Typically, grazing 
is the way people get information watching trad~howdemonstration programs. The passive nature of this 
viewing assumes that the user hasenoughpatienceto wait until thetopicof interest is presented, and grazing 
can have negative effect; only a fraction of what is presented is understood. Ukesynhls or keystoaid 
tk in@mation wrarch.Icons, or highlighted words and phra~s (text appearing in abold font orreversevideo), 
whichexpbde to reveal information the user requests, are useful tools for navigating anon-line presentation. 
They should be accessible (either by mouw or by key), easy to use, and easy to return from. The user 
should use the fewest keystrokes possible. Applya wnskhmt organizationalstrategyandstructure on-line 
documents simply. Users, when facd with complex organization, can become discouraged and abandon on-line 
presentations. When an on-line document is kept simple, its usefulness is greatly enhanced. The complexity 
often associated with hard<opy documents (such as a graduate-level m­researchpaper, or a scientific document) 
would be come a verbal morass on-line and consequently would be difficult to navigate, use, or comprehend. 
A complex hierarchy or too many links between associated sub-should be avoided. Menus am navigational 
tools that axe easy to use and that provide easy amess to portions of on-line documen­tation L&#38; kzibie 
screenfin ts.For on-line presen~tions, the textmustbelegible, notjustrecognizable. Displayed text, however, 
is less legible than printed text, and reading from the screen is 20 to 30 percent slower, slightly less 
accurate, and more variable in speed than reading lmrd copy! Therefore, serious atten­tion must be directed 
to letter shapes, type size, display contrast, and the layout of text to improve the readability of the 
text. U&#38; well-jlnmd chanactershqxs Most of the differ­ence in the reading speed between paper and 
on-line documents nxmlts from the lowlegibilityof display charactm when such characters are compard to 
pMted characters? l he legibility of displayed text relative to printed text can be improved with the 
use of well-formed characters. Simple character shapes provide arnorelegible display than complex shapes 
(such as Old English), cursive, or decorative type faces. %ms serif fonts display better and are more 
legible than serif fonts, such as the Times New Roman font used in this text. some screen fonts (such 
as those usd on the IBM 3278, or dumb twminals) do not have true de­scenders, and as SUCh, the taik Of 
g s, j%, P S, q s, and y s do not project below the basetine of the text, but instead coil under the 
body of the character. Without true descenders, some legibility is sacrificed Screenfontsthatfeature 
kerningdetractfromlegibil­ityand should beavoidd Withkernin&#38;a portion of a typeface projects beyond 
the bcdy of a letter and can overlap part of another letter; e.g., AV, or t%This tiadtisticke-lyi~-ttimfibl~~m 
fonts are being used. Kerning can be very attractive when printed but canconfuseor detract from the text 
when displaywt. Watch @ fimt sizes that impair reading. Character recognition is most sensitive to thesizeand 
design of the dot matrix on the screen~l Legibility can be guaranteed by using fonts that are neither 
too small nor too large. 9Wdliam Horton, Designing ami Writing Online Documen­ tation, Help Files tom, 
(New Yorlq ~ John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1990), p. 156. Ibid. p. 156. II Qdd F. ~cvq, ~ibifity in Film-based 
and Televi­sion Display Systems, SI C Technical Communication, Vol. 32, No. 4,19$5, p. 21. Fonts which 
are too small can cause users to squint (perhaps causing eyestrain), force them to decipher the characters 
one by one, speUing enough of the word to recognize it and then comprehend it. This tedious pmcesscan 
alienate the user; the sarneholds true for fonts which are too large. The proper size for text depends 
on the following factors reading distance, screen resolutio~ contrast between text and background, visual 
acuity of the user, and how the textisread (skimmed lightly, read word-for-word, or read character-byduwacter)}z 
A display should feature text ku~ eIIOU@ so that -recognize characters but small enough so that users 
can see enthe words or phrases at a glance. Between these two extremes is a zone of optimal legibility. 
Any blanket rcmnmnendations regarding specific point size, character height, or dot-mati dimens­ions 
should tw examined critically. Legibility de pends on the character size, the viewing distance, and the 
angle at which it is viewed. Reading dis­tances for computer screens are more variable and less adjustable 
by the user than the traditional paper page William Horton sbuok, Designing&#38; Writing On-line Da.wmentation, 
contains a matrix which relates dis­tance and viewing angle to height for display fonts; it provides 
specific guidelines for choosing the cor­rect size for an on-line document. If this resource is not available, 
font sizes and their legibility can be tested on prospective users. Head bobbin&#38; s@nt­in~ or distance 
compensation on the part of the user are telltale signs that indicate the proposed fonts need to be ~valuated 
for legibility. Select color combinations czrefully. One of the more creative aspects of designing on-line 
presentations is using the vast palette of colors available. Though inexpensive, color should be used 
sparingly; other­wise too many colors generate the Christmas-tree effect and make reading difficult. 
(Christmas-tme effectisa term that applies to theoveruseof different colors, to such an extent that the 
computer screen looks like a Christmas tree.) IIwilliam HOfiOn, Mgningd Writing Online DOCUm­tation, 
Help Files to FIyprtext, (New York NY: John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1990) p. 24. . Awid wkvs that comeinto 
focus fir the human eyeat difient distances, This phenomenon (known as chromostempsk) is pemived as a 
viimtion (or beat­ing) between colors. It can cause discomfort for the viewer or evoke a negative reaction+mmetimes 
to extremes. (Some users have reported feeling dizzy and/or nauseous when working with certain color 
combinations.) Putting intense cool and hot colors next to one another, such as a bright orange next 
to a bright blue, can create chromostempsis. While using contrasting colors can keep a presenta­tion 
from being dull, the communicator must be aware of running the risk of overwhelming the message by misusing 
the medium. Testing color combinations on a number of subjects is one method the communicator can employ 
to avoid potential problems. It should be documcn ted whether or not viewers move their heads back and 
forth (to change the distance for focusing) or lblink theireyesrapidly tomakeanadjustment fortlmcolor 
combination on the smen. Communicators should also solicit and document the preferences of test subjects 
for particular color combinations. It would also be advisable to ascertain if any of the subjects have 
any known degree of color-blindness. When highlighting w th wlor, give the mat important 14@t the most 
highlighting. The appropriate use of highlighting can be verified by moving back from the screen (to 
a distanm of four to six feet or one to two meters) and squinting at the display. Any (color which does 
not blend with its surrounding colors is thedominantobjwt (orhasvisual conspicuity)inthe human eye and 
mind. If there are too many domi­nant objects on the screen, the viewer can become confused and concentration 
can be impaired. CaE+ ful use of color can heighten communication and increase the value of an on-line 
presentation im­measurably; carelessusecancmatevisual confusion. Writing for On-line A user has similar 
expectations, perceptions, and psychology foron-he aspaperj but because c)f the differences of the new 
medium, a user must mad a page which is smaller, fuzzier, and lcslegible. lCon­sequently, writing on-line 
documents is vastly dif­ferentthan writinghard copy; many on-line docu­ments fail because the communicator 
does not ac­count for the differences between the two. 13wfl~~ Hofion. ~gningd wrifi?fg~lhe k3l?W?l­ 
tution, HeZpFi&#38;s to Fly@ext. New York, W John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., 1990. The challenge isespecidyacute 
for communicators of documen ts that will appe~ both on paper and semen. Perhaps the most significantly 
discriminat­ingelement ishow thedocumentsare produced: on­lined ocumentsamdesigned, while hard copydocu­ments 
are written. One rnapr difference is language words and pun~ tuation. Short, simple, familiar words should 
be used in an on-line d Ocument. Restricting an on-line presentation to a basic English vocabulary helps 
to increase the user s understanding. When designing procedures, the communicator should place emphasis 
on small words which can affect the outcome, such as all, if, and, any, etc. Highlighting such words 
with reverse video, under­lines, or capitalizing all the letters can prevent the user from overlooking 
words which can make a critical diffenmce in the successful use of the proe dures. Contractions and abbreviations 
should be avoidd because they can be misunderstood or misread by the user. Due to the limitations of 
a computer di% play, a communicator should use only standard symbols which are easily read. Exvressideaszmxiseti. 
On-1ine presentations should use a direct style of writing that features short, but not terse, sentenas. 
Users retain more, and faster, if on-line text gets to the point quickly, clearly, and without excessive 
rhetoric. $tate quantities exzctlti. Users expect mmputers to give precise information, especially when 
express­ing quantities. As an example, it would be better to use the phrase them are two... rather than 
a couple of; because the use of the latter in everyday speech generally desaibes a group of two, three, 
or more rather than an exact number. Avoid nudo nq the cumvuter sound humaq. Certain phrases (such as 
Illbegin when you prmtheEnter key) plant an unsound model in the mind of the user. Usersexpectmmputersto 
actlikecomputers and take comfort in this concept because of its pm dictability. Write fbr the litenzl-minded 
user. Users may feel an increased anxiety when working with a computer and may interpret on-line docurne 
nts literally char­acterforchanzcfer. When a document is being written, fora user, sornehadcopywriting 
standards should be modified for on-line (and this can apply to some off-line documents as well). Traditional 
usage puts a period (termimd punctua­tion) within quotation marks, for example, Enter GO. It is likely 
that a computer-knowledgeable user would enter the word GO and the @d as instructai. Unless the period 
was mquimci by the computer, which isunlikely,theco rnmandcouldnot be interpreted and would result inanerrorrnessage. 
An example of a better way to give instructions would be Enter GO . Alternatively, terminal punc­ tuation 
could be disregarded for instructions alto­ gether, and each co rnmand could be displayed on a line by 
itself, in a different font. Beconsisfent. Terms should becorwistent throughout the document. If the 
term TE is used to describe a parsing engine initially, then it should be used uni­forrnlythmughout thepresentation. 
CasuaUychang­ing the nXerence to a TEP for parsing engine processor (which is another term for the parsing 
engine) could create confusion. The user would not know if the terms were interchangeable or if a new 
concept had been introduced with a simikirfunction to the previous one, and what, if any the critical 
differences are. Presentideasin a natural order. Because of limita­tions imposed by the computer sawn, 
the user cannot see an entire sequence of ideas at once. For this reason, ideas must be presented in 
an obvious, intuitive order. Examples of natural ordering in­clude describing a computer screen from 
top to bot­tom, left to right, ora process in chronological order. If at all possible, a communicator 
should anticipate questions r%arding ideas and pnssmt them in the terms which are natural for the user. 
Using Pictures and Scwnd On-line Modern computers can show cartoons, speak, and play a familiar tune. 
On-line documen ts can take advantage of the multimedia powers of the compu­tersinceuserexpxtations foron-linedocuments 
are shaped as much by television and movies as by books In on-linedocurnents, asinpaperdocuments, pictures 
should be used to communicate and clarify, not to decorate and ?XWltify. Use illustrations to exvfain 
and d- lx. Cornmunica­tom can express visual and spatial concepts in pic­tures, espmially those involving 
physical actions or chronology. Pictures increaseusers the speed at which can com­prehend and carry out 
actions and also highlight important pintsbycatchingand focusing the user s attention. Illustrations 
can be used to draw attention to essential information, especially if it is new, unfa­miliar, or diffexs 
fmm what the user may expw~ Pictures can show relationships, especially complex ones, that words cannot. 
On-line presentation allows the communicator tousegraphicorganizers to show how complm systems are organized. 
Tksepictwvs improve the us&#38;s recall and thereby make on-line documents more effective. r hich SUVDO?f 
thesubiect. Illustra­tions in on-line documen ts can vary from uhra­simple typewritergraphicsto sophisticate 
film clips or vidmtape. The types of illustrations which can h Chm5e@ctu ehmsw used depend upon the display 
characteristics, stor­ age and retrieval capability, screen resolution, and other available technology. 
 Typewriter graphics can be used to show two-and threedimensional objects, form arrows, or create tables 
complete with horizontal and vertical rules. Graphic character sets, also known as line draw, are available 
in some word proassing programs and allow the communicator to draw pictures using standard keys with 
s-al capabilities provided by the application. These elements can be combined to create on scren illustrations. 
Icons are small visual symbols for cornman ds, pm grams, and data in the computer. They are simple, concise 
representations designed to pg the user s memory and work best when labeled. Icons can assist the user 
in navigating and using an on-line document. Their use contributes to organizing a document and to the 
overall usability of the docu-Inenti Photographscanbe scanned intoon-line documents for illustration 
purpmes Photos with a wide mnge of greytonesand mlorphotosdo not display well on moderately priced computer 
displays. (Communi­cators would do well to remember that the resolu­tionofa screen is20t0100tirnes less 
thanthatofa ckir photograph.)14To create gmytones, black-and­white rnonitom simulate gmy with patterns 
of dots. (Like creating a halftone from a photograph so a picture can be printed in ink.) This technique 
trades semen resolution for a greater number of simulated grey levels. The following queries should be 
considered when using photos in on-line docume nts 1. Is the photo simple and well exposed with high 
contrast? 2. Is the user to nmgnize main features, not study finedetails?Note that for fine details, 
it would be better to make a line drawing of the important feature in the photograph. 3. Am the objects 
familiar and easy to recog­niz? 4. Isthedisplaymonitoradequate forthetypeof photograph?  Photographs 
are especially useful when showing people s faces (evena low-resolution pictwe isnxxe ~ognizable than 
a line drawing), objects in their surroundings, or subjects whose light values am important (such as 
X-rays or surveillance photos). Photos are best used when the pictures are simple, easily recognized, 
and properly labeled. Informa­tion is best learned, and understood quicker, when both pictures and words 
are used. Pictures must be annotated so that U-can understand their impor­tance and how they relate to 
other information. Use sound selectively. On-line documents can use sound as well as wordsand pictumstocomnuubte 
with users. Because users can listen while reading or Performingother tasks, sound isespeciallyvaluable 
for communicating additional information, or as an alarm to alert the user to sptxial conditions. Ii 
William Ho fion, Wgningati Writing Online Docu~­tation, HelpFiks to H-, (New York ~ John Wiley &#38; 
Sons, Inc., 1989), p. 180. Sound should be incorporated wlwre appropriate, such as using a siren to emulate 
an emagency condition in a computer network. However, relying on sound alone to communicate critical 
information would be a grave emor; consider the user who hears a siren but taxi.not understand the meaning 
because no explanation was given. Allowing users to select betweenaudi%leand blinkingalarms, orboth, 
greatly lends to the usefulness of the presentation and ac­commodates theneedsof those with physical 
limitat­ions, such as hearing or vision impairments. Music can be used as an omnipresent acmmpani­ment 
to visual information or as feedback. For em­phasis, a new product could be announced with a trumpet 
fanfare. Also to keep the attention of the user focmxl on the on-line presentation, especially during 
a trade-show demonstration, background music can act as a .scmen for environmental noises. When sound 
is used as feedback, especially in train­ing materials, a short, happy melody is good rein­forcement. 
Va@ng the melody often so that it does not kome stale or go unnoticed is another impor­tant tactic. Neutral 
tones can be used for negative feedback. A communicator should use sound to gently alert users, not distract 
them from their curnmt task. For example, a simple tune could be played to remind the user to take a 
stretch break as recommended by many human-factors experts. Communicatorscanusespeech tonarratesimulations 
and demonstrations. The user can easily concentrate on the screen while listening to the spoken word. 
Unlike printed words, spoken words do not clutter the screen or take the user s eyes away from the current 
task. Speech also makes on-line documents available, and extremely useful, to the blind and visually 
impaired, as well as those who cannot read. vwsible, vrewn t instructions audibly. An audio presentation 
cm increase performance and reduce errors for the user when learning from on-line docu­ments. The communicator 
should take care to make the voice distinct from the usefs envimunent. For example, the use of a female 
voice in aircmft warn­in~ capfwes the pilot s attention because ~t air. traffic controlled and navigators 
are male. Useanimationtoleadtheuserthm.wh thepresentation. Motion can display information powerfully 
and fo­cus the usefs attention on specific concepts. Com­municators should take care to use visual transitions 
toguidetheeyeand the mind and to express the flow from one idea to the next. Visual transitions can guide 
the user s eye to a spe­cificarea of the screen, can preserve coherence when shifting from one context 
to another, and can rei­nforcethe action being performed. A communicator should take care to make such 
transitions distinct, smooth, and clear, especially when shifting context. Visual transitions and special 
effects can be com­bined to communicate compound actions. Build complexd+plays. The simplest form of 
anima­tion is called a build. A communicator can continu­ally build art image by adding to it on the 
display. Information cart be added, provided that the addi­tionisexecuted predictably and doesnot distract 
the user. Builds are useful to illustrate detaikxl informa­tionprogmssively, show information flow, or 
depict processes. Animafedynamicconcepts.Animationistheillusionof motion; it is the element that makes 
exploded dia­grams explode, procedures proceed, and working models work-all in front of the user s eyes.ls 
Ani­mation can show abstract changes, such as move­ment of data through a process. A communicator should 
use animation to communicate, not decorate. Remend fo theuser.Responding to the user deserves the same 
critical evaluation as other multimedia features. High speeds are what computers are know for and users 
are reasonable in having such an expectation. Therefore, speed and consistency am basic criteria that 
should reincorporated in the user­ response design mechanism. Respond quickly, but nof too quickly. Can 
a computer response be too fast? Yes. Response times that am faster than human perception are definitely 
too fast, especially when displaying messages. A response MW~lim Hotion, mustrating Computer Documentation, 
The Art of Pmenting Informatwn Graphidly on Papsr and Online, (New Yorlq N John Wiley&#38;Sons, Inc., 
1989), p. 189. time that allows usem to blink their eyes or mornen­ tarilyglanceatanotherpartofthesaeenyetstillsee 
the message should be considered. Respond wnskkwtly. Unexpe&#38;d delays can frus­trate the user. Often 
users will tolerate delays if they are ptiictable. Uncertainty about the length of a delay can produce 
greater anxiety than the delay itself because users question their ability to under­stand or use the 
on-line presentation. E@ain deZays.If the user requests a lengthy action, the program should execute 
a response to the m­questimmediately, butinforrntheuserhow Iongthe process will take and offer an option 
to cancel the request. While the request is being served, the user should be inforrnd periodically about 
the progress king made; this bulletin-type information is ex­tremely important during inactive displays. 
Phrases such as Retrieving the file ..Y reassure the user that the request is underway and that the mmputer 
has not stopped working. Planning the Optimum length Ergonomic factors play an important part in on-line 
presentations. Behavioral optometrists have found that prolonged reading of a computer screen can have 
an adverse effect on both adult and juvenile eyes? Viewers ... report major eye problems caused by overwork-blurred 
vision, fatigue, shooting pain, and double vision-and body discomfort-head­ache, shoulder pain, and neck 
muscle tension. 17 Evenaprewntation which employs the most skillful useof on-line componentscan fail 
because the viewer cannot use it effectively due to physical discomfort. Overuse of the on-line medium 
mn.dts in a negative envinmment for the user, and the communicator must be aware of such a potential. 
16~n F. Miller, student Doctor, southern CEdifOrnia College of Optometry, Video Display Units, What s 
the FUSS?: (Duncan, OK, 1982), p 1. v Stella Glackin, me Office Eye Workout, ~st w~t April 1990, P 60. 
consider thetmuosedemn nmmentfir theuresentation. The communicator should asmrtam the type of ter­minal 
for which the presentation is to be used,, Sub­ject testing can aid in determuu ng the need for an anti-glare 
screen (some termhds haveananti-glare coating on the tmminal) and the need to ad~t the face of the screen 
by rotating it for better viewing. Additionally, theviewercanadjust thebrightnessto a cornfortablelevel 
at the beginning of the presenta­tion. (This recommendation is pardculady true for computer-based training 
though the same design principles hold true for demonstrations.) Ifpossible,acornmunicatorcan evaluate 
the room in which the presentation is to be used and suggest any accommodations nemsswyto enhance the 
usability of the presentation. It is particularly important to take into account lightin~ table height, 
window positions, window coverings, etc. If at all possible, focal points for use in eye exercises to 
offset visual fatigue should be considered. h omorute rest breuks. How long is too long? The answer varies 
from individual to individual. Chil­dnm have shorter mncentmtion spans than adults, and so the audience 
for whom the presentation is designed mustbeconsidered. Manypeoplerespond well to short breaks every 
20 to W minutes, and lengthy breaks that allow the viewer to getup an walk about are mcmnmended every 
one and one half to two hom?n~psible,qeewfi~tim presentation segmentsandsuggested restbreaksam techniques 
that can be used to refresh the viewer. consider multivle medriz.If possible, on-line training can complemented 
with other media. %me exam­ ples are the use an accompanying handbook in which the viewer can write answers 
or take notes and retain as future reference, the use of a printer as part of the presentation, tlw incorporation 
of charts in theclassroomenvinmrnent, or theprtwmtationof an audio review with the sugg@ion the a viewer 
close and rest his/her eyes. Each method of convey­ing information can contribute to the overall effec­tiveness 
of the on-line presentation and serve to rest the viewer s eyes, stimulate other senses, and possi­bly 
avoid monotony. 18Howr@,D. I@n, O.D. Wdeo DiSphy TtiMIs ad VKlon. Santa Ana, CA: Optometric Extension 
Program Foundation. References and Bibliography Alred,G.,Oliu,W., Brusaw,CTheP@ssiowd Writer, A Guife 
@r AdzxzncedTedmical Writing. New York, NY: St. Martin s Press, Inc., 1992. Anderson, Ronald H., and 
Reynolds, Angus. Selcr­tizwzndDeuelophgMedia@rInstniction, Third Edition. New York, ~ Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1992. Bradford, Anrwtte Norris. Conceptual Differemms Between the Display Screen and the Printed Page. 
Technical Communication 31 (3), 1984, pp. 13-16. Gottleib,RaymondL.,O.D.,Ph.D. Neuropsychology of Myopia. 
Courtesy of Claude D. Valenti, Opto­ metric Vision Development Center, La Jolla, CA. Horton, William. 
Designing &#38; Writing Online Docu­mentation, Help Files to Hypertext. New York, NY: John Wiley &#38; 
Sons, Inc., 1989. Horton, William. Illustnzting Computer Documenta­tion, The Art of Presenting Ir$vmation 
Grnphidly on Paprand Online. NewYork,~John Wiley &#38;Sons, Inc., 1991. HutchinsOn, Dr. R Anthony. Computer 
Eye-Stress, How toAmidlt,How toAUeuiateIt.NewYork,~ M. Evans and Company, Inc., 1985. Kahn, Howard D., 
O.D. Vidm Display Terrnimls and Vision. Santa Ana, CA: optometric Extension Program Foundation. McVey, 
Gerald F. Legibility in Film-based and Television Display Systems. Technical Communic­ation 32 (4), 1985, 
pp. 21-28. Murch,Gerald M. UsingColorEffectively Design­ing to Human Specifications. Technical Communic­ation 
32 (4), 1985. Quality Documentation Process; Conducting and Interpreting User Surveys. Dayton, OH National 
Cash Register Corporation, 1990. Trachtrnan,JosephN.,0.D. Biofeedback of Accom­modation to Reduce Functional 
Myopia A Case Report. AmericanJournal of Optometry and Physi­okqjicid optics 55 (6), 1987, pp. ~ -406. 
working With VDTs, The Human Interface. Daly City, CA Krames Communications, 1984. Zook, Lola. WorkingasaCommunicatonThenand 
Now. The Editorial Eye, 14 (4), 1992, pp. 1-3. Reseachin.strumentsand sumrnariesavailable from Roberta 
B. Hartley, c/o NCR Corporation, LCPD - San Diego, 16550 West Bernardo Drive, San Diego, CA 92127, U.S. 
of A  SIGIX3C 93 .  
			