
 § Figure 1: We introduce hexagonal global parameterization, which can enable a surface to be tiled seamlessly 
with regular texture and geometry patterns. Note how the pattern follows the features on the feline (middle), 
highlighting the shape. The mostly hexagonal hollow structureisusedtorepresentthebunny surface (right). 
1 Introduction This sketch introduces hexagonal global parameterization, a new type of periodic global 
parameterization that is ideal for tiling surfaces with patterns of six-fold rotational symmetries, i.e., 
6-RoSy s [Palacios and Zhang 2007]. Being one of the two most fundamental rotational symmetries that 
are compatible with trans­lational symmetries in the plane, 6-RoSy sappear in manyplaces in nature, such 
as honeycombs, insecteyes, corals and crystals, as well as man-made objects such as Islamic patterns 
[Kaplan and Salesin 2004] and tri-axial weaving [Akleman et al. 2009]. Such sym­metries can also provide 
optimal circle packing, which naturally have applications in architectural design [Schiftner et al. 2009]. 
A hexagonal global parameterizationfacilitates all of these applica­tions. See Figure 1 for some examples. 
Furthermore, parameter linesinahexagonal global parameterization intersectatanangle of . 3, which enables 
triangular remeshing of a mesh surface with close to ideal aspect ratios in the triangles. The dual mesh 
of such a triangulation provides a hexagon-dominant tiling of the surface. Past research in periodic 
global parameterization has focused on quadrangular global parameterization for the purpose of quad remeshing 
(see [Bommes et al. 2009] and references therein). In this work we introduce hexagonal global parameterization 
and demonstrate its importance with applications such as regular pat­tern generation on surfaces and 
triangular remeshing. Furthermore, we have identi.ed a set of requirements for hexagonal global pa­rameterization 
and developed an automatic, two-stage pipeline to generate suchaparameterizationgiven an input surface.Tothe 
best of our knowledge, this is the .rst technique that generates hexago­ .matthias.nieser@fu-berlin.de 
palacijo@eecs.oregonstate.edu konrad.polthier@fu-berlin.de §zhange@eecs.oregonstate.edu nal global parameterizations. 
 2 Methodology Our parameterization pipeline consists of two steps: (1) automat­ically generating a 6-RoSy 
.eld, and (2) computing a hexagonal parameterization from the 6-RoSy .eld. Field Generation: A6-RoSy 
is a set of six vectors of equal length with an angle of . 3 between adjacent vectors. A6-RoSy .eld is 
a continuous 6-RoSy valued function. A point p is a singularity if the length of the vectors at p is 
zero. The existence of singularities in a 6-RoSy .eld is a result of both the topology and geometry of 
the underlying surface. Topologically, any.eld on a closed mani­fold surface with a non-zero Euler characteristic 
must have at least one singularity. Geometrically, the locations of these singularities re.ect the Gaussian 
curvature in the surface. However, the singularities in the RoSy .eld can lead to the breakup of texture 
and geometry patterns in pattern design as well as cause excessive and misplaced extraordinary vertices 
in triangular remeshing.Weaddress this issueby providinga singularity cluster­ing operation. With this 
operation, all the singularities in the .eld are treated as the nodes of a graph whose edges re.ect the 
spatial proximity between nearby singularities. We then iteratively per­form edge collapses on this graph 
until the cost of further collapse exceeds a user speci.ed threshold. The cost of an edge collapse operation 
is the geodesic distance between the singularities at the ends of the edge. During an edge collapse, 
the singularity pair is ei­ther cancelled if the sum of their singularity indexes [Palacios and Zhang 
2007] is zero, or merged otherwise. This technique provides control over the number and location of the 
singularities. For triangular remeshing, there is an additional requirement that in anisotropic regions 
the parameter lines be aligned with the principal Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 
Asia 2010, Seoul, South Korea, December 15 18, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4503-0439-9/10/0012  (a)(b)(c)(d) Figure 
2: We comparethe outputsofour method(b,d)tothoseof Alliezetal.[2002](a,c)withaFootmodelandVenus. Notethereduced 
numberofextraordinary veriticesin.atregionsoftheFoot,andincreased feature alignment(aroundthe noseandbrow)ontheVenus. 
The histogramsshowthe occuringinnerangles(onthexaxisfrom0to120degrees). curvature directions. However, 
there are three parameter lines and two principal directions at each point. Consequently, it is impossi­ble 
to makeuse of both principal directions without incurring angu­lar distortion.Wenote that this challengeis 
uniqueto 6-RoSy .elds since with 4-RoSy .elds both principal directions can be aligned with the parameter 
lines. Through our experiments, we have found that for feature-preservation in triangular remeshing, 
it is desirable to use the principal direction corresponding to the least absolute curvature. Given that 
principal directions are not well de.ned in spherical regions, we propagate the selected principal curvature 
di­rections from highly anisotropic regions to the rest of the surface through constrained optimization. 
Parameterization: To compute a hexagonal global parameteriza­tion from a 6-RoSy .eld, we formulate an 
energy minimization problem in which the energy term is speci.c to hexagonal global parameterizations. 
Furthermore, unlikequadrangular global param­eterizations where the branch points (corresponding to the 
singular­ities in the RoSy .eld) appear on the integer lattice in the parameter domain, in hexagonal 
parameterizations the branch points are situ­ () ated on the set of Eisenstein integers, i.e., {a- b 
3 |a,b. 22 bZ}.Oncethe energy termis formulatedanumberof techniques can be used to solvethe energy minimization 
problem and constrain the singularitiesonthe Eisensteinintegers.Wemakeuseofatechnique based on the concept 
of covering spaces from algebraic topology, which allows to represent the 6-RoSy .eld as a vector .eld 
in the covering space. This insight simpli.es the theoretic notion since all standard methods from vector 
calculus can now be applied to 6-RoSy .elds. The notion of covering spaces has been used in constructingaquadrangularglobal 
parameterization[K¨albereretal. 2007]. 3 Results In Figure 1 we show several patterns on surfaces using 
our tech­nique. In Figure 2 we demonstrate the bene.ts of applying geometry-aware hexagonal global parameterization 
to triangular remeshing. Notice that with our technique, the range of angles is smaller than methods 
based on Delaunay triangulations [Alliez et al. 2002]. Moreover, there are fewer extraordinary vertices, 
and they appear in more natural locations (the Foot). Finally, along ridges such as the nose ofVenus, 
our method can better follow the ridge line than the Delaunay triangulation. We refer the readers to 
the accompanying video and other supple­mentary materials for additional examples and technical details. 
 References AKLEMAN, E., CHEN, J., XING, Q., AND GROSS, J. L. 2009. Cyclic plain-weaving on polygonal 
mesh surfaces with graph ro­tation systems. ACMTrans. Graph. 28, 3, 1 8. ALLIEZ, P., MEYER, M., AND DESBRUN, 
M. 2002. Interactive geometry remeshing. In SIGGRAPH 02: Proceedings of the 29th annual conference on 
Computer graphics and interactive techniques,ACM,NewYork,NY, USA, 347 354. BOMMES, D., ZIMMER, H., AND 
KOBBELT, L. 2009. Mixed­integer quadrangulation. ACMTrans. Graph. 28, 3, 1 10. ¨cover -surface parameterization 
using branched coverings. Com­put. Graph.Forum 26, 3, 375 384. KALBERER, F., NIESER, M., AND POLTHIER, 
K. 2007. Quad- KAPLAN,C.S., AND SALESIN,D.H. 2004. Islamic star patterns in absolute geometry. ACMTrans. 
Graph. 23, 2, 97 119. PALACIOS,J., AND ZHANG,E. 2007. Rotational symmetry .eld design on surfaces. In 
SIGGRAPH 07:ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 papers,ACM,NewYork,NY, USA, 55. ¨POTTMANN,H. 2009.Packing circles and spheres 
on surfaces. In SIGGRAPH Asia 09: ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2009 papers, ACM,NewYork,NY, USA, 1 8. SCHIFTNER, 
A., HOBINGER, M., WALLNER, J., AND 
			