
 How a Personalized Geowiki Can Help Bicyclists Share Information More Effectively Reid Priedhorsky, 
Benjamin Jordan, Loren Terveen Department of Computer Science and Engineering University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota {reid,benjordan}@umn.edu, terveen@cs.umn.edu Abstract The bicycling community 
is focused around a real-world activity navigating a bicycle which requires planning within a complex 
and ever-changing space. While all the knowledge needed to .nd good routes exists, it is highly distributed. 
We show, using the results of surveys and in­terviews, that cyclists need a comprehensive, up-to-date, 
and personalized information resource. We introduce the person­alized geowiki, a new type of wiki which 
meets these re­quirements, and we formalize the notion of geowiki. Finally, we state some general prerequisites 
for wiki contribution and show that they are met by cyclists. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.5.3 
[Group and Or­ganization Interfaces]: Collaborative computing, computer­supported cooperative work, web-based 
interaction. General Terms Human factors, design. Keywords Wiki, geowiki, geography, personalization. 
1. Introduction 1.1 Bicycling and the Personalized Geowiki The bicycling community is focused around 
doing:navigat­ing a bicycle in the physical world. This activity raises in­teresting challenges. First, 
it is inherently geographic and typically local (i.e., people mostly ride in the area where they live). 
Second, the planning task deciding where to go, and how to get there is hard. It is hard because cyclists 
must navigate a transportation network largely designed for another purpose (driving motor vehicles) 
and because they must do so under continually changing conditions (weather, Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. WikiSym 07, October 21 23, 2007, Montr´eal, 
Qu´ebec, Canada. Copyright c . 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-861-9/07/0010. . . $5.00 motor traf.c, construction, 
etc.). Third, cyclists have signi.­cant individual differences in purpose, attitude, and abilities. Many 
related domains exist. One is shopping in a mall: this is geographic and local, focused around real-world 
do­ing, and requires planning in a complex, changing space. Another is .nding one s way around a new 
city or neigh­borhood: this too is geographic, local, and occurs in a com­plex, changing space. A third 
is natural resource manage­ment, for example monitoring off-road vehicle activity. In other words, the 
personalized geowiki has many applications beyond cycling. The complexity of bicyclists tasks results 
in complex in­formation needs. Cyclists have a strong tradition of sharing information, but their existing 
practices are relatively inef­.cient. There is no comprehensive, up-to-date information resource that 
helps users .nd routes that meet their personal preferences. This is true even today, when at least four 
ma­jor vendors offer geographic web search and automated mo­tor vehicle route .nding1 and there are hundreds 
of Google Maps mashups , covering everything from where to .nd an apartment2 to where crimes have occurred3 
to If the Earth Were a Sandwich 4 [7]. Why is there no Google Bicycle? First, the cycling community is 
relatively small. In the United States, cycling is two to three orders of magnitude less frequent than 
driving, whether measured by number of trips or number of miles traveled per person [12]. Second, cyclists 
require detailed and continually changing informa­tion to plan their routes. Together, these two factors 
make the problem too hard for hobbyists and economically unattrac­tive for businesses. However, wikis 
change the equation. While it s still hard to gather and maintain the information, this work is dis­tributed 
across many motivated users, rather than being the responsibility of the system builder. 1 Google, http://maps.google.com; 
Yahoo, http://maps.yahoo.com; MapQuest, http://www.mapquest.com; and Microsoft, http://local. live.com. 
2 http://www.housingmaps.com 3 http://www.chicagocrime.org 4 http://www.zefrank.com/sandwich/tool.html 
 Figure 1. Screenshot of our current application, with an automatically generated route. To meet the 
needs of such communities, we propose a new type of wiki: a personalized geowiki, which is a geowiki 
with personalized planning features. We have designed the user interface of our personalized geowiki 
for cyclists and are currently implementing it; Figure 1 is a screenshot of our application at the time 
of this writing. 1.2 The Geowiki The personalized geowiki is an extension of the geowiki, which is itself 
an extension of the wiki. Geowiki is already a well-established term and is generally considered to mean 
a geographically contextualized wiki. However, we argue that, in a true geowiki, the geographic context 
itself, as well as links between geographic context and non-geographic data, enjoys wiki editing features 
 i.e., the structure of the map itself can be edited, not just items on the map and this is the notion 
of geowiki that we extend. Speci.cally, a geowiki is a geographically contextualized wiki which implements 
the following features: 1. Graphical web-map interface with standard web-map navigation operations. 
2. On-line map editability, i.e., if geographic data or links involving geographic data are reasonably 
editable at all, they can be edited in the browser. For example, the names of lakes and the locations 
and connectivity of streets are editable, but aerial imagery is not, because aerial images, once loaded, 
typically are not edited by anyone. 3. WYSIWYG editing of geographic data, with a reason­ably complete 
set of editing operations. While wikitext markup works reasonably well for textual data, geo­graphic 
data is too complex to edit using text markup. 4. Robust linking to geographic data. For example, text 
which describes a street must be linked to the street itself rather than to a region which is co-located 
with the street. Co-location links are weak, breaking down both when geodata moves and when multiple 
geographic objects are themselves co-located.  5. Comprehensive data monitoring, i.e., revision history 
browsing and automatic watching of geographic data, non-geographic data, and links between data. We intro­duce 
the watch region, a generalization of the watch list feature standard in traditional text wikis: users 
graphi­cally indicate regions (or byways) they care about. When editing changes data within a watch region, 
the system then noti.es the user who de.ned it. We are not aware of any true geowikis, though numerous 
partial implementations exist (which we discuss further in Section 2 below). However, as we show, this 
complete ed­itability is key to the success of wiki as a cycling resource. In the remainder of the paper, 
we sketch related work, present the design of an empirical study of cyclists, identify their unmet needs, 
show how these needs can be met using a personalized geowiki, and explain why we expect cyclists to contribute 
to such a wiki. We also illustrate the key features of our personalized geowiki.  2. Related Work The 
wiki model, where any random visitor can make unre­viewed changed to a website, is a relatively new method 
of collective work. The Wikipedia5 online encyclopedia is the most famous example of this model and is 
generally quite successful; e.g., Giles found that the accuracy of Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica 
were roughly equivalent [5]. Other work has shown that users are as effective as experts in reviewing 
other users work [3], and that the wiki model and traditional review-before-publication result in the 
same quality, but the wiki model achieves it faster [4]. Partial implementations of the geowiki concept 
exist. For example, PlaceOpedia6 maps Wikipedia articles to locations, OpenGuides7 is a wiki travel guide, 
WikiMapia8 allows users to tag places and rectangles with wiki-editable infor­mation, and there are numerous 
other similar sites. However, these sites implement only geographically contextualized wiki information 
without offering any editability of the ge­ographic context (i.e., they implement only the .rst of our 
.ve geowiki features). Other sites allow sharing of WYSIWYG-edited geo­graphic and geographically contextualized 
data but do not have wiki features. Gmaps Pedometer9 allows sharing of routes, and Google My Maps10 allows 
sharing of points, paths, and polygons which can be annotated with text, im­ages, and videos. In both 
cases, information is geographic­ally contextualized using co-location only, though because 5 http://www.wikipedia.org 
6 http://www.placeopedia.com 7 http://openguides.org 8 http://wikimapia.org 9 http://www.gmap-pedometer.com 
10 http://maps.google.com routes sometimes deviate from stored geography, this is nec­essary in a .xed-geography 
system. Open Street Map11 is an effort to build street maps using the wiki model. This project is a fuller 
geowiki, implement­ing four of our .ve geowiki features: a web-map interface, on-line map editability12, 
WYSIWYG editing, and some ro­bust linking. Geographic data is robustly linked with itself, but there 
is no non-geographic data at all, making that robust linking issue moot. OSM s programmatic interface 
would permit such robust linking and could be used in the construc­tion of geowikis, though we are not 
aware of any which make use of this feature. Similarly, while the programmatic inter­face makes available 
the revision history of geographic data, this is not exposed in the Web interface, and no automatic watching 
is available. The geographic information systems (GIS) community has also proposed various types of collaboration 
in mapmak­ing [2, 6, 9, 10]. However, GIS researchers have not consid­ered the open editing that is the 
essence of the wiki model. Finally, there are many websites dedicated to bicycle nav­igation. Bikely13 
allows users to create and share routes. TopoRoute14 does this and also offers automated route .nd­ing, 
but this is of limited help because it uses motor vehi­cle routing data. byCycle15 offers cyclist-oriented 
automated route .nding but offers only the route choices Normal and Safer , which does not fully meet 
the routing needs of cy­clists, as we show below. 3. Research Design We studied the cycling community 
using surveys and in­terviews, recruiting subjects from the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area. We 
sent invitations to three local cyclists discussion lists with about 950 total members and also en­couraged 
recipients to forward the invitation. All partici­pants were over 18 and had spent at least 200 miles 
or 25 hours cycling within the local area during the past year. 73 respondents .nished the survey, and 
most questions had about 75 responses. 68% of survey respondents were male and 32% female; most were 
between 18 and 64 years of age with a roughly uniform distribution. Survey questions focused on attitudes 
regarding map errors and existing plan­ning and navigation methods. We also used the survey to recruit 
for interviews. We completed 19 semi-structured interviews lasting 60 to 90 minutes each; 13 subjects 
were men and 6 women. Some questions elaborated on issues touched on by the survey; others explored topics 
more suitable to an interview setting, such as attitudes toward the wiki model and privacy con­cerns. 
We also presented lo-. paper mockups of three core 11 http://www.openstreetmap.org 12 On-line editing 
uses a Java applet, somewhat limiting its reach. 13 http://www.bikely.com 14 http://toporoute.com 15 
http://bycycle.org personalized geowiki features the wiki geodatabase, bike­ability ratings, and monitoring 
of edits. Finally, each sub­ject sketched a map of a familiar route to provide non-verbal data on geographic 
thinking. Interviews were recorded by two note takers and subsequently coded. 4. Unmet Needs We identify 
three key unmet needs: no comprehensive and up-to-date information resource, no automated route .nding, 
and no personalized ratings of byway bikeability. Resource in this context means anything bicyclists 
use to plan routes, common examples being bicycle maps or guidebooks. We use byway to mean the smallest 
identi.able segment of a bike route, e.g. a section of bike path between intersections with roads or 
other paths. 4.1 No Comprehensive, Up-To-Date Resource To plan a route, cyclists need to know how they 
can travel through geographic space now and what they will .nd within the space now. Some of this information 
isn t recorded at all, and the rest is distributed across numerous electronic and non-electronic resources. 
For example, some bike trails and bike lanes are mapped by the state, others are mapped by municipalities, 
and still others are mapped by park boards. Bicycle travel is accomplished using byways, so cyclists 
need to know where the byways are and how they con­nect. Byways clearly include dedicated bike trails 
and many (but not all) roads. However, subjects suggested several ad­ditional classes of surfaces that 
are sometimes byways: al­leys, sidewalks, parking lots, etc. More classes certainly ex­ist, and it would 
be dif.cult to enumerate them even if all possible cycling routes were known. Regardless, current in­formation 
resources do not include these types of byways. Furthermore, only actual byways should be included, in 
or­der to avoid overwhelming the resource and users with unim­portant information. For example, most 
sidewalks should be excluded, but some, such as those that bridge highways, are key byways. Cyclists 
know the locations and properties of byways because they themselves travel upon them. The locations of 
landmarks, resources,and obstacles are also important to bicyclists. 16 out of 19 subjects mentioned 
landmarks. These, in addition to street names, are used for orientation and navigation, and subjects 
cited objects like businesses, highways, and water bodies, i.e., both point and non-point landmarks. 
Resources are things helpful to cy­clists in some way; 11 subjects cited a wide variety of re­sources 
including restrooms, water sources, and restaurants. Obstacles cause cyclists dif.culty or frustration. 
12 subjects mentioned a variety of obstacles, including construction and traf.c lights. A few of these 
items e.g., water bodies are found on current information resources, but most are typically not. It 
is also time-consuming to identify which landmarks, re­sources, and obstacles are important; for example, 
members of the local cycling club frequently use Dairy Queen restau­rants as landmarks. However, cyclists 
know which of these things are important and where they are located because they themselves use or avoid 
them. These things change, both in location and other proper­ties. Construction begins and ends, byways 
close and new ones open, and businesses close or move. A useful resource must be up-to-date. However, 
current (typically centrally­maintained) resources go stale. 11 subjects mentioned this or its consequences 
as a problem. People who notice prob­lems can .x them or at least point them out. These observations 
 that existing information reposito­ries are widely scattered and incomplete, and that cyclists themselves 
know the important information motivate the distributed editing approach of wikis. 4.2 No Automated 
Route Finding Cyclists told us that they want automated route .nding, i.e., .nd me a good route from 
point A to point B : 4 of 19 subjects mentioned this desire speci.cally, 5 described a problem that could 
be solved with such a tool, and 5 expressed dissatisfaction using motor vehicle route-.nders for cycling 
(11 total). No such tool is available. Tools for automated motor vehicle route .nding are very successful, 
but our interviews reveal that they are unsuitable for cyclists because they do not know about all byways 
and they do not take into account the complexity of cyclists routing needs. While a handful of bicycle-speci.c 
routing tools exist, most notably byCycle, they suffer from the same basic problems of incomplete coverage 
and simplistic routes. Automated bicycle route .nding can use the same basic approach as motor vehicle 
routing: the network of byways is represented as a weighted graph, and a minimum-weight path is calculated. 
However, while motor vehicle routing uses simple factors like distance and travel time to calculate edge 
weights, effective bicycle weights are based on many more additional factors. Subjects cited factors 
both objective and subjective, including the locations of hills, presence and quality of pavement, motor 
vehicle traf.c levels, motorist attitude, and numerous others. 4.3 No Personalized Bikeability Furthermore, 
people s ratings of and preferences for any given byway are a matter of personal taste: cyclists do not 
agree on which quality factors should be considered and what their relative importance should be. This 
led 8 of 19 subjects to question the utility of existing generic bikeabil­ity ratings (in the cases where 
they are available), expressing either a general concern that their own notion of what made for a good 
byway might differ or else that they had actually encountered ratings they disagreed with. Additionally, 
exist­ing resources offer bikeability ratings for only a subset of byways. What cyclists really wanted 
was a way to get per­sonalized ratings for any byway. Figure 2. Our current automatic route .nding interface. 
Edge weight is calculated as a weighted sum of the (nor­malized) priority factors.  5. The Personalized 
Geowiki A personalized geowiki can meet these three unmet needs. In the context of cycling, a personalized 
geowiki has four core features, the .rst two forming the geowiki and the latter two adding the necessary 
personalization: 1. Wiki map. A user-maintained geographic information system (GIS) storing the byway 
network. Editing byways is done with a simple interface analogous to standard vector drawing programs. 
High-resolution aerial photos help orient users16. Also, precise positioning of byways is not as important 
as connectivity, which is easier to edit. This component is closely related to Open Street Map. While 
OSM builds street maps from scratch in order to avoid the great cost of base maps in Europe, in our American 
locale, good base maps of both streets and cycling infrastructure are available for free and high­resolution 
color aerial photography for a nominal fee. We therefore use these as a starting point for our wiki map. 
 2. Wiki geodatabase. A user-maintained database of geo­graphic objects important to cyclists: the locations 
and details of landmarks, resources, and obstacles. These are contextualized using the wiki map and robustly 
linked to geographic objects in the map and to one another. Monitoring of both the wiki map and wiki 
geodatabase is achieved using watch regions. When editing occurs in­side the geographic boundary of a 
watch region, whoever de.ned the region is noti.ed, regardless of whether or not the edit was geographic. 
 3. Route .nding. Automatic generation of routes through the byway network based on personal preference 
and im­mediate needs. Figure 2 shows our current route .nding interface design.  16 A few subjects noted 
that they already use aerial photos to plan. Willing to spend ... If other users saw corrections... in 
six months immediately 1 minute or more 67% 96% 5 minutes or more 44% 73% 10 minutes or more 21% 43% 
 Table 1. Willingness to correct map errors. As noted above, there is strong personal variation on what 
makes a good byway. Our approach is to isolate a few ob­jective metrics generally considered useful 
for example, distance and hilliness and address the rest with a purely subjective bikeability metric, 
as discussed below. 4. Personalized bikeability ratings of every byway. Clearly, any individual cyclist 
would be able to give ratings for only a small subset of the byways in the system. However ratings for 
the remaining byways can be estimated using a collaborative .ltering recommender system [8,11]. Af­ter 
a cyclist rates familiar byways, the system .nds other cyclists with similar preferences on those byways 
and uses these users ratings to estimate ratings of unfamiliar byways, the result being a personalized 
bikeability map of the entire byway network for each individual cyclist. This requires a critical mass 
of ratings, but while this is collected, estimation can rely on simple aggregate popu­larity or generic 
ratings based on objective metrics. Relying on cyclists themselves to enter and maintain data seems plausible 
and attractive. They know what information is important to cyclists and why it is important, because 
they use it (or wish they had it) on every ride. Therefore, a comprehensive, up-to-date personalized 
geowiki is possible but only if cyclists are willing to contribute. 6. Will Cyclists Contribute? A wiki 
is successful only if users do the necessary work: creating, editing, and monitoring the data. We discuss 
four prerequisites for getting work done: propensity to share, trust, propensity to monitor,and privacy. 
Our subjects expressed a strong propensity to share what they knew with other cyclists. 83% of survey 
respondents reported asking other cyclists for route planning help. They were also willing to spend substantial 
effort correcting map errors, especially if their work was available to others im­mediately; see Table 
1. Furthermore, some cyclists already spend considerable effort on helping one another. In 2006, the 
local recreational cycling club s 100 volunteer ride lead­ers led over 1,400 rides [1]. The duties of 
a ride leader are to obtain or create a route, scout the route regularly, maintain and distribute maps 
and turn lists, and lead rides along the route many hours of effort on behalf of other cyclists. In 
our interviews, we asked subjects if they would share routes with the general public; 17 of 19 subjects 
said yes. 14 mentioned textual information they would share. When asked if they would rate the bikeability 
of byways to help other cyclists, 13 subjects said yes. When asked if they believed that they knew how 
to correct map errors they had encountered themselves, 14 said yes, and when asked why they would .x 
map errors, 7 gave helping others as a reason. We also observe cyclists using existing collaborative 
technology, however cumbersome, to share information. For example, the following routing help request 
recently ap­peared on a local cycling web forum: How do I get to Khan s in Roseville, from the St. Paul 
campus [of the University of Minnesota], without be­ ing killed in traf.c? Khan s Mongolian Barbeque 
2720 Snelling Ave N Roseville, MN 55113 It generated 8 responses, including (a) a detailed Gmaps Pedometer 
route posted within about 7 minutes, (b) another Gmaps Pedometer route recommended for use after dark, 
(c) an endorsement of the second route, and (d) a warning that a speci.c byway contained many potholes. 
Another thread began with a warning that a particlar bridge was closed, and a third, titled streets to 
avoid , had 24 posts. These results re.ect the tradition of information sharing within the bicycling 
community. We expect the geowiki ini­tially to bene.t from this tradition and subsequently to allow for 
even more effective sharing. 6 interview subjects hesitated to trust the wiki model, not­ing its vulnerability 
to vandalism and misinformation. These concerns are valid. However, as we have noted, successful and 
trusted wikis have emerged. When they do, wikis work because of the motivation of users to correct mistakes 
and vandalism, aided by mechanisms to help notice and .x the damage. Subjects were enthusiastic about 
using watch re­gions to monitor areas they knew and cared about: 16 iden­ti.ed speci.c geographic regions 
they would want to watch, typically near their homes or on routes they rode frequently. We asked subjects 
about any privacy concerns they had with the wiki information sharing model. 10 subjects men­tioned various 
concerns. Most could be mitigated with stan­dard techniques (e.g., using pseudonyms instead of real names) 
or though selective information withholding (e.g., by not sharing a few revealing routes such as those 
used for commuting). 7 subjects told us that they wanted to keep the locations of their homes private; 
however, most were willing to reveal nearby locations, e.g. If some creepy guy wants to come to the corner 
of my block, more power to him . Traditional wikis expose editing history, labeling each action with 
the pseudonym of the user who performed it; if geowikis do this as well, it might be possible to infer 
the locations of users homes, areas they re likely to be found, or other potentially sensitive places. 
What is and is not acceptable to users, speci.c information that can be inferred, and techniques to mitigate 
risks should be explored. Figure 3. Mockup of the personalized geowiki we envi­sion. A landmark (statue), 
resource (water ftn), and obsta­cle (gravel) are shown, as well as a watch region; click­ing on any of 
these would bring up further details. Bolder and black indicates byways with increasing user-rated bike­ability, 
while bolder and gray indicates increasing system­estimated bikeability. The highlighted byway is in 
the pro­cess of being rated. 7. Status and Next Steps The results of our study, including subjects positive 
re­sponse to our interface design, support the potential of the personalized geowiki approach. Our planned 
design is illus­trated in Figure 3. It features a zoomable, pannable map with different layers of information 
that can be viewed or hidden, and (in most cases) edited. To realize the potential of a personalized 
geowiki, we must complete our implementation and deploy it for use by cyclists. This is challenging, 
as existing web mapping APIs like Google Maps17 provide insuf.cient functionality, offer­ing only manipulation 
of data co-located with an unchange­able, vendor-controlled transportation network. Our study shows that 
we must implement not only deep access to the connectivity and properties of byways, but all of this 
must be editable as well. Therefore, we are implementing our design using lower­level APIs. The client 
is written using the Adobe Flex18 framework and runs in the browser on the widely deployed Flash Player 
9 virtual machine19. It communicates over HTTP with custom mapping and route-.nding servers writ­ten 
in Python20. Data is stored using the industry-standard PostGIS spatial database manager21. 17 http://www.google.com/apis/maps/ 
18 http://www..ex.org 19 http://www.adobe.com/products/.ashplayer/ 20 http://www.python.org 21 http://postgis.refractions.net 
In summary, we show that cyclists need a comprehensive resource that contains all information relevant 
to planning a route and enables personalized route .nding through the network of byways. While cyclists 
have a strong tradition of sharing information, their existing methods are limited; a wiki builds on 
this tradition of sharing and promises much greater coverage and reach, allowing individual cyclists 
to ef.ciently share with many others. We look forward to de­ploying our personalized geowiki and meeting 
this promise.  Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the time and effort of our sub­jects as well 
as the support and feedback of members of our research group, particularly Pam Ludford. This work has 
been supported by the National Science Foundation, grants IIS 03-07459 and IIS 05-34692. References 
[1] Angle, K. Annual recognition dinner 2007. Twin Cities Bicycling Club News (2007), 7. http://www.pdwebworks. 
com/tcbc/news/. [2] Balram, S. et al. A collaborative GIS method for integrating local and technical 
knowledge in establishing biodiversity conservation priorities. Biodiversity and Conservation, 13 (2004), 
1195 1208. [3] Cosley, D. et al. How oversight improves member-main­tained communities. In Proc. CHI. 
2005, 11 20. [4] Cosley, D. et al. Using intelligent task routing and contri­bution review to help communities 
build artifacts of lasting value. In Proc. CHI. 2006, 1037 1046. [5] Giles, J. Internet encyclopedias 
go head to head. Nature, 438 (2005), 900 901. [6] Gillavry, E. Collaborative mapping: By the people, 
for the people. Society of Cartographers Bulletin, 37, 2 (2004), 43 45. [7] Google maps mania. http://googlemapsmania.blogspot. 
com. [8] Konstan, J. et al. GroupLens: Applying collaborative .ltering to Usenet news. CACM, 40, 3 (1997), 
77 87. [9] Li, S. Results of CSCW supported collaborative GIS data production: An internet-based solution. 
In Proc. Hypertext and Hypermedia. 2002. [10] Rybaczuk, K. GIS as an aid to environmental management 
and community participation in the Negril Watershed, Jamaica. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 
25,2 (2001), 141 165. [11] Sarwar, B. et al. Item-based collaborative .ltering recom­mendation algorithms. 
In Proc. WWW. 2001, 285 295. [12] U.S. Dept. of Transportation. National household travel survey. http://nhts.ornl.gov/2001/ 
(2001).  
			