
 SPECIAL SESSION ON VISION chaired by Fanya S. Montalvo Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720 
 Is one picture really worth a thousand words? Why do cleverly designed graphic displays make visual 
information stand out more clearly with strikingly greater impact than numbers buried in pages of computer 
printout? Graphic output devices shift the burden . of integrating information generated by computers 
onto the human vision system: the sensory channel with the highest capacity for distributed parallel 
processing. The system consists of hundreds of successive two-dimensional arrays of millions of interconnected 
parallel computers. Perception seems instantaneous because we are not conscious of the massive amounts 
of computation that occur. What we consciously "see at a glance" is already a highly structured, synthesized, 
and summarized version of the actual light intensity mosaic that enters the retina. We will demonstrate 
some results of the visual structuring that occurs in the human visual system, show why some features 
stand out instantaneously and others do not, and explain why knowledge of the human input device is 
crucial to the design of effective computer output devices and displays. PARTICIPANTS Stephen R. Levine 
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory Introductory Remarks Fanya S. Montalvo Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory 
Vision and Computer Graphics Stuart Anstis York University Montion Bela Julesz Bell Telephone Laboratories 
 Preattentive Perception Richard L. Gregory University of Bristol Color HUMAN VISION AND COMPUTER 
GRAPHICS Fanya S. Montalvo I. INTRODUCTION ~y should computer graphics concern itself with human vision? 
The very reason for the rise in the use of graphics in the first place is deeply embedded in the way 
humans perceive. Graphs and pictures convey more information more quickly than pages of numbers. We all 
know this intuitively. Few of us, however, stop to consider why. What is it about visual perception that 
allows this seemingly instantaneous communication from computer to human? Conversely, why does the synthesis 
of concepts or objects from pages of numbers require such time-consuming mental effort? The answer is 
to be found in the way the visual system is structured and in what it was designed to compute. It cannot 
and does not compute everything it "sees." Our unawareness of the enormous amounts of parallel computation 
taking place gives the impression that seeing is simple, that seeing is a one-to-one mapping, and that 
everything on the physical display is transmitted directly to the user's brain. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. Tremendous Inhomogeneitles, distortions and super-acultles exist in the human visual 
system. The system is rich in special parallel hardware designed to detect specific classes of features. 
Neural cells code for specific features, such as the width and orientation of bars, and operate in a 
distributed fashion throughout the two-dimensional visual field. Interactions between cells can make 
some features stand" out more clearly, while obscuring others, and distorting still others. The distinction 
between preattentlve perception, requiring no conscious effort, and that requiring attention or serial 
inspection helps to identify which features are processed by this special visual hardware and which 
require higher cognitive processes. *This Work was supported by the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Computer 
Center, and by the Office of Energy Research of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract No. W-7405-ENG-48. 
 ¢1979 ACM O-89791-004--4/79/0800--121 $00.75 See Copyright Pg. 121 We need to know what characteristics 
of visual presentation make information stand out quickly, clearly, without distortion and without conscious 
effort. If we cannot eliminate distortion we should know how to compensate for it. If we cannot duplicate 
a natural image exactly we should know what approximations are close enough to the perception we wish 
to transmit. If we expect a pattern recognition program to make automatic decisions about natural images, 
we need to know about the subliminal decisions made by our brains in processing those images. In generating 
synthetic images, we need to compensate for distortions such as aliasing and staircasing, produced, respectively, 
by our approximations to smooth boundaries and curved sufaces. These devastating distortions occur because 
of the special characteristics of the visual system and not because festering and faceting are poor approximations. 
Other approximations do not cause severe problems, for example, distortions of the color space produced 
by a badly tuned color television. The reasons for these differences in severity can be found in the 
various units of special hardware the visual system uses to detect specific features and in the interactions 
between these units that accentuate some features at the expense of others. 2. SPECIAL HARDWARE Biological 
visual systems possess many specialized processes that enhance contrast, making boundaries sharper [Ratliff 
&#38; Hartline 59] and making gradual intensity changes disappear. Other processes detect symmetry within 
local regions [Julesz 75]. In addition, neural cells have been found that are specifically tuned to line 
orientation [Hubel &#38; Wiesel 62], size or spatial frequency [Blakemore &#38; Campbell 69], binocular 
disparity or depth [Barlow et el. 67], color [DeValois et al. 66], and speed and direction of motion 
[Barlow et al. 64]. All of these special feature detectors presumably operate in parallel, arranged topographically 
over the two-dimensional visual field. They interact with each other, enhancing some of their neighbors 
and inhibiting others. 2.1 LATERAL INHIBITION Lateral inhibition between cells in the retina causes 
an exaggeration of intensity differences at boundaries [Ratliff &#38; Hartline 59]. Math bands, which 
appear as dark an~ light bands at positive and negative discontinuities in the first derivative of light 
intensity, are also caused by lateral inhibition [Ratliff 65]. In computer graphics, contrast enhancement 
of light intensity is known as staircasing when it occurs at boundaries between flat areas of uniform 
intensity, and as scalloping when it occurs in 2D polygonal approximations to 3D curved surfaces. Lateral 
inhibition can also cause the appearance of two areas of equal intensity to differ if the transition 
between them has a sharp intensity discontinuity completely surrounding one of the areas [Cornsweet 70]. 
Areas that actually do differ in intensity may not be discriminated if the transition is too gradual. 
 2.2 FEATURE DETECTORS The visual system contains neural cells selectively sensitive to specific features 
in the visual input. Some of these detect line orientation, bar width, spatial frequency, direction and 
speed of motion, and binocular disparity. For example, pools of cells, each representing a specific degree 
of tilt, map the continuous dimension of llne orientation. Each cell fires maximally to its preferred 
feature along its continuous feature dimension and drops off in response the more the input feature differs 
from the optimal one. In the case of orientation, for example, a cell may fire maximally for a vertical 
bar and drop off to 50% of its maximal response for 15 degrees of tilt away from vertical. The accuracy 
with which we can detect differences between bars of different orientations seems to depend on the density 
of such cells along the feature dimension [Montalvo 76]. The distribution of line orientation cells has 
clusters at vertical and horizontal, and it can be shown that discrimination excels for differences near 
these orientations [Mansfield 74]. Time and space interactions between detectors enhance contrast between 
near neighbors. Space interactions are known as simultaneous contrast and time interactions are known 
as adaptation. Both refer to the exaggeration of differences between adjacent features along a given 
dimension. }~sking, the degradation of one feature by another, often occurs for features adjacent both 
in space and in the feature domain [Weisstein 72]. One example is demonstrated by Harmon and Julesz [73]. 
Face recognition is more effectively impaired by noise that is spectrally adjacent to the picture's 
spatial frequency spectrum, Noise of the sort introduced by digitization need not interfere with the 
information content of the picture if it is spectrally far enough away.  2.3 SPECIAL COMPUTATION Some 
processes cannot be isolated to single cells using neurophysiological methods. However, using psychophysical 
methods we can infer that a given computation must occur if humans can identify particular aspects in 
the visual field. If identification can occur anywhere in the visual field without eye movements or time 
for inspection then we can assume that computation occurs automatically and in parallel over the entire 
field. Julesz has clarified the distinction between preattentive perception and the form of perception 
requiring serial inspection and attention [Julesz et el. 73]. By generating various series of discrimination 
tasks between textures that vary only in their Nth-order statistics, or in minor aspects of their local 
geometry, they were able to isolate crucial factors of preattentive perception. Two preattentive visual 
processes that cannot be isolated to computations occurring in single cells are binocular depth perception 
and a local symmetry operation. Julesz [71] was first to show that these correlation processes occur 
even in the absence of meaningful form cues. If two identical random dot patterns are generated, one 
with a central area of dots slightly displaced, and these patterns are projected binocularly, that is, 
each  to one eye, the central portion will appear at a depth different from the background. This will 
occur even though no edges or meaningful forms are visible to either eye separately. The symmetry perception 
operation can be demonstrated with a similar random dot pattern. Each quadrant of the field is replicated 
with axial symmetry about the x and y axes. The pattern will appear symmetric only in a certain zone 
near the x and y axes on the pattern. Beyond this zone the pattern will appear random. This demonstration 
implies that the symmetry operation is limited by distance. The preattentive property of both the binocular 
and symmetrical correlation operations can be clearly distinguished from other kinds of correlations 
requiring mental effort. For example, if the four quadrants in a random dot pattern are duplicated four 
times without being mirrored, the entire array appears totally random [Julesz 75]. Such demonstrations 
distinguish those operations in the visual system which are "pre-wired" to occur automatically from 
those that require focusing of attention towards producing the necessary operations at the cognitive 
level. The best strategy for producing clear displays that transmit information quickly is to distribute 
the information over the many parallel, automatic processes that exist in the low-level visual system. 
  2.4 VERNIER ACUITY AND ALIASING Aliaslng, the perceived Jaggedness at high contrast edges, has become 
a particularly annoying display problem with the growth of computer-generated, raster scan pictures and 
films. The problem is not necessarily solved by using higher resolution display devices. Individual edge 
discontinuities may become too small to see, but regular patterns of edge breaks may be much more visible 
as global patterns. Thus, beside the added expense of higher resolution, these more offensive problems 
due to sampling may result [Crow 77]. The heuristic solution to aliaslng is a smooth, rather than abrupt, 
intensity transition from one llne segment to the next, computed from the degree of overlap of the desired 
line and the model display grid. The resulting display transforms location information which is finer 
than the display grid into intensity variations. This solution works because of the visual system's peculiar 
tolerance for the replacement of location information by intensity information. The aliasing problem 
can be better understood by examining the visual system's extreme sensitlviy to Jagged edges. This sensitivity 
has been found to be in the same range as vernier acuity [Hamerley &#38; Springer 78]. Vernier acuity 
is the sensitivity to a slight displacement between parallel, almost aligned contours. It is more than 
ten times greater than the spatial resolution of the retina. Spatial resolution is limited by receptor 
spacing and light diffraction onthe retina. Receptor separation is about 30 seconds of visual angle, 
but, remarkably, vernier acuity is on the order of 2 to 3 seconds of visual angle [Berry 48, Riggs 65]. 
Thus, changes in line width or edge location finer than the retinal mosaic can be detected only as variations 
~n intensity. Since long contours involve sampling by many receptors along a straight line or edge, 
some form of signal averaging or comparison over many units must be involved [Riggs 65]. Signal averaging 
of intensity over long contours dramatically increases the system's ability for localization.  2.5 COLOR 
 2.5.1 Cones: The First Layer Color graphics devices can reproduce virtually all colors perceived by 
humans with only three variables. This is because the human eye has only three types of narrow-band light 
receptors, called cones, with peak sensitivities at three different wavelengths on the electromagnetic 
spectrum. Their peak sensitivity corresponds roughly (not strictly) to monochromatic red, green and blue. 
The appearance of any monochromatic color can be simulated by reproducing the excitation it produces 
in these three distinct populations of receptors. Similarly, any color composed of a distribution of 
monochromatic colors across the spectrum can be reproduced with proper proportions of red, green, and 
blue. [See Smith 78 and Joblove &#38; Greenberg 78 for further discussion of the 3D color space.] One 
problem arising from the non-uniformity of the distribution of color receptors over wavelength is a non-unlformlty 
of hue discrimination over wavelength and intensity [Hurvich &#38; Jameson 57, DeValols 65, Gregory 66]. 
Because of the close proximity of red and green cone cells" peak responses and the sharp drop in response 
between their peaks, discrimination of hue differences about yellow is much more acute than discrimination 
near blue. It is because of these non-uniformities that we have to be very cautious about representing 
data by variations in hue. The greatest differences in the data may not correspond to the greatest perceptual 
hue differences unless the color space is corrected for equal hue steps. If we want to be able to pick 
out distinctive features of the data we wish to display, we need to have some idea of how the perceptual 
hue mapping corresponds to the color space of the output device.  2.5.2 Opponent-Color Processes Beyond 
the retina the three color receptors are linked to cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) on the 
way to the visual cortex [Abramov 68]. Cells at the LGN are organized into four general populations: 
cells stimulated by red and suppressed by green, cells stimulated by green and suppressed by red, cells 
stimulated by yellow and suppressed by blue, and cells stimulated by blue and suppressed by yellow [DeValois 
et al. 66]. This kind of opponent-color process seems to account for color contrast and adaptation [Hurvlch 
&#38; Jameson 57, Bajcsy 75]. Color contrast is a spatial phenomenon. Gray next to red looks much greener 
than the same gray next to green. Adaptation refers to negative effects over time. After hours of watching 
a color television image with an overall red component, the colors begin to look perfectly balanced. 
This is partly due to the automatic gain control peformed by the retina on each color channel. Other 
forms of color aftereffects are believed to occur in the LGN and visual cortex as well [McCollough 65]. 
In the case of our color TV example above, the perceptual color space is gradually rescaled such that 
the net red component in the red-green system appears white. Rescallng of a continuous feature space 
seems to be involved in many other forms of adaptation as well [Over 71, Montalvo 76].  2.5.3 Color 
Resolution Spatial resolution for color is lower than the resolution for black and white [VanDerHorst 
69]. This fact has implications for anti-aliasing and anti-staircasing algorithms in color. Sharp borders 
between colors of equal luminance tend to disappear [Boynton &#38; Kaiser 68]. (Luminance is a term that 
refers to light intensity corrected for  \the spectral sensitivity of the visual system in order to 
produce equal effectiveness in stimulating the retina.) This means that chromatic edges between areas 
of equal luminance need not be anti-aliased as carefully as achromatic edges. No border enhancement occurs 
between colors of equal luminance, as is true of the black and white domain [DeValois &#38; Pease 71]. 
Thus, the degree of anti-staircasing found necessary for black-white transitions need not be as high 
as for purely chromatic transitions. If a color output device is properly balanced to ensure equal luminance 
between colors at all levels, fewer levels need be devoted to hue transitions than to luminance transitions. 
 3. CONCLUSION We have seen that the existance of parallel, automatic populations of cells and operations 
in the human visual system make visual information stand out quickly and clearly in graphic displays. 
Exploitation of these properties of the visual system allows us to transmit more information to the user 
more quickly. We, in effect, utilize the human channels with the highest bandwidths. Doing so shifts 
the burden of the integration of information onto the visual system and away from higher mental processes 
requiring more time and attention. However, we need to be aware of the idiosyncrasies of the system in 
order to best utilize its full capacity and in order to conpensate for nonlinearities that can seriously 
distort the display output.  REFERENCES Abramov, I. Further analysis of the responses of LGN cells. 
J.Opt.Soc.Am. 58, 574-579 (1968). BaJcsy, R. A computational structure for color perception. Moore School 
of EE Tech. Report, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (1975). Barlow, H.B., Blakemore, C. &#38; 
Pettigrew, J.D. The neural mechanism of binocular depth discrimination. J.Physiol. 193, 327-342 (1967). 
 Barlow, H.B., Hill, R.M. &#38; Levick, W.R. Retinal ganglion cells reponding selectively to direction 
and speed of image motion in the rabbit. J.Physiol. 173, 377-407 (1964). Berry, R.N. Quantitative relations 
among vernier, real depth, and stereoscopic depth acuities. JtExp.Psychol. 3R, 708-721 (1948). Blakemore, 
C. &#38; Campbell, F.W. On the existence of neurones in the human visual system selectively sensitive 
to the orientation and size of retinal images. J.Physiol. 203~ 237-260 (1969). Boynton, R.M. &#38; 
Kaiser, P.K. Vision: the additivity law made to work for heterochromatic photometry with bipartite fields. 
Science 161~ 366-368 (1968). Cornsweet, T.N. Visual Perception. New York: Academic Press, 1970. Crow, 
F.C." The aliasing problem in computer-synthesized shaded images. CACM 20~ 79g-805 (1977). DeValois, 
R.L. Analysis and coding of color vision in the primate visual system. Cold Sprin~ Harbor Symp.Quant.Biol. 
30, 567-579 (1965). DeValois, R.L., Abramov, I. &#38; Jacobs, G.H. Analysis of response patterns of 
LGN cells. J.Opt.Soc.Am. 56, 966-977 (1966). DeValois, R.L. &#38; Pease, P.L. Contours and contrast: 
responses of monkey lateral geniculate cells to luminance and color figures. Science 171~ 694-696 (1971). 
 Gregory, R.L. Eye and Brain. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966. Joblove, G.H. &#38; Greenberg, D. Color 
spaces for computer graphics. Proc. SIGGRAPH-78~ Atlanta GA, 20-25 (August 1978). Hamerley, J.R. &#38; 
Springer, R.M. Perception of raggedness of edge images. Op. Soc.Am.MeetinR~ San Francisco CA (November 
1978). Harmon, L.D. &#38; Julesz, B. Masking in visual recognition: effects of two-dimensional filtered 
noise. Science 180 r 1194-1196 (1973). Hubel, D.H. &#38; Wiesel, T.N. Receptive fields, binocular interaction, 
and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex. J.Physiol. 160, 106-154 (1962). Hurvich, L.M. 
&#38; Jameson, D. An opponent-process theory of color vision. Psyc.Rev. 64, 384-404 (1957). Julesz, 
B. Foundations of Cyclopean Vision. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1971. Julesz, B. Experiments in 
the visual perception of texture. Sci.Am. 232, 34-43 (1975). Julesz, B., Gilbert, E.N., Shepp, L.A. 
&#38; Frisch, H.L. Inability of humans to discriminate between visual textures that agree in second-order 
statistics: revisited. Perception 2, 391-405 (1973).  Mansfield, J.R.W. Neural basis of orientation 
' -perception in primate vision. Science 186~ 1133-1135 (1974). ~Collough, C. Color adaptation of edge-detectors 
 in the human visual system. Science 149~ 1115-1116 (1965). Montalvo, F.S. Aftereffects, adaptation, 
and plasticity: a neural model for tunable feature space. PhD thesis, Comp.&#38; Info.Sci.Dept. Tech.Report 
76-4, University of Massachusetts, Amherst (September 1976). Over, R. Comparison of normalization theory 
and neural enhancement explanation of negative aftereffects. Psyc.Bulletin 75~ 225-243 (1971). Ratliff, 
F. Mach Bands. San Francisco: Nolden-Day, 1965. Ratliff, F. &#38; Hartline, H.K. The responses of Limulus 
optic nerve fibers to patterns of illumination on the retinal mosaic. J.Gen.Physiol. 42~ 1241-1255 (1959). 
 Riggs, L.A. Visual acuity. In C.H. Graham (Ed.) Vision and Visual Perception. New York: Wiley &#38; 
 Sons, 321-349 (1965). Smith, A.R. Color gamut transform pairs. Proc. SIGGRAPH-78~ Atlanta GA, 12-19 
(August 1978). Van Der Horst, G.J.C. Fourier analysis and color discrimination. J.Opt.Soc.Am. 59~ 1670-1676 
 (1969). Ueisstein, N. ~tacontrast. In L.M. Hurvich &#38; D. Jameson (Eds.) Visual Psychophysics. Heidelberg: 
 Springer-Verlag, 233-272 (1972).  
			