
 HyperStorM -Administering Structured Documents Using Object-Oriented Database Technology Klernens B6hm, 
and Karl Aberer GMD -Integrated Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI) Dolivostrasse 15, 
D-64293 Darmstadt, Germany; {kboehm, aberer}tldarmstadt. gmd.de The objective of the project HyperStorM 
( Hyperme­dia Document Storage and Modeling ) is to use objec~­oriented database technology to administer 
structured documents like SGML-and HyTime-documents. It 1s an asset of formats such as SGML to allow 
for the seam­!ess integration of metainformation, HyTime provides a set of archi~ectural forms, i.e., 
templates with a pre­define semantics to be used in hypermedia documents for scheduling or hyperlinking. 
to give examples. Requirements. We have identified the following re­quirements in the context of structured 
document stor­age: the database application has to administer docu­ments conformant to arbitrary document-type 
defini­t~ons ( DTDs) With regard to declarative access, it must be possible to formulate queries in a 
more pre­cise way, e.g., by referring to documents structure, in order tO COPe with th~ increase of documents 
in num­ber and size. Updates on documents are advantageous as, first,, it may be pointless to only insert 
entire doc­ uments when considering certain document types, such as encyclopedia or codes of law. Second, 
t ormats such as SGML are m use to capture structured reformation going beyond the conventional notion 
of document, . - Document components semantics should be available within the dat,abase application to 
ensure adequate per­ formance, and to allow for querying based on such con­ cepts Finally, we think that. 
wnth regard to access vm the WWW documents conversion to HTML should take place at the server site: transformation 
of docu­ me~ts might not be straightforward, hut may instead be driven by the database context. Then, 
the process is more efficient when carried out in the database. System Overview. Due to the dynamic nature 
of the sys~em. most structures comprising the document conrent have to be generated at mntime. &#38; 
a first Permission to make digitahhard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, 
the copyright notce, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notics is given that copying 
is by permission of ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGMOD 96 6/96 Montreal, Canada ICI 1996 ACM 
0-89791 -794-419610006 ...$3.50 step, the document-type definition is transformed to an SGML document 
on the syntactic level. By inserting tks document into the database, generating those structures becomes 
a database-internal process. -A hybrid database-internal representation for documents has been chosen: 
while documents structure within the database may be made explicit to a certain degree, the structure 
of the remaining components is obtained by interpreting flat strings. Before inserting a DTD into the 
database, it is enriched with knowledge on the semantics of documents and document components types. 
Thus, the database application is configurable. SGML-/HyTime-specific indexing mechanisms and materialized 
views on documents are part of the database schema. Index structures have been constructed so that they 
do not have to be updated after small document modifications. Queries are optimized using application­specific 
semantics. -The framework has been imple­mented on top of the 00DBMS VODAK [VOD95]. Demonstration Outlook. 
With the demonstra­tion, we illustrate how the database configuration can be specified in a natural, 
SGML-compliant way, how documents of arbitrary type can be accessed both by navigation and declarative 
access (via the WWW), and how database technology can be exploited to ensure a higher quality of document 
presentation. References [ABH94] K. Aberer, K. Bohm, C. Hiiser: The Prospects of Publishing Using Advanced 
Database Con­cepts , in Pr-oc. of Conf. on Electronic Publish­ing 469-480, Wiley Ltd., April 1994. [BoA94] 
K. Bohm, K. Aberer: Storing HyTime Docu­ ments in an Object-Oriented Database , in Proc. .%-cl Int. Conf. 
on Information and Knowledge Management 26-33, ACM Press, Nov. 1994. [BAN95] K. Bohm, K. Aberer, E. J, 
Neuhold: Admin­ istermg Structured Documents in Digital Li­ braries , in Digital Libraries: 91-117, Springer 
LNCS, 1995. [VOD95] VODAK V ~.O User Manual, GMD Technical Report No. 910, 1995. 547 
			