
 * Identifying User Behavior in Online Social Networks Marcelo Maia, Jussara Almeida, Virgílio Almeida 
Computer Science Department Federal University of Minas Gerais Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Pampulha Belo 
Horizonte, MG, Brazil, 31270-010 {mmaia, jussara, virgilio}@dcc.ufmg.br ABSTRACT Online social networks 
pose an interesting problem: how to best characterize the di.erent classes of user behavior. Tra­ditionally,userbehaviorcharacterization 
methods,based on user individual features, are not appropriate for online net­working sites. In these 
environments, users interact with the site and with other users through a series of multi­ple interfaces 
that let them to upload and view content, choose friends, rank favorite content, subscribe to users and 
do many other interactions. Di.erent interaction patterns can be observed for di.erent groups of users. 
In this paper, weproposea methodologyforcharacterizing andidentifying user behaviors in online social 
networks. First, we crawled datafromYouTube andused a clustering algorithm togroup users that share similar 
behavioral pattern. Next, we have shown that attributes that stem from the user social inter­actions, 
in contrast to attributes relative to each individual user, are good discriminators and allow the identi.cation 
of relevant user behaviors. Finally, we present and discuss ex­perimentalresultsof theuseofproposed methodology. 
Aset of useful pro.les, derived from the analysis of the YouTube sample is presented. The identi.cation 
of di.erent classes of user behavior has the potential to improve, for instance, recommendation systems 
for advertisements in online social networks. Categories and Subject Descriptors C.2.3[Network Operations]: 
Networkmonitoring General Terms Human Factors, Measurement, Experimentation, Theory Keywords Online 
Social Networks, Clustering, Groups, User Behavior * This research was sponsored by UOL (www.uol.com.br), 
through its UOL Bolsa Pesquisa program, process number 20060520221328a. Permission to make digital or 
hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. SocialNets 08, April 1, 2008 , Glasgow, Scotland, 
UK Copyright 2008 ACM ISBN 978-1-60558-124-8/08/04 ...$5.00. 1. INTRODUCTION Enablingand encouraginginteractionsbetween 
usershave shown to be of paramount importance to the triumph of most of the online services available 
on the current Internet. Often referred to as Web 2.0, some of the most successful serviceslikeFlickr1 
,MySpace1, Orkut1 andYouTube1 allow userstocreateand maintaintheirownpersonal weblogs(or blogs for short), 
whichcanbe comprised of text,pictures and videos. Users of these services typically execute di.erent 
kinds of tasks such as search for information, watch or view public content, exchange messages, among 
others. Duetotheintrinsichumannature, users are not expected to exhibit one single and simple behavior. 
Some are enthu­siasts and express themselves by updating blogs on a daily basis and upload as many videos 
or photos as they can, whereasthere are usersthatactlikefree-riders[1,10] and just want to enjoythe contents 
made publicly available. The comprehension of peculiarities of the user behavioral patterns in online 
social communication systems are of sig­ni.cant importance in the sense they can give useful in­formation 
for the providers to plan their resource capacity such as network bandwidth usage, memory allocation 
and CPU. To aid specialists in their designing tasks, user behav­ior models have also been extensively 
studied and are able to capture particularities from a community of users with a singlebehaviorto multiple 
classes of users[2,3,6,11,18]. In order to develop models that capture accurately the di.erent userbehavior 
classes, specialists mustknowhowto identify and distinguish users with di.erent aspirations and purposes. 
This workseeks to systematicallyidentify userbe­haviorsin online social systems. Overall, to achieve 
thisgoal wedesigned a web crawler togatherdatafromYouTube sub­scription network, where users arelinkedif 
they subscribe to videos of other users. The crawled data were used to build one feature vector per user 
composed of a set of individ­ual and social information relative to the user. The feature vectors were 
given as input to the K-means clustering algo­rithm[9,13,15], whichinturngrouped users with similar behavior. 
We provide the details in the following sections. The main contributions of this work are: The analysis 
ofYouTube s subscription network, which is more suitable to capture the process of production, promotionand 
visualizationof usergenerated content.  We have shown that the individual attributes of the users are 
not good behavior discriminators because  1http://www.{.ickr,myspace,orkut,youtube}.com they result 
in one single large group. On the other hand, the attributes stemmed from the social interac­tions are 
those that allow thedistinction of thegroups. The methodologyusedinthispaperfortheuserbehav­ior identi.cation 
can be applied not only to YouTube butalso to online social networking systemsingeneral. The remaining 
of this paper is organized as follows. Sec­tion 2 presents the related work. The data collection is shown 
in section 3. The methodology is described in section 4. Section5presentsthebehavioridenti.cationprocess 
and section 6 concludes this work and exposes future directions. 2. RELATED WORK A number of studies 
focusing on properties of the Web 2.0 have been recently published. They analyze aspects of the users, 
the structure of the social networks emerged from theirinteractions and also showhow thisknowledge canhelp 
to design new systems or improve existing ones. The authorsin[8] havestudiedproperties of theusergen­erated 
videos such as popularity shifts. Video tra.c and .le attributes, like bitrate, were analyzed in [12]. 
Struc­tural properties of the friendship network of three major systems were comparedin[4]. Theauthorsin[19]presented 
a large-scale measurement study and analysis of the struc­ture of four major systems in which they have 
con.rmed the power-law, small-world and scale-free properties of the services. Tappingintothe userbehavior, 
the authorsin[20]presents a characterization ofbroadband userbehaviorfrom anInter­netServiceProvider 
standpoint. The authorsin[6] analyzed a large online community system and investigated engage­ment and 
relationship between users and groups of users. In[11] itispresented a methodforapplying social network 
analysis to characterize authors in a newsgroup system. In [18] the authors considered classes of users 
to optimize the computational resources and thee-commercebusinessitself. In[2] the userbehavior wasincorporated 
to signi.cantlyim­prove the accuracy of a web search ranking algorithm. In [3]the authors evaluated a 
general classi.cation framework theyhavedesignedbased on socialfeedback to separatehigh quality question-answer 
items from the rest. Our work di.ers fundamentally from the aforementioned references. Rather than analyzing 
the user generated con­tent or the structure of the networks emerged from their in­teractions, weinvestigatetypical 
userbehaviorsandpresent a methodology to identify characteristics that de.ne a user as part of a group 
that share the same overall behavior. 3. DATA COLLECTION Foundedin2005,YouTubeisthelargest online social 
sys­temfor sharing video clips on the currentWeb2.0[5,7]. Due to its magnitude it has been chosen for 
the pro.le analysis. Videos within YouTube are assigned to 12 di.erent cate­gories and can be browsed 
by 9 distinct ranking options. Users can add other users as friends or subscribe to their videos, add 
a video as favorite, leave comments and also vote up to .ve stars according to their level of satisfaction. 
YouTube, as well as any online social service that allows users interactions, can be represented by multiple 
graphs. Usingitsfeaturesonecangeneratevariousnetworksof users based on their social interactions. For 
instance, considering the users as network nodes, directed edges could link two users if one has added 
the other as friend, one has left the other user a comment on any of her videos or if both users have 
added the same video as favorite. We have used in this work a special network of users that, tothebest 
of ourknowl­edge, has never been studied: the subscription network. YouTube subscription network is built 
up when authenti­cated users subscribe to videos from other users. Consider­ing the users as network 
nodes,a directed edge from user A touserB meansthatAhassubscribedtovideosfromB.The subscriptionfeatureis 
closely related totheidea ofRSSfeeds in which users cankeep up with theirfavorite web sitesin an automated 
manner. When the users log in to YouTube they haveaccesstotheirsubscriptionsright onthe .rstpage. We 
have opted for the subscription network because analyzing the relations emerged from these explicit social 
interactions is more suitable to capture the essence of YouTube which is to enable the production, promotion 
and visualization of user generated videos. Even though there may be some pro­fessionallygenerated content,thedistributionprocessisthe 
same. Moreover, it captures a more extensive variety of ac­tions than other networks of users,like the 
onebuilt upfrom friendship, for instance. We designed a web crawler to collect a sample from the subscription 
network based on a breadth-.rst search. This technique, also known as snowball sampling [14], starts 
with a set of users and adds all her subscribers and subscriptions to the end of the list of available 
users. The whole proce­dureisrepeated until thecrawleris manually stopped orthe entire network component 
is exhausted. In this work, the top 100 most subscribed users constituted the initial set of users. For 
each user found in the search, we saved informa­tion such as the number of uploads, videos watched and 
the datehejoined the system. Table1 summarizes the sample collected and show the main network metrics. 
Table1: Summary ofYouTube subscriptionnetwork (CV = Coe.cient of Variation). Crawling period 06-17/Sep/2007 
Total number of users 1,467,003 Avg. clustering coe.cient 0.07 Avg. reciprocity 0.01 Avg. in-degree (CV) 
6.20 (42.88) Avg. out-degree (CV) 6.20 (14.84) Avg. uploads per user (CV) 3.41 (5.91) Avg. videowatchesperuser(CV) 
604.61(3.24) Avg. channel visitsperuser(CV) 720.56(34.84)  4. CLUSTERING METHODOLOGY This section describes 
the methodology for clustering the users. We used a clustering algorithm that assigns users to groups 
through a distance measure that is computed based on the values of a normalized vector representation 
of the users. The normalized vector representation of the users and theclusteringprocedureisdetailedinthefollowing 
sections. 4.1 Representing Users as Feature Vectors We de.ne our user feature vector as a unidimensional 
vector of length nine, where each position contains an in­formation about the referred user. It is de.ned 
as follows: useri =[f1 ,f2 ,f3 ,f4 ,f5 ,f6 ,f7 ,f8 ,f9 ], where the .rst .ve positions contain attributes 
related to each individual user 2 and the last four positions holds attributes stemmed from the user 
social interactions. Each collected user holds an in­dividual feature vector. The nine features are detailed 
next. 1. Number of uploads (f1): This is the number of dif­ferentvideo clips the userhas uploadedtoYouYube. 
It could indicate the potential of the user as a producer. 2. Number of watches (f2): This is the number 
of dif­ferent videos the user has watched. It could indicate the potential of the user as a content consumer. 
 3. Number of channel views (f3): YouTube considers each user as a channel. This is the number of di.erent 
user information pages, or channels, a user has visited possibly when searching for videos. 4. System 
join date (f4 ): Considering February 1st , 2005 as the date YouTube was founded, the system join date 
is the time elapsed from foundation to the day the user created the account at YouTube. 5. Age (f5): 
Each YouTube user has also a timestamp relative to the time he performed his last login to the system. 
We consider as user age the time elapsed be­tween the join date and the last login, or in other words, 
the amount of time the users had to perform all actions on YouTube. 6. Clustering coe.cient (f6 ): This 
is a measure3 of the interconnection between the users and their neigh­bors. If user A subscribed to 
videos from user B and also to videos from user C, then there is a high prob­ability of a subscription 
between users B and C. 7. Reciprocity (f7): Indicates theprobabilityof mutual subscriptions. The reciprocity 
of user i is the ratio Ri = A/B, where A is the number of reciprocal sub­scriptions user i has made and 
B represents all user i subscribers and subscriptions. 8. Out-degree (f8): Number of subscriptions made 
by the user. Alsoindicates the userpotentialas consumer. 9. In-degree (f9 ): Number of subscriptions 
received by theuser. Alsoindicatestheuserpotential asproducer.  These nine features are of di.erent 
units and, mostly, of di.erentmagnitudes. Consideringthatthedistance measure used by the clustering algorithm 
is calculated based on the value of each feature, we must normalize the data to ensure that the distance 
is computed with features of equal weight, otherwise the one with the largest scale would prevail over 
the others. We then normalized the data by the maximum value of eachfeature so that everyfeature rangesfrom0 
to1. 2 The number ofuploads, watches and channel views of a user represent his/her interactions only 
in periods when he/she was logged in to the system. 3 We usedWatts andStrogatzde.nition[21]. 4.2 Grouping 
Users with Similar Behavior In order to group users that share similar behavioral pat-ternwehaveusedK-means[9,13,15] 
astheclustering algo­rithm and the Euclidean distance4 as the distance measure. Brie.y, K-means selects 
K points in space to be the ini­tial guess of the K centroids5 . Remaining points are then allocated 
to the nearest centroid. The whole procedure is repeated until no points switches cluster assignment 
or a number of iterations is performed. In addition to the feature vectors, K-means also requires the 
number of clusters tobe created(K) asinput. Aques­tion then arises: How many clusters should we choose? 
In [16] and[17] the authors suggestthatthisquestion canbe answered by examining the variation of two 
metrics: the intraclusterdistance(averagedistancebetween each cluster point andits centroid) andtheinterclusterdistance(aver­age 
distance between centroids), both characterizedby their Coe.cient of Variation (CV). The goal is to minimize 
in­tracluster CV while maximizing the intercluster CV. The ratio between the intracluster CV and the 
intercluster CV, denoted by ßCV , can help us de.ne the value of K. Varying the number of clusters yields 
di.erent values for ßCV . The bestindicationfor K wouldbe when ßCV becomes relatively stable[16, 17]. 
Once de.ned the number of clusters, we use the centroids to represent the users assigned to each group. 
We then an­alyze the average values of each feature to draw our conclu­sions and associate each centroid 
with a di.erent YouTube user behavior.  5. IDENTIFYING USER BEHAVIORS This section describes the cluster 
analysis performed on the feature vectors. Figure 1 shows the ßCV variation for executions of the K-means 
with di.erent values of K. One can observe that there is no number of cluster in which ßCV becomes stable. 
It is relatively stable for all values of K, meaning that an good value for K is not clear and we must 
employ a di.erent methodology to select K. The following sections describe the iterative strategy used 
instead. ß CV 3 2 1 0 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 Number of clusters (K) Figure 1: ßCV for Varying Values of K 
 41 Pn TheEuclideandistanceisde.nedas D =(xi -yi)2 , ni=1 where n is the length of user feature vector 
and x and y are twopointsin space(two users or oneuser and thecentroid). 5The centroid is de.ned as the 
point whose coordinates are the average among all points in the cluster. Intergroup relative feature 
value 1% 0.8% 0.6% 0.4% 0.2% 0% G1-6% G2-23% G3-13% G4-48% G5-10% Clusters created and the percentage 
of users assigned to each cluster  Figure 2: Relative Feature Values for the Five Clusters Created. 
5.1 Grouping Users by Iterating over K Wecaninterpret .gure1fromadi.erentpointof viewand argue that any 
value of K is as good as any other, though wemustkeepin mind that eachincrementinKyieldsanew cluster 
and similarly a new behavior. On the one hand, if we consider a small number of clusters as an aggregation 
of many possible behaviors, we could expect the most pre­dominant behaviors to be discovered for lower 
values of K. On the other hand, by selecting a small value for K we may miss some relevant behaviors. 
Thus, one possible strategy is to analyze the behaviors discovered as K is incremented. However, up to 
which value should we increment K? Algorithm 1 depicts our methodology. To help us de.ne our stopping 
criteria, we can take any two centroid vec­tor, for instance C1 and C2 , and compute the di.erence PF 
 between them as d(C1,C2)= abs(i=1(C1[i]- C2 [i])/F), where abs(x)is the absolute value of x and F is 
the length of the vector, orthe number offeatures(9,in our analysis). Algorithm 1 Clustering Identi.cation 
Algorithm. 1: K . 2; 2: repeat 3: K . K + 1; 4: run K-means algorithm; 5: for (eachcluster k returned 
by K-means) do 6: Ck . centroid of cluster k; 7: if (.k,x | d(Ck,Cx)< T)then 8: merge users from clusters 
k and x; 9: end if 10: end for 11: until (d(Ci,Cn)<T). (d(Cn,Cj )<T), .i,j,n, where i .j,j= n,i .n, 
{i,j,n}. [1,K]; 12: manually analyze the features and associate the cluster centroids to user behaviors; 
Thisdi.erence measurerangesfrom0(equalvectors) to1 (opposite vectors). If d is below a certain threshold 
T we canarguethatboth vectorsarevery similarand then merge the users of the corresponding clusters into 
one single larger group. To be conservative, we use a threshold of T = 10-3 and de.ne our stopping criteria 
to be when a newly created cluster merges with an already merged one, for example, (d(C1,C2 )< 10-3 )AND 
(d(C2,C3)< 10-3 ). Based on the aforementioned methodology, the yielded clusters are displayed in .gure 
2. On the x axis, each clus­terisillustratedby its set of9features, along withtheper­centage of all users 
assigned to the cluster. On the y axis the intergroup relative feature value, denoted by rij , mea­sures 
how a feature i of cluster j is related to the same feature of the other clusters. It is computed as 
follows P rij = fij /Kk=1 fik , where fij is the value of the feature i of cluster j. This allows us 
to contrast the same feature i of all clusters. Apart from the absolute values, we can see, for instance, 
if the values of a feature are evenly distributed between clusters or concentrated in a single one. This 
can give us valuable hints for the manual behavior inference. For instance, the join date is roughly 
evenly distributed among the groups and does not help us to de.ne any be­havior. Based on the other features, 
we describe the .ve di.erent groups identi.ed: G1 -Small Community Member: This group corre­sponds to 
users that form small but highly intercon­nected communities such as family members or col­leaguesfrom 
work or school(smallin-/out-degrees and considerablyhigher clustering coe.cient than any other group). 
These users have low values for their features meaning they are not as active as users with di.er­ent 
behaviors. Typically, they create their accounts, subscribe to videos from their communities and then 
attenuate their craving for interactions. G2 -Content Producer: This group corresponds to a typical 
content producer and 23% of all users. Users are relatively older, meaning they are constantly ac­cessing 
their accounts. They visit many channels and also watch and upload many videos. As content pro­ducers 
they receive many subscriptions from varying audience (low clustering coe.cient). They also sub­scribe 
to videos of many users either to be in touch with other producers or as a response for an even­tual 
subscription received (reciprocity). The content produced can be either home made or professional, from 
users like BBCWorldwide, NationalGeographic, universalmusicgroup, NBA, CBS or warnerbrosrecords.  G3 
-Content Consumer: Thisgroup correspondsto a typical content consumer. These users browse through the 
available videos more than they do with channels. YouTube has a feature that suggests videos related 
to the one being watched at the moment. They also sub­scribe to videos more than they receive subscription. 
Users and their subscription targets seem to share sim­ilar interests due to the high clustering coe.cient 
and specially high reciprocity.  G4 -Producer &#38; Consumer: This group corresponds to users that have 
both characteristics of producers and consumers. It represents the largest fraction of users (48%). They 
have moderately large number of subscribers and uploads, like the producers, and also browse manychannelstowatch 
and subscribetovideos, like the consumers. Clustering coe.cient and reci­procity arelowdue to varying 
subscription targets and subscribers audience.  G5 -Other: A clear identi.cation of this group is not 
possible because of the low values of every fea­ture. However, possible interpretations, based on the 
short user age, are that it could correspond either to recent users or users that have abandoned their 
ac­counts. The low values of the features corroborate the recencyhypothesis. However, whenweanalyzetheab­solute 
values we see that on average these users have subscribed to more videos than they have watched or the 
number of channels they have visited. One could consider this behavior as suspect in the sense that YouTubekeepsarankingof 
the most subscribed users. Accountscouldhavebeencreatedjustto makeafew isolated subscriptions and increase 
the rank of a few opportunist users that want to raise the popularity of their channels and videos. 
 In summary, using the clustering methodology, we have identi.ed up to .ve distinct behaviors in which 
YouTube users can be classi.ed based on their individual and social attributes. So far, we have managed 
a total of nine di.erent features, however do we need all these features to reach the same results? or, 
if we consider a smaller set of the most relevant features, what are the predominant behaviors? The next 
section answers these questions. 5.2 Dominant User Behaviors From the original set of nine features, 
we have .rst dis­cardedthe systemjoindateduetoits roughly equaldistribu­tion among the clusters. Considering 
an arbitrary threshold of 6 months on the user age, we now split the users into two groups in an attempt 
to distinguish the users that have been onthe systemfor alongerperiod and thenpotentially exhibit a more 
clearly de.ned behavior. If the clustering procedure executed on both groups do not yield consider­ably 
di.erent behaviors, then we can also discard the user age. Users with age above the threshold represent 
63.53% of the total and users below the threshold, 36.47%. The distinction using the age of the users 
did not bring signi.cantly new insight. Visually inspecting, we note that equivalentbehaviors ofbothgroupshave 
similar overallfea­tures distribution. A short interval of time seems to be enough for the users to establish 
their pattern of social in­teractions and older users typically have larger number of uploads, watches 
and channel views only because they have been using the system for a longer time than recent users. We 
have, therefore, also discarded the user age. Thesevenremainingfeatures weredividedintotwodi.er­ent vectorsper 
user. We repeated the sameiterative cluster­ingprocedureseparately, .rst considering only thethreeleft 
individual features(f1,f2,f3)and then only the four social features (f6 ,f7 ,f8 ,f9 ). In each case, 
we contrast the pro­.les found with those described in the last section to verify whether the descriptions 
would still hold. Consideringonlythe userindividualfeaturesis not enough to produce signi.cantly di.erent 
behaviors. The iterative procedure results in three di.erent groups, however, almost thetotality of users(99%) 
are assignedto one singlelarge cluster. We run the clustering procedure up to K=15 indi­viduallyfor everyfeature 
totrytoisolate the one,if any,that causes all users to be assigned to one single cluster. Results are 
similarto whenthethreefeatures are usedjointly. Most of the users have moderate values for all features, 
meaning they moderately upload, watch videos and visit channels, whereas only a few enthusiasts stand 
out. Our next step is to consider only the four social network features. Figure3presentsthegroupsobtained. 
Comparing the clustersdescribedinFigures2 and3, we note similarities between clusters S1-G1, S2-(G2,G4,G5) 
and S3-G3, for the distribution of their feature values are very similar. From the results, we can draw 
the conclusion: considering only the user social network features we are able to .nd the most dominant 
behaviors as we do when we consider all avail­able features. In contrast to the individual features, 
the social features carry information not only about the indi­vidual users, but also implicitly about 
their neighbors. This aggregated information is stronger and outweighs individual features, thus de.ning 
better the user behavioral pattern. Clusters created and the percentage of users assigned to each cluster 
Figure 3: User pro.les using social features Identifying user behavior within an environment in which 
we know nothing a priori is a challenging task and also an empirical process. We use K-means, an unsupervised 
clus­tering algorithm, to .nd the clusters. The algorithm, by de.nition, runs without any optimization 
criterion or feed­back[9,13,15]. Thus,thereis no right or wrong number of clusters to .nd. De.ning a 
good, not optimal, number of clusters, and ultimately user behaviors as in our analysis, is part of the 
problem and closely depends on the nature of the network of users and the data available. Finally, based 
on four simple and local networking mea­sures, one can use the methodology we present to assign users 
to groups with similar behavior and then incorporate this knowledge to improve the systems. The methodology 
used in this work is not restricted to YouTube. Indeed, it is applicable to online social networking 
systems in general.  6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In current Web 2.0 services, users with di.erent 
aspira­tions and goals interact with the site and with other users through a series of multiple interfaces. 
Di.erent interaction patterns can be observed for di.erent groups of users, and yet specialists must 
plan accurately their system resource capacities in order to e.ciently serve these users. This work presented 
a methodology for characterizing and identifying user pro.les in online social networks. We crawled data 
from YouTube and used a clustering al­gorithm togroupusers that share similarbehavioralpattern. We have 
identi.ed and discussed up to .ve di.erent groups in which YouTube users can be classi.ed. In an attempt 
to verify which attributes are relevant to the clustering proce­durewe runexperimentsbased on attributesrelated 
to each individual user and also based on those stemmed from social interactions. We have shown that 
attributes stemming from the user social interactions, in contrast to attributes relative to each individual 
user, are good discriminators and allow the identi.cation of the dominant user behaviors. Identifying 
di.erent user behaviors has the potential to improve business and resource management in online social 
networks. For future directions we could investigate, for instance, recommendation systems that exploit 
the user be­havior to display more apropriate advertisements. We could also exploittheuserbehaviorstode.nedi.erent 
classes and develop more accurate performance models for the services. 7. REFERENCES [1] E. Adar and 
B. Huberman. Free Riding on Gnutella. First Monday, 5(10), 2000. [2] E. Agichtein, E. Brill, and S. Dumais. 
Improving Web Search Ranking by Incorporating User Behavior Information. In Proc. ACM SIGIR Conf. on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2006. [3] E. Agichtein, C. Castillo, D. Donato, A. 
Gionis, and G. Mishne. Finding HighQuality Content in Social Media, with an Application to Community-Based 
Question Answering. In Proc. ACM Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), Stanford, CA, USA, Feb 2008. [4] 
Y.-Y. Ahn, S. Han, H. Kwak, S. Moon, and H. Jeong. Analysis of Topological Characteristics of Huge Online 
Social Networking Services. In Proc. Intl. World Wide Web Conference (WWW), Ban., Alberta, Canada, May 
2007. [5] Alexa Web Search. http://www.alexa.com, 2008. [6] L. Backstrom, R. Kumar, C. Marlow, J. Novak, 
and A. Tomkins. Preferential Behavior in Online Groups. In Proc. ACM Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 
Stanford, CA, USA, Feb 2008. [7] Business Intelligence Lowdown: Top 10 Largest Databases in the World, 
Feb 2007. [8] M. Cha, H. Kwak, P. Rodriguez, Y.-Y. Ahn, and S. Moon. I Tube, You Tube, Everybody Tubes: 
Analyzing the World s Largest User Generated Content Video System. In Proc. ACM Internet Measurement 
Conference (IMC), San Diego, CA, USA, Oct 2007. [9] B. Everitt. Cluster Analysis. Halsted Press, NY, 
1980. [10] M. Feldman, C. Papadimitriou, J. Chuang, and I. Stoica. Free-riding and Whitewashing in Peer-to-Peer 
Systems. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 24(5):1010 1019, 2006. [11] D. Fisher, M. 
Smith, and H. Welser. You Are Who You Talk To: Detecting Roles in Usenet Newsgroups. In Proc. Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Jan 2006. [12] P. Gill, M. Arlitt, Z. Li, and A. 
Mahanti. Youtube Tra.c Characterization: A View From the Edge. In Proc. ACM Internet Measurement Conference 
(IMC), San Diego, CA, USA, Oct 2007. [13] A. Jain, M. Murty, and P. Flynn. Data Clustering: A Review. 
ACM Computing Surveys, 31(3):264 323, 1999. [14] S. H. Lee, P.-J. Kim, and H. Jeong. Statistical Properties 
of Sampled Networks. Physical Review E, 73:016102, 2006. [15] J. Macqueen. Some Methods of Classi.cation 
and Analysis of Multivariate Observations. In Proc. Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics 
and Probability, pages 281 297, 1967. [16] D. Menasc´e and V. Almeida. Scaling for E-Business: Technologies, 
Models, Performance, and Capacity Planning. Upper Saddle River, Prentice Hall, NJ, 2000. [17] D. Menasc´e, 
V. Almeida, R. Fonseca, and M. Mendes. A Methodology for Workload Characterization of E-Commerce Sites. 
In Proc. ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC), pages 119 128, 1999. [18] D. Menasc´e, V. Almeida, 
R. Fonseca, and M. Mendes. Business-Oriented Resource Management Policies for E-Commerce Servers. Performance 
Evaluation, 42(2-3):223 239, 2000. [19] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. Bhattacharjee. 
Measurement and Analysis of Online Social Networks. In Proc. ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), 
San Diego, CA, USA, Oct 2007. [20] H. Neto, J. Almeida, L. Rocha, W. Meira, P. Guerra, and V. Almeida. 
A Characterization of Broadband User Behavior and Their E-Business Activities. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance 
Evaluation Review, 32(3):3 13, 2004. [21] D. Watts and S. Strogatz. Collective Dynamics of Small-World 
Networks. Nature, 393:440 442, 1998.  
			