
 Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain INCORPORATING FINANCIAL AND ERGONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS INTO MODELS OF WUFACTURING SYSTEMS 
Henry Herper Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg Department of Computer Simulation and Graphics 
P.O. BOX 4120 D-390 16 Magdeburg, Germany Thomas Kagerl Engineering Oftice for Projeet Management, Work 
Structuring and Plant Organisation Schleimtfer 14 D-39 104 Magdeburg, Germany Dietrich Ziems Otto-von-Guericke-University 
of Magdeburg Department of Logistics and Mechanical Handling Engineering P.O. BOX 4120 D-390 16 Magdeburg, 
Germany ABSTRACT This contribution describes a modular concept by which simulation results can be post-run 
interpreted under different aspects (multifimctional interpretation). The extension of classic simulation 
models for materials flow systems and manufacturing systems by economic, ecological and environmental 
aspects as well as the advantages and limits of this approach are discussed in this paper. A gear manufacturing 
was cho­sen as an example to demonstrate the application of a multifunctional interpretation. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Classic simulators are able to model technical processes in manufacturing and material handling systems 
with a stilcient degree of details. They are used by factory planners to check and improve plans of technical 
systems. During the last years these tools were extended with components to support the modelling of 
flexible manufacturing systems, automated production lines and automated materials flow processes. But 
today the consideration of worker, costs and en­vironmental factors becomes more and more important in 
designing of technical systems, Criteria like qualifi­cation, work organisation, compensation of employees 
and work structuring must be more integrated into the planning process and for that reason also into 
the plan­ning tools. At the same time economic and ecological questions gain more and more importance. 
To support the necessary to provide methods for the planning tools. planning results statements about 
of manufacturing could be available Conventional In assessment of such aspeets it is and process additional 
data and application in computer-based such a way the relii~bility of could be improved and qualiiied 
ergonomics, economy andl ecology systems and materials flow systems already during the planning stage. 
simulators only allow limited assess­ ment of a materials flow system. Normally they are based on state 
variables of flows of material and re­sources in location and time. Such models do not fully suffice 
e.g. for the introduction of new work structures like team work. Often it is necessary to allow a view 
on simulated systems under different aspects. In this case the simulation results are to be prepared 
under various viewpoints and for ditTerent user groups. We refer to this process as multifunctional interpretation 
of simulation results. The problem analysis must clear up which questions of different user groups should 
be an­swered by the simulation system, how the additional result data could be generated out of the model 
data, which additional input data are to be provided and how these data are to process. The classic form 
of a simulation study can deliver the pIanning team many necessary itiormation about the materials flow 
and can show an insight into the process. The modelling of the behaviour of materials flow systems and 
manufacturing systems in location and time is the basis of the development of expanded models. Banks 
(1996) claims 80 to 85°/0 of the time that an item is on the manufacturing floor is expended in material 
handling or waiting for material handling 1149 to occur. Therefore the planning tools are often concentrated 
on the modelling of these items, especially on the states of flowing objects and technical resources. 
Theses models can be generated very precisely for flexible manufacturing systems with a high level of 
automation. They deliver results which are well suited for the assessment of the planning. The strain 
of the employees, ecological or economic aspects are normally modelled only if they directly influence 
the production sequences or if they are requested as target figures or factors of evaluation of the modelling. 
2 BACKGROUND Today s simulation tools are equipped with extensive components for the assessment of states 
and behaviour of manufacturing systems and materials flow systems. The simulation results are delivered 
in a processed form as compressed result data. They include for instance the utilisation rate of transport 
devices and manufacturing facilities, the utilisation of storage space, or the throughput time of items 
or orders. These data allow the materials flow planner an effective assessment of technicat systems, 
their petiormance and their performance limits. Besides most simulators offer primary result data. These 
are for instance trace protocols. The animation trace file is a special form of primary result data which 
allows a post run animation. With the help of the animation components in to­day s simulation tools, 
the experienced user gets various possibilities, for instance to assess the modelled processes and to 
put the system states in a proper place due to their history. Classic simulation models are state models 
of oper­ands, operators and operations (process stages). The model structure and the kind of result data 
are deter­mined by the aims of the simulation study. In multi­functional models not all result data must 
be generated by the simulation tool. Primary result data can be con­nected and interpreted with extended 
input data. The dataflow is shown in Figure 1. The interpretation makes is possible to gain an ex­tended 
evaluation under ditTerent aspects. Therefore it is necessary that the simulation model is designed, 
structured and detailed in a proper way, The methods described in this contribution concentrate on the 
form of post-run evaluation above explained to make simulation results accessible to a multifimctional 
interpretation. ~ primary resulta B processed unprocessed (statistical) (trace) additional + connection 
and interpretation input­ data extended evaluation of the system DD=I Figure 1: Data Flow 3 EXTENSION 
OF SIMULATION TOOLS One aspect of the extension of simulation tools is for instance the detailed modelling 
of workers. In classic simulation models statements about single workers are only possible in an abstract 
way. Often only the utilisa­tion of the worker is given indicated. Qnalitlcations as the ability to carry 
out a production sequence at a workplace are normally defined in simulators, but only to distinguish 
between The worker can make this job and The worker can not make this job . But it is not enough to use 
only the state modelling of technical systems if it is necessary to assess different work structures 
concerning their demands on the worker. Components allowing a distinguished estima­tion of physical strain 
and qualitlcation must be inte­grated. Two different approaches are possible for the neces­sary extension 
of simulation tools. On the one hand there is the possibility to expand the simulators with fiuther fimctions. 
The result would be specialised simulators. Some simulator developers follow this way for instance to 
model value added processes in much more detail. This approach is ve~ expensive and demands an individual 
s own solution for each simulator. The second approach consists in a post-run combination and assessment 
of uncompressed result worker­data E) jobal orders B equip­ment d database economic evaluation 
> + * input data collection and processing v simulator kernel model evaluation of work loed and strain 
and -dangering potentials v evaluation material of the flow evaluation of the results system Figure 
2: Components and Interfaces of the System data produced by the simulator with additioml infor­mation. 
Additional modules allow an assessment under various viewpoints. The structure and components of such 
an approach are shown in Figure 2. 3.1 STRUCTURE OF THE SYSTEM The precondition for the winning of additional 
irrfor­mation is a simulation model that describes the ana­lysed system very detailed. It must have a 
clear con­nection of all manufacturing sequences to machines, items and workers. The series of manufacturing 
se­quences (processes) are to be recorded in trace proto­cols. Also the writing of trace protocols of 
changes in states of system components must be possible. Both forms of trace protocols constitute as 
primary result data the basis for the extended data evaluation. The multifimctional interpretation system 
has the following basic fimctions: input data collection and processing, . interfaces to the simulation 
model, . assessments,  help and documentation systems and . database interface.  The assessment modules 
can be chosen in relation to the aims of the simulation study. The following mod­ules were developed 
in connection with research proj­ ects and simulation studies for the industry: assessment of load, strain 
and danger potential of workers, . assessment of the value added by the manufacturing process and estimation 
of the environmental danger potential by the manufacturing process. For the generation of additional 
information, addi­ tional input data are to be collected and to be proc­essed. The generated data can 
be stored and managed in a database. The simulation model generates data which can also be stored in 
the data base. The internal assessment methods of the simulation tools are used for the as­sessment of 
the system behaviour in location and time. The user gets his other results about the system in the usual 
and accepted way from the simulation tool. The simulation tool creates also the animation correspond­ing 
to its implemented abilities. The additional assessment tools deliver the extended interpretation and 
evaluation of the simulation results. The users get further aspects, assessment criteria and data for 
their decision making. Trace protocols gener­ated by the simulator provide the basis for the estima­tion. 
All modules use the trace protocols by connecting the events and processes with additional data. Due 
to the modular concept chosen it is possible to integrate ditTerent assessment tools. The components 
run under a uniform user interface. 3.2 DATABASE Data are managed in a relational database. In this 
data base a redundancy free data management is aimed. The data formats are chosen in such a way that 
they allow a platform independent exchange. Therefore we use the ASCII format. The data necessary for 
the extended result evalua­tion must be collected and committed to the evaluation components. The events 
or processes must be assigned to the trace protocol to connect the additional input data with the result 
data generated by the simulator. Events and processes are the elementary components of the state model. 
Manufacturing sequences for the evaluation processes are built from these events and processes. Every 
working sequence consists of several working activities which are connected to a working task. These 
working sequences are not interruptive. They are processed by a worker or a team at a defined location, 
on a defined item with defined devices. The combination of working activities to a working se­quence 
is realised in the stage of the additional data collection. There are two ways to determine the dura­tion 
of a working sequence. On the one hand the dura­tion is determined by input data, on the other hand the 
duration is computed by the simulator. The application of this concept demands a trace file viewp oint 
object state type: resource (operator) ecology forklift truck transport economy busy idle ergonomy worker 
in work wait ~; issue [operand) part processing quality checking transportation ecology Figure 3: Examples 
for added costs and values generated by the simulator with the following contents start, end, working 
location, . working item and  worker for each working sequence. The combination of work­ing sequences 
and primary simulation results is real­ised by a connection file which is represented by a ma­trix. Various 
evaluation components can generate multifimctional intepetations from these combined result data. Another 
kind of data connection is the extension of state protocols generated by the simulator with addi­tional 
data. These state protocols are necessary for the evaluation of data which can not be collected from 
working sequences.  3.3 INTERFACES AND RESULT DATA EVALUATION The extended result data evaluation is 
also realised by a modular concept. This allows the integration of various evaluation modules related 
to the requirements of the users. The result data evaluation is post run. This method has the advantage 
that the computed simulation results can be interpreted under various viewpoints. The disadvantage is 
that the results of the primary result evaluation result duration energy energy consumption/ consumption 
period operation duration heat environmental noise load carbon dioxide emmision duration work costs cost 
I period duration waiting costs idle costi period duration work load stress level duration recreation 
time stress level duration increase in value increase in valuel yes period duration increase in value 
yes (partially) duration increase in value no duration heat loss energy demand evaluation can not be 
used for the decision making during the simulation nm. The connection to dillerent simulators was one 
of the main aims in the development of the interfaces. A high acceptance by a user can only be reached, 
if the modules work with his or her simulator and the additional costs for modeling are low. For different 
viewpoints and users we provide different modules. The functionality of the modules shall be described 
in the following paragraphs. The module for the economic evaluation allows a detailed analysis of the 
cost behavior of the simulated system and the added value. For the usage of this module it is necessary 
that the user can combine every working sequence with its cost and added value (Figure 3). This kind 
of economic analysis is at this time directly supported by some simulators. The advantage of the external 
evaluation module is that the user can choose the form of the evaluation according to the available data. 
The module allows the calculation of direct costs (for example consumption of operating resources and 
energy) and indirect costs ( for example floating capital). Another module was developed for the estimation 
of load and strain of workers. The evaluation component for the physical work load and strain was developed 
in the project EMSIG and described in Ehrhardt (1994). Investigations in several firms have shown that 
the physical load and strain of workers becomes more and more important. The activities done by the workers 
include a lot of control tasks with a high level of responsibility. The estimation of mental load and 
strain of the worker is much more dit%cult than physical work load, because the individual diHerences 
are much higher. The evaluation component includes methods used in ergonomic investigations in firms. 
The qualitlcation of workers is very important for reengineering manufacturing systems. Materials flow 
simulators generate oflen only results about the utilization of workers. The developed evaluation module 
takes into consideration how well a worker is qualified for an activity. It compares the qualification 
of the worker with the requirements of the working process. The interpretation of the results allows 
the determination of necessary training for the workers already in the planning stage. Many manufacturing 
sequences include danger potentials for the workers. The danger potential is caused by the working sequence 
but also by the substances used and by the environmental conditions. A special evaluation module supports 
the user in the estimation of kind and duration of danger potentials in the planning stage. Ergonom c 
Considerations All Modules work separately on the same database. Often it is neeessary to combine the 
results of the different evaluation models with each other and with the prirnmy simulation results of 
the technical system. Therefore we developed a separate component which compresses and presents combined 
result data. 4 MODEL OF AN ASSEMBLY SYSTEM The developed modules were tried in a simulation study supporting 
the reengineering of a gear manufacturing. The planning team consists of materials flow engineers, work 
structuring engineers and quality managers. Different variants of the system were analysed and evaluated 
under diiTerent viewpoints with the help of the simulation model. The variants difTer in the chosen form 
of the working structures and layout of the material flow system. The main goal in the restructuring, 
of the manufacturing system is an increased performance with lower throughput times. The simulation results 
allow statements about: performance of the system and the throughput time of items, . cost and added 
value, . demand of qualification,  load and strain of workers and  possible danger potentials. For 
the development of the model we used the simulation language GPSWJ3TM and for the animation the system 
PROOW . 5 SUMMARY Traditional simulation models for materials flow systems and manufacturing systems 
describe and insight the processes, technical performance and the system behavior in location and time 
using discrete events and states. The primary results are related to these goals. The integration of 
additional aspects like ecological, economic and ergonomical evaluation demands extensions of the model. 
This can be done with two different approaches. The first one is the extension of the simulator and the 
other one is a post run interpretation. The post run interpretation is usable if the decision making 
is not influenced by the additional evaluation. A multifunctional interpretation can be realised with 
various simulators which are able to generate trace files in the described form. The presente~d modular 
concept of evaluation modules and files allows the interpretation of primary simulation result data under 
various viewpoints and user interests. The evaluation methods were successfully used with result data 
of different simulation tools. This approach opens up several new application fields for traditional 
simulators and models. REFERENCES Banks, J., John S Carson, and Berry L. Nelson. 1996. Discrete-event 
system simulation. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. Ehrhardt, I., Henry Hewer, and Hansjttrgen 
Gebhardt. 1994. Modelling Strain of Manual Work in Manufacturing Systems. In: Proceedings of the 1994 
Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivnnan, D. A. Sadowski and A. F. Seila, 1044­1049. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES HENRY HERPER 
works as Assistent Professor in the department of Computer Simulation and Graphics at the University 
of Magdeburg. His areas of research are the modelling of logistical and manufacturing systems and their 
dispositions. He is a member of the ASIM and the GPSS-Users -Group Europe. Thomas Kagerl works as Project 
Manager in an Engineering 0f13ce for Project Management, Work Structuring and Plant Organisation. One 
of his recent projects has been the reengineering of a gear manufacturing. Dietrich Zlems has been Professor 
at the University of Magdeburg (Germany), Department of Logistics and Materials Handling Engineering 
since 1992. He obtained his doctorate at the University of Magdeburg. He teaches planning of material 
handling systems, organisation and control of material flow processes and logistics. His research interests 
include applications of CAD-layout planning, simulation and animation of manufacturing, multimedia technologies 
in education. He is a member of the ASIM.  
			