
 Information Center for Administrative Data Implementation Experience at UC Berkeley CHERYL BANISTER 
LAURA KIM CINDY NELSON Information Systems Office 205 Banway Building University of California Berkeley, 
California PURPOSE FOR THOSE OF YOU who are interested in establishing an information center on your 
campus, we discuss the implementation of the Administrative Information Center (AIC) at the University 
of California, Berkeley. Topics we include are: Introduction to the AIC  Objectives and Goals  Organization 
 Services Provided  Selecting a Service  Facilities  Tools: Software and Hardware  Subscriptions 
and Recharging for Services  Plans  We also include a brief Summary at the end of this paper, followed 
by organization charts of the UC Berkeley Computing Affairs Organization. INTRODUCTION TO THE AIC During 
the last few years, there has been a growing need on the UC Berkeley campus to support additional administrative 
computing activities. After considerable research, we determined that an information center approach 
would fulfill the campus needs for accessing and disseminating administrative data, and, thus, we established 
the Administrative Information Center. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is 
granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM 
copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1984 ACM 0-89791-146-6/84/011/0091 $00.75 ACM-SIGUCCS XII, 
1984, Conference Proceedings Banister, Kim, and Nelson Before the AIC was formed, various studies were 
conducted to determine campus computing needs.1 The first extensive, campus-wide study identified major 
problems and projected needs in administrative systems. These findings were published in the 1977 Needs 
Assessment Plan. What followed in the same year was a comprehensive Information Systems Plan which outlined 
the overall coordination and development of campus administrative systems and data bases. The Information 
Systems Plan is updated annually. The Plan produced last year reaffirmed the need for easily-accessed 
administrative data. Research revealed that the campus departments and offices had needs for administrative 
computing and data that were not being met, including: easy access to files and data bases;  coordination 
among common data files among functions (such as student or financial areas) so that administrative offices 
can share information;  state-of-the-art equipment (hardware and software) to adequately fulfill computing 
responsibility needs; quick turnaround (different services and priorities for different kinds of work); 
inexpensive data retrieval; and training in use of software, data access, and retrieval. OBJECTIVES AND 
GOALS AIC's objective is to meet partially the campus needs for administrative computing and data mentioned 
above. Specifically, AIC provides administrative users access to data on their own terms and at a minimum 
cost, so that the users can solve many of their computing and data needs themselves; for the most part, 
AIC provides the tools and the training, and the user does the rest of the work. The type of work AIC 
handles are the one-time query, the simple report, the minor change, etc.; AIC may also take on small 
programming projects that can be done quickly and wl~ich will enable a department (or several departments) 
to retrieve data and produce reports as needed. AIC does not take on projects that require considerable 
development and which have a campus-wide impact. 2 Services of the AIC are purchased by subscription 
or are recharged to the departments. ORGANIZATION The AIC is established within the Information Systems 
Office of the UC Berkeley Computing Affairs Organization) The AIC is divided into three functional units: 
1. Retrieval Services 2. Administrative Microcomputer Services 3. Information Center for Administrative 
Data (mainframe)  The units differ in how data is accessed and in cost to the user, thus providing a 
range of data access possibilities from which the user can select. 1 This was the result of the suspension 
of the previous common system policy (July 1976) which transferred the authority and responsibility of 
administrative systems from System-wide to the nine individual campuses of the University of California 
system. 2Those projects are handled by the Developmem Unit of the Information Systems Office; see the 
organization charts at the end of this paper. 3The Berkeley Computing Affairs Organization is rather 
large (over 270 employees), and is organized into three functional units: (1) Computer Facilities and 
Operations, which maintains the equipment, (2) Computing Services, which supports academic computing, 
and (3) the Information Systems Office, which supports administrative computing. See the organization 
charts at the end of this paper. Information Center for Administrative Data Retrieval Services Berkeley 
Retrieval Services, which was established in 1978 to meet the ad hoc reporting and special informational 
needs of the campus, is now incorporated in AIC. The main objective of Retrieval is to provide users 
with information from the campus files and data bases. The user does not need a microcomputer or a terminal; 
all the work is done by Retrieval Services using software available on various mainframes. The major 
attribute of this service is the timeliness and flexibility of response to the user; for example, once 
a department has appropriate approvals for accessing the data base, the request is programmed, tested, 
and scheduled for a production run usually within an eight hour day. Requests can vary from simple reports 
using one file to more complex reports involving several files across several systems (for example, student 
and financial). Currently, Retrieval provides services to 80 administrative departments on a recharge 
basis. Administrative Microcomputer Services The Administrative Microcomputer Services (AMS) unit, which 
was established in January 1984, provides technical expertise and support for administrative users in 
the selection, acquisition, and use of microcomputer hardware and software. Typically, users request 
microcomputer training, consulting, or software tailoring so that they can then do their own report generating; 
a total of 17 departments have subscribed to the microcomputing services (10 already have subscriptions 
for this fiscal year). AMS is also working on some small microcomputer systems for several departments, 
and several other departments have requested microcomputer-supported operations. Information Center for 
Administrative Data (mainframe) By the end of October, we expect to announce that the Information Center 
for Administrative Data (ICAD) is operating (if all the software is in place). ICAD's overall objective 
is to inform administrative offices on the campus of administrative data available on the mainframe computers, 
and then to provide technical expertise and training so that those administrative users can access the 
data. A department that already has terminals and computer accounts (or who is willing to get them) may 
be interested in this service. Once departments know about data, have authority to access that data, 
and know how to use mainframe software, they can generate their own reports as needed. For example, ICAD 
can assist the department that wants to monitor costs or produce monthly reports for specific account/fund 
summaries, which requires access to the General Ledger System data. Currently, the AIC has three employees: 
a supervisor and two analysts. The supervisor reports to the Data Administration and Standards group 
of the Information Systems Office; see the organization charts at the end of this paper. We expect the 
staff to grow after we announce the mainframe unit and as requests for services increase. Each analyst 
is expected to support at least 20 users; each analyst is responsible for two to four software packages, 
and is expected to develop expertise in the usage of these software packages. Technical staff in the 
Data Administration and Standards unit assist with the AIC services as needed; for example, they teach 
some of the classes and they may be called upon to help with some of the AIC programming projects. So, 
although there are only three official employees in AlE, other employees of the campus administrative 
computing group assist with some of the AIC services. SERVICES PROVIDED Specific services provided by 
AIC are described below; information is also included about which unit of AIC provides the service. Ad 
Hoc Requests for Data and Report This service is available exclusively through Retrieval Services. Although 
the user is not involved with the technical aspects of extracting data from the mainframe, the user is 
highly interested in the end-result, such as reports or labels. Those who use the Berkeley Retrieval 
Services usually do not have the volume or need Banister, Kim, and Nelson to implement a computing system 
on their own. Because Retrieval Services has access to all administrative data and the software tools 
to provide fairly inexpensive reports, users can fulfill their ad hoc reporting needs adequately through 
this service. Technical Consulting Technical consulting is provided by both the microcomputer unit and 
the mainframe unit. Consulting services include: 1. analyzing the needs, data requirements, and operating 
requirements for a given situation, 2. providing expertise in choosing software suitable for a given 
application (if the software is for a microcomputer, the user is also assisted with the purchasing procedures), 
 3. providing expertise in choosing the., appropriate hardware suitable for a particular application 
(if the user is buying a microcomputer, rather than using a mainframe, the user will be assisted with 
the purchasing procedures), and 4. tailoring software for a department's particular needs.  This consulting 
service is designed to free the user from calling different people and places for technical consultation. 
One call to AIC connects users to an analyst who can listen to the problem, understand it, and make informed 
recommendations. In addition to telephone consulting, an analyst may go to the user's location or may 
research a problem and then get back to the user. Access to Software and Hardware The AMS unit of AIC 
provides: 1. access to many software packages developed by other campus departments, in cooperation with 
AMS, 2. on-site (at AIC facilities) trial usage of many commercial software packages for short terms, 
 3. on-site (at AIC facilities) access to commercial software that ISO has purchased, 4. access to evaluations 
of hardware and software by Datapro, a major commercial service, and by other computing journals (many 
publications are available for reading in the AIC library), and 5. special arrangements to use microcomputers 
already on campus before purchasing a new microcomputer.  The ICAD unit enables users to access data 
and software on the mainframe computer. If the department does not already have a terminal and wants 
one, ICAD can help them make arrangements for getting the terminal and the appropriate port connection. 
Access to a Data Dictionary AIC maintains a data dictionary, from which it produces hardcopies of a data 
glossary. The glossaries are available to administrative users so thai: they know what important administrative 
data are available. Access to Campus Mainframe Data Since ISO is the custodian of all campus administrative 
data, AIC is able to help departments access some of that data-given proper authorization. In particular, 
AIC can: 1. ensure that administrative data is relatively easy to access, 2. provide communications 
between microcomputer and selected campus mainframe computers, 3. provide data file transfer between 
microcomputers and mainframe computers, and 4. provide access to data and software available on selected 
mainframe computers. If the user selects Retrieval Services, AIC accesses the data and prepares the reports. 
If the user selects  Information Center for Administrative Data either the microcomputer or mainframe 
services, it may be necessary for the user to have an account on a mainframe computer in order to access 
the data. Or, AMS (the microcomputer service) may arrange to have the data transferred to a suitable 
diskette format for a user. Access to Standards and Procedures AIC provides support and guidelines for: 
I. systems analysis and design, 2. documentation, 3. maintenance, 4. designing and program review, 
and 5. program coding.  Although designing and developing a complete system is a highly complex and 
time-consuming job, AIC ensures the success of a system as well as its continued reliability and easy 
maintenance. AIC shares with users its methodologies, guidelines, and standards, and helps optimize users' 
systems; also, AIC maintains a user's system upon request. The AMS and ICAD units provide this service 
for microcomputer and mainframes respectively, although it is more applicable to the mainframes. Training 
The Administrative Microcomputer Service regularly teaches classes on such topics as: Introduction to 
Microcomputers, Visicalc, Multiplan, dBaseII, Lotus 1-2-3, Wordstar/MailMerge, and BASIC programming. 
Additional topics, such as Symphony, Framework, and dBase III, will be added. From January 1984 through 
July 1984, AMS taught 28 classes, which were attended by 163 students; at least 38 administrative offices 
were represented at the microcomputing classes. Seventeen classes are already scheduled for Fall Semester. 
These classes are announced in the Computing Services Short Course Schedule and the INSIDE, which is 
published by the Personnel Department. The microcomputer classes are hands-on classes using IBM PCs and 
IBM XTs. Although many training centers conduct classes where the students share microcomputers, we have 
found that it is advantageous for each student to have his or her own microcomputer. In our classes, 
therefore, each student has a microcomputer; the classes are limited to four to six students. Although 
there is only one instructor per class, we can arrange for an assistant to help in classes where the 
students need a lot of attention. The Information Center for Administrative Data plans to offer classes 
in Data Processing Concepts, WYLBUR, On Line Query, Batch Query Language, EasyMARK (a front-end to MARK 
IV), etc. Classes in microcomputer to mainframe communications are also planned. These classes will enable 
users to do their own data retrieval for simple reports, minor changes, short jobs, and one-time queries. 
SELECTING A SERVICE Once a department is interested in our services, we set up an interview with that 
department to determine the particular kinds of services that department needs, wants, or can afford. 
Since we have three units and can provide a range of services in a range of prices, we make several recommendations 
to the department, and then let the department select. Some departments come to us with a specific problem 
to solve which we can handle with a combination of our services. Some departments come with a vague notion 
that they want to computerize; sometimes we help them define their problem so that they can get started 
solving the problem themselves, or sometimes we help them define the problem and then proceed to solve 
the problem for them. Occasionally, a department comes to us with the need for a major system; we refer 
that department to the Development unit of the Information Systems Office. Banister, Kim, and Nelson 
FACILITIES The Administrative Information Center facility is next to the analysts' offices. The facility 
contains a library of current computer documentation, journals, reports, etc. and a work area with tables 
and chairs. If a microcomputer class is scheduled for the room, four to six IBM PCs or IBM XTs are set 
up. A session may be arranged to train a department to use a Batch Query Language system, for example, 
to access student profile data for that department; the room will then be set up with a terminal or a 
microcomputer emulating a terminal (connected to a mainframe). If a user wants to test software or a 
microcomputer, the room is set up accordingly. Also, users who subscribe to services may arrange to use 
a terminal or microcomputer at the facilities (if the department terminal is not yet installed, if the 
microcomputer is broken, etc.). Users must make arrangements to use the facilities. TOOLS: SOFTWARE AND 
HARDWARE Software packages that the AIC currently uses, consults on, trains on, or has available for 
use are listed below in a table; new products are added regularly. The AIC only supports software and 
hardware that are also supported by the central campus computing facility (Computing Services and Computer 
Facilities and Operations). Although AIC consults on ihardware use and helps set up new microcomputers, 
it does not repair malfunctioning hardware. 4 Software Microcomputer Mainframe Communications BASIC Compiler 
Batch Query Language Apple-IBM Connection BASIC Programming Development System Kermit CICS MODEM7 CP/M-86 
CMS YTERM dBaselI Culprit dBase III5 EasyCulprit 6 FORTRAN EasyMARK 6 Framework 5 MARK IV IBM DOS 1.1 
and 2.0 MVS IBM 3101 Emulation program On-line Query Lotus 1-2-3 UNIX Macro Assembler MS-DOS Multiplan 
Pascal Personal Editor Project Scheduler Sideways Symphony 5 UNIX-like 5 Visicalc WordStar/MailMerge 
 SUBSCRIPTIONS AND RECHARGING FOR SERVICES Retrieval Services are charged to departments through recharge. 
Administrative Microcomputer Services are available at both recharge and subscription rates depending 
on the service requested. Again, programming 4The Hardware and Maintenance unit in Computer Facilities 
and Operations supports terminal repairs and some installations of ports, etc. See the organization charts 
at the end of this paper. 5Being purchased 6Developed locally; EasyCulprit will be developed locally. 
Information Center for Administrative Data tasks must be recharge; but, consulting, training, use of 
the facilities, software tailoring, etc. can be purchased on either a comprehensive plan or a limited 
plan for a fiscal year. The Information Center for Administrative Data is expected to have a similar 
charging structure. PLANS We expect that emphasis will be on training during this next fiscal year; once 
our administrative users are familiar with mainframes and microcomputers, we expect that we will have 
more work from those departments. Immediately, we want to focus on announcing the mainframe services 
and promoting all of the AIC services. This Fall Semester, we expect to introduce the Information Center 
for Administrative Data. We are planning an AIC open house, where we will display our facilities and 
give demonstrations on various services and software. Prior to the open house, we will distribute, to 
administrative departments, brochures which describe our services and which give schedules for the open 
house and the demonstrations. Other promotional activities will be planned as needed. As mentioned earlier, 
Retrieval Services and Administrative Microcomputer Services are available. We have steady requests for 
Retrieval Services, and one analyst has been working full-time on those requests. We have more requests 
for Administrative Microcomputer Services than we can handle; also, 10 departments already subscribe 
to Microcomputer Services this fiscal year (which gives them a certain number of free hours of consultation 
per year, among other services). We expect that requests for services will continue to increase (especially 
after the open house), and that we will need to add additional staff. Since administrative personnel 
have been wanting easy access to data for many years, we expect the Administrative Information Center 
to be a popular service. SUMMARY Based on campus need for quick and inexpensive access to administrative 
data, we formed the Administra- tive Information Center. The AIC is divided into three units, which access 
data in different ways and which charge differently for the variety of services provided, giving the 
user a range of services and costs from which to choose. Both the Retrieval Services and Administrative 
Microcomputer Services units of the AIC are already providing services; we expect the Information Center 
for Administrative Data (mainframe) unit to be providing services in the fall. The AIC is still new, 
and not yet fully implemented. At the convention in November, we expect to have additional implementation 
experiences to share. Banister, Kim, and Nelson "- 8 R, h ~o ~-~ O. ~o ¢/1 R E~ o ~ ~_ ~~ -~ fi =- N 
.,I~ .~ ~-3 ,~-~  ~ ~.~-.~0~.~ I1~ 11~ OII ~ ~ ~ >, ~_~ o-.o i o~ t~ I o 0 0 cn E 0 co ~ 0 0 IL 0 
ft. ~= ~ ~= o ~ ~' 0 1"'fr" Information Center for Administrative Data OO O0 :io ~ o O0 D_ m (D No 
c~m. *' Og"ID E o ~o_ t-O o  Q ~o o ._.(.9 U. (Drr o > K- ~ e-(D 4~ O u9 oooo i-4-~ r-- to ~ (D > ,-- 
i-4m (D c-,O c-. ,-- q-- 0.1 i. ¢-% ~.~ cr 0 i- o ou.i == zr <~ Z o 121 <09 O. zi 0 C 0 ! ~-§~ o .~_ 
co ~.~ .. o. C/3 "10 0 0 O0 0 @ < 0 > .1 .1 0 ~.~ o0<(D o o o o @ O -a C~ O9 o ~ aJ ~ o o o o o~ 99 
 
			