
 Information Technology Curriculum Development Bei-Tseng (Bill) Chu, Moderator Department of Software 
and Information Systems University of North Carolina at Charlotte billchu@uncc.edu John Gorgone Department 
of Computer Information Systems Bentley College jgorgone@bentley.edu Introduction Driven by the strong 
demands for IT professionals, an increasing number of universities are experimenting with curriculums 
for Information Technology. ACM is the established leading professional organization for computing research 
and education. The relationship between IT curriculum and Computer Science (CS) education is a topic 
of wide spread interest among CS educators. The objective of this panel is to share experiences in the 
design and implementation of IT programs in universities and to provide a forum for in­depth discussion 
on the future of CS and IT educations. IT intellectual domain and Master s program in IT Bill Chu New 
academic disciplines in universities should be based on a clearly defined intellectual domain. According 
to the view of the faculty at UNC Charlotte, Information Technology (IT) can be divided into the following 
intellectual domains: Foundations of IT, Management of IT, Information Systems Technology, and Applications. 
Traditionally Computer Science has focused on the foundations of IT while MIS have focused on the Management 
of IT. While many CS and MIS have, to some extent, issues of interests in Information System Technology 
and Applications, gaps clearly remain. For example, many CS departments have relatively few, faculty 
members focused on issues such as enterprise information integration, information systems architecture, 
and information system privacy. These and other areas that have not been adequately served by the Computer 
Science community have many challenging research issues that are of critical importance to the IT industry. 
UNC Charlotte offers a Master s program in Information Technology. The curriculum has six required courses 
that cover the intellectual domains of Management of IT (two Permission to make digital or hard copies 
of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGCSE 2001 2/01 Charlotte, NC USA Copyright 
2000 ACM 1-58113-329-4/01/0002 ... $5.00 Venu Dasigi Department of Computer Science Southern Polytechnic 
State University vdasigi@spsu.edu  David Spooner Information Technology Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
spoonerd@cs.rpi.edu courses) and Information Systems Technology (four courses). Students must also choose 
an area of concentration (three courses) focusing on any one of the four intellectual domains. Students 
are required to complete a practical project. The required courses for the MSIT program at UNC Charlotte 
has a similar topic distribution compared to the MSIS 2000 guidelines [2]. However, the courses on networking, 
integration, and design and analysis are much more technically oriented requiring substantial programming 
requirements. Undergraduate IT education --David Spooner RPI created a Bachelor of Science degree program 
in Information Technology (BS in IT) in the Fall of 1998 [3]. Two overarching goals in defining this 
program were capturing the interdisciplinary nature of IT and stressing technical fundamentals. In the 
three years that the program has been in existence, it has grown to about 285 majors and has generated 
much interest from potential employers. This interest currently is expressed in the form of co-op and 
internship opportunities since to date there are few graduates. The BS in IT at RPI is first and foremost 
an interdisciplinary degree program as motivated by the first overarching goal. A Faculty of IT that 
sits above the academic schools manages the degree program. The degree program stresses application of 
computing and communication in other disciplines. This interdisciplinarity shows up in two major ways. 
First, all students take an interdisciplinary set of core courses. As one would expect, this set includes 
a variety of technical courses from traditional computer science and engineering programs. But it also 
includes social science courses motivating students to think about the broader implications of applying 
information technology around the world, humanities courses that among other things build strong communication 
skills, management courses focusing on relevant management concepts, and project courses allowing students 
to put into practice what they learn and develop good project management and group work skills. The second 
interdisciplinary aspect of the degree program is a student-chosen second discipline. This is best viewed 
as an application area for the information technology. It consists of eight courses and has the goal 
of making the student an expert in the chosen second discipline area as well as motivating the student 
to understand how information technology can be exploited in that area. The BS in IT has thirty-three 
second disciplines defined with some coming from all five academic schools at RPI (i.e., Engineering, 
Science, Humanities and Social Science, Management, and Architecture). Thus, regardless of a student 
s interest, there should be an appropriate second discipline for the student to choose. As stated above 
the second overarching goal is strong technical fundamentals. This goal is achieved by requiring all 
students to take a number of traditional computer science and engineering courses. This is supplemented 
by requiring students to take several math and science courses as well. An external advisory committee 
of interested external business leaders reviews the program on a yearly basis. Members of this committee 
stress the importance of strong technical fundamentals in the degree program. Model curricula development 
 John Gorgone College and university-level IT curricula need frequent updating to remain effective in 
this dynamic field. Model curricula developed by committees and task force groups of the professional 
societies (AIS, ACM, AITP, IEEE-CS) [1,2] aid faculties in their curricula developments. Designing information 
technology/systems/science programs requires numerous considerations. We will present and discuss such 
topics as: mission statement, program objectives, faculty resources, computing facilities, physical space, 
laboratory support, student input characteristics, student exit characteristics, technology infrastructure, 
institutional support and financial resources, balance between general education, the IT major and the 
organizational knowledge needed for the working environment. Audience participation is strongly encouraged. 
 Relationship between IT, CS, and MIS Venu Dasigi Defining the intellectual domain of IT is an important 
challenge. Even after a few decades of Computer Science curricula being around, distinctions between 
different flavors such as Computer Science, Computing, Computer Information Science, etc. is subject 
to lack of agreement. Characterizing IT and Distinguishing IT from Information Science, Information Systems, 
Computer Technology, Software Technology should go hand in hand. In doing so, the relationship of the 
field to the curriculum proposed in IS-97 [1] should be clarified. Also, careful note should be taken 
of the skills identified as common to all computing disciplines in the context of CS-2001 report. An 
important question would be if and how these common skills fit into various views of IT. I will describe 
some elements of the new Master of Science in Information Technology (MSIT) program and the proposed 
BSIT program at Southern Polytechnic State University, and their position in the organizational structure 
of the university. These programs are shared between the Department of Computer Science and the School 
of Management. I will also discuss profiles that distinguish our Computer Science, Software Engineering, 
and Information Technology students. Reference [1] Davis, Gordon B., Gorgone, John T., Couger, J. Daniel, 
Feinstein, David L., and Longenecker, Jr. Herbert E.). IS'97 Model Curriculum and Guidelines for Undergraduate 
Degree Programs in Information Systems. The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems, Volume 28, 
Number 1,Winter 1997, pp. 1 -94. [2] Gorgone, John T., and Gray, Paul. MSIS 2000 Model Curriculum and 
Guidelines for Graduate Degree Programs in Information Systems. The DATA BASE for Advances in Information 
System, Volume 31, Number 1, Winter 2000, pp. i -48. [3] Spooner, D. L., "A Bachelor of Science in Information 
Technology: An Interdisciplinary Approach," Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGCSE Symposium on Computer 
Science Education, ACM Press, March 2000, pp. 285-289.  
			