
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND POWER: STRUCTURAL VERSUS PERSONAL VIEWS College of Business IRebecca Koop and 
Administration, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435 College of Business Administration, IRebecca 
Grant University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221 ABSTRACT Power issues impact information systems 
design, development, and implementation. Our understandiug of the sources of power affects how we interpet 
its potential impacts. This study examines the foundations of both personal and stmctural power sources. 
The outcomes of two well-known IS case studies are re-interpreted usin,g the two perspectives. This study 
shows that IS researchers should employ a structural view of power when exploring its impact on IS design 
and implementation. INTRODUCTION Many authors have discussed the influence of power in information systems 
design and implementation (see, for example, Keen 1981, Markus 1983, Markus and R.obey 1984, Newman and 
Rosenberg 1985, Bjorn-Andersen et al. 1986, Kling and Iacono 1984). Much of the research in the area 
focuses on the balance of power between the user and the information systems (IS) staff, and how that 
balance affects the interplay between the two groups. Other studies consider how the power structure 
implied or imposed by a system design affects the implementation process and system use. These studies 
suggest that incongruence between the organization s existing power structure and the structure arising 
from the system design often leads tc) user resistance or system failure. Research investigating how 
changes in power structure influence system implementation success often focuses on the viewpoint of 
individuals. Personal sources of power, Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is 
granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM 
copvright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. CPR/4/93/MO, USA @ 1993 ACM 0-89791 -573-9/93/0004/0265 . ..$1.50 those 
unique to an individual worker, are analyzed. However, consideration should also be given to structural 
sources of power, i.e. sources related to position or role within an organization. A structural view 
of power leads to a better understanding of the collective resistance of groups involved in implementation. 
This paper explores the relationship between power and information systems from both the structural and 
personal perspectives. The paper begins by addressing the concept of power and the sources of power. 
That discussion is followed by a review of IS research focusing on power issues in system development. 
The discussion then uses both personal and structural perspectives of power to re­interpret the results 
of two IS case studies (Markus 1983, Zuboff 1984). The paper concludes by emphasizing the value of using 
a structural analysis of power to understand IS design and implementation issues. POWER AS A CONCEPT 
Classical definitions of power includes those of Dahl (1957) and Emerson (1962). Dahl saw power in terms 
of influence, saying A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would 
not otherwise do. Emerson wrote the power of actor A over actor B is the amount of resistance on the 
part of B which can be potentially overcome by A. Similarly, Pfeffer (1981) later defined it as the capability 
of one actor to overcome resistance in achieving a desired objector results . . . force sufficient to 
change the probability of B s behavior from what it would have been in the absence of the application 
of the force. Mintzberg (1983) looked at the concept in organizational terms, saying power was the capability 
to effect (or affect) organizational outcomes. Each of these definitions includes the notion of eff~ting 
change, but with subtle differences. For instance, effecting organizational outcomes is a subset of influencing 
people; thus, Mintzberg s power is subsumed in Dahl s. Emerson and Pfeffer both depict power as the ability 
to change or influence. Emerson, however, described amount of power in terms of the resistance of the 
person being influenced, while Pfeffer defined it in terms of the force of the person exercising influence. 
Using Emerson s definition, the person being influenced must be aware of the exercise of power. According 
to Pfeffer s definition of power, awareness of another s influence is not needed. One can also distinguish 
between potential and enacted power (Provan 1980). Some researchers acknowledge potential power, where 
having the potential to exercise influence is an adequate indication of power. For other researchers, 
it is not enough to possess power --it must be enacted. That is, power isn t power unless and until it 
is used. Consistent with Pfeffer and Mintzberg, this paper acknowledges that potential power is power: 
it need not be wielded to be threatening or have an effect. People generally understand what having or 
using power implies and often use the terms power and influence interchangeably. As Mintzberg (1983) 
noted, the problem with the word power in English is that it lacks a convenient verb form. We are forced 
to talk of influencing or controlling instead when the intent is to talk about exercising power. An intuitive 
understanding of power does not simplify the task of developing operational deftitions. Researchers continue 
to investigate the concept in different ways. For example, power can result from personal or structural 
sources. Personal sources of power are the result of the unique position and character of a particular 
individual (French and Raven 1959). Structural power accrues from one s position within the organization 
and applies to groups, as well as individuals (Pfeffer 1981). While analyzing power in terms of personal 
sources is a psychological perspective, using structural sources represents the sociological perspective. 
In this paper, both views are considered. SOURCES OF POWER The threat that a new 1S design will alter 
relationships within an organization often results in user resistance (Markus 1983, Newman and Rosenberg 
1985), making re­distribution of power an important issue in IS research. To study the relationship between 
design or implementation and power structures, the potential sources of power must first be understood. 
Personal Power As noted earlier, power may be viewed as personal or structural. The choice between the 
two corresponds closely to one s view of the possible sources of power. The source of personal power 
can be directly attributed to a specific person. Structural power derives from the organization and one 
s position in it. Table 1: Sources of Personal Power (Adapted from French and Raven 1959, Raven 1965) 
Personal Power 1. Reward 4. Referent 2. Coercive 5. Expert 3. Legitimate 6. Information  French and 
Raven (1959) and Raven (1965) cited six different bases of personal power: reward, coercive, legitimate, 
referent, expert, and information. Reward power is based on one person s ability to reward another. Its 
strength increases with the magnitude of a potential reward. Coercive power is based on the ability of 
one person to punish another, increasing with the magnitude of potential punishment. Legitimate power 
(authority) stems from internalized values in which one person is believed to have a right to influence 
someone else. Referent power is often characterized as charismatic power. It accrues from an individual 
s desire to identify with or belong to a particular referent person or group. Expert power accrues from 
special knowledge that is high valued; it s strength increases with the extent of knowledge and another 
s perception of that extent. Finally, information power is based on a person s access to data or facts. 
Greater access to information means greater power. Structural Power Power in the structural sense reflects 
properties of the organization as a social system. Pfeffer (1981) stated that power was a structural 
phenomenon created by the division of labor and departmentation that characterize the specific organization 
or set of organizations being investigated. The individual s power thus derives from characteristics 
of the organization. Hickson et al. (1971) and Hinings et al. (1974) postulated and tested a strategic 
contingencies theory, a structural approach to power. They said that power in an organization arose from 
three sources: (1) the ability of a subunit to cope with uncertain y, (2) the degree to which the subunit 
was central to the organization s workflow, and (3) the substitutability of the subunit s talents. In 
a test of the theory, Hinings et al. found significant correlations between indicators of power and the 
three theoretical variables of uncertainty, centrality, and substitutability. Pfeffer and Salancik (1978) 
argued that units that are the best at providing resources that are both critical and difficult to obtain 
will have power within an organiuition. In an earlier study (Salancik and Pfeffer 1974), they found that 
the amount of grant and contract money received by a university department was a significant predictor 
of that department s power. Thus, Pfeffer (1981) subsequently identified three more structural sources 
of power: (1) the ability to provide resources, (2) the ability to affect decision processes, and (3) 
the power of consensus. Table 2: Sources of Structural Power Structural Power 1. Coping with Uncertainty 
 2. Centrality in Workflow 3. Substitutability 4. Provide Resources 5. Affect Decision Process 6. 
Consensus  The ability to affect decision processes is best viewed in terms of control of the decision 
agenda, since a final decision depends heavily on the alternatives presented (Pfeffer 1981). Likewise, 
control over the definition of decision premises and the information given about alternatives can be 
sources of power. This ability to iaffect decision processes may be the direct result of one s position 
in an organization, a structural source of power. P feffer (1981) described the power of consensus as 
a subunit sharing a common value or perspective in approaching a situation. Where members of a subunit 
share a common view, they can approach the situation in concert, giving the group another structural 
source of power. Finally, some forms of personal power may be linked to structural sources. A person 
s ability to use legitimate, reward or coercive power is related to the division of labor in an organization. 
Furthermore, control over information (Pettigrew 1972) could be associated with the indivi[iual s place 
in the organization and centralization tat the communication network. POWER IN IS RESEARCH Several well-known 
IS studies have sought to understand the interplay between analysts and users in the systems development 
process. Markus and Robey (1984), for example, noted the need to imply rationality in analysis and design, 
even though the process is often a struggle to protect personal power. User participation is one rational 
approach to systems development which appears in much of the IS research with a political theme. Newman 
and Rosenberg (1985) concluded that analysis and design was a political process, but that systems analysts 
tended to be rationally oriented. The clash between the rational analysts and political users led to 
resistance and contributed to IS failure. Lucas (1984) studied the power position of IS professionals 
relative to the user community. Contrary to expectations, he found that the IS group was not powerful 
relative to other departments. These results would suggest that the IS group had little power over the 
user community in the analysis and design process. Saunders and Scammell (1986) later confirmed Lucas 
s tindings. Saunders and Scamell s and Lucas s studies relied on perceptions from department staff to 
determine the amount of power each group possessed. Markus and Bjom-Andersen (1987) stated that IS professionals 
may exercise power unobtrusively: In fact, the very lack of users awareness of the use of power may indicate 
an especially effwtive (i.e. powerful) exercise of it. The greatest problem with user resistance occurred 
when the user group felt power being exercised and the IS designer was unaware of it. In such cases, 
the user may believe that the designer is intentionally manipulating the process. To combat that manipulation, 
the user resists the designer s suggestions and, ultimately, the information system. Kling and Iacono 
(1984) analyzed the way in which organizations implemented enhancements to existing information systems. 
Their analysis showed that the process of maintaining and enhancing an information system was highly 
political. In some cases, individuals built structural barriers to ensure that their views of the system 
s development were supported. Baronas and Louis (1988) found that users perception of their own power 
was increased by giving them control during the implementation phase. Increasing the users power increased 
the likelihood of implementation success. These studies help us understand negotiation during the system 
development and maintenance process. But the political struggle between the IS and user communities during 
development is only one part of the power distribution conflict. Another power conflict is evident in 
the result of the development process, the physical design of the information system. An IS design implies 
a structure or pattern of information distribution which may not match the distribution among users prior 
to implementation. Only a few researchers have explicitly investigated the changes in the distribution 
of power implied by such system designs. Bjom-Andersen et al. (1986) studied the effect of information 
systems on leadership. They suggested that IS implementation complemented or enhanced existing management 
style more often than changing it. That is, after IS implementation, participative managers were more 
participative, while non-participative managers were less participative. This suggests a subtle change 
in the balance of power between managers and subordinates. Markus and Robey (1984) suggested that systems 
analysis techniques are biased toward retaining the status quo. This would support the assertion that 
the resulting design reinforces existing patterns, rather than changing them. Bjom-Andersen et al. s 
results (also discussed in Bjom-Andersen and Pederson 1980) indicated that organizational features of 
the system, such as user stmcture, computer role, and information quality, were usefirl predictors of 
power change. They further suggested that an information system alters individual users dependency relationships, 
bases of power, and ability to absorb uncertainty. Markus and Pfeffer (1983) and Markus (1983) found 
that an IS design that matched the organizational power structure was more successfully implemented than 
one that required changes in the organizational power structure. This implies that each IS design team 
should be aware of the intricacies of the power structure existing in the organization. Joshi (1989) 
developed an instrument to measure user perception of fairness in dealing with the information systems 
environment. Among the items were measures of the user s perception of relative power within the organization 
in terms of access to data and conflict among users. The instrument assessed users feelings about the 
IS environment (as opposed to feelings specific to a particular information system). As such, it was 
a move toward measuring the distribution of power among users. ANALYZING SHIFTS FROM TWO PERSPECTIVES 
The IS literature provides many examples of shifts in the distribution of personal power resulting from 
a mismatch between the design of system and the power distribution of an organization. Two well-known 
cases are analyzed, first from a personal power view and then from a structural one. Personal Power Zuboff 
s (1984) description of the automation of a pulp mill is a graphic account of shifts in each of the personal 
sources of power. There, the traditional mill work system was replaced by a computerized interface to 
control manufacturing. Prior to system implementation, workers physically checked and controlled the 
manufacturing process on the shop floor. After implementation, workers monitored it from computers in 
a centralized booth. Management, as well as the mill workers, had access to the process information contained 
in the computer. Introducing the computer system shifted power from the mill worker to the manager, the 
supervisor and in some cases the technology. The supervisor gained power over the worker because the 
computer recorded the operator s every move. The increased base of information, stored in the computer 
for access by the supervisor, led to tighter control and the potential for more reward and coercive power. 
After automation, the computer controlled operations previously performed by the operator. Losing physical 
contact with the machine reduced the operator s expert power. The manual skill was transformed into a 
thinking skill: an operator who could not adjust lost expert power. Legitimate and referent power were 
challenged by the manager s ability to understand the computerized operations and control the worker 
s tasks. The manager s effort to retain power was captured in the use of closed­loop systems designed 
to work without operator interference. Clearly, the system affected several aspects of personal power. 
Markus s (1983) study of the design and implementation of a financial information system (FIS) also illustrates 
shifts in personal sources of power. The system was designed to provide financial reporting for corporate 
accounting as well as provide profit and loss statementsfor each of the divisions within the company. 
Prior to system installation, each division produced its own financial statements and sent them to corporate 
accounting. After installation, division accountants input data directly to FIS. FIS produced summary 
statements sent to both corporate and divisional accounting groups. When production of the financial 
statements shifted from divisional to corporate control, the division accountant experienced a loss of 
several sources of personal power. First, the division accountant s knowledge was no longer needed to 
produce the financial statements, so s/be lost expert power to the FIS system. Second, the division accounting 
manager experienced a personal loss of legitimate power. Statements were produced under the Table 3: 
Summary of Power Distribution Effects Personal Sources Zuboff (1984) Markus (1983) Reward Coercive Legitimate 
Referent Expert Information Manager Manager Manager Worker Manager Worker Worker Manager + + + -* * -+ 
Corporate Accountant Corporate Accountant Corporate Accountant Division Accountant Division Accountant 
Division Accountant Corporate Accountant Division Accountant + + + -* -+ - Structural Sources Zuboff 
(1984) Markus (1983) Coping with Uncertainty Centrality in Workflow Substitutability Providing Resources 
Affect Decision Process Consensus Management Workers -Management Workers -Workers -Management Workers 
-Management Workers * + + + + Corporate Corporate Division Division Corporate Division Corporate Division 
+ + --+ -+ * NOTE: + indicates an increase in the power source -indicates a decrease in the pc)wer source 
* indicates that the power source was threatened control of the corporate accounting manager and sent 
to the division manager, rather than division staff producing, verifying and sending final statements 
to the corporate staff. Third, a corporate accountant could get a statement of division perfornumce at 
any time. Division staff could be called to explain problems with the statements that corporate retrieved, 
increasing corporate reward and coercive power over division accounts and managers. Finally, the corporate 
accountant s information power was increased at the expense of the division accountant. S/he could no 
longer adjust for special circumstances before forwarding summaries to the corporate accountant, since 
both received statements at the same time. Here again, there were several personal power explanations 
for individual resistance to the system. Structural Power Keen (198 1) stated Data are not merely an 
intellectual commodity but a political resource, whose redistribution through new information system 
affects the interests of particular groups. The same two studies can also be interpreted from a structural 
rather than personal perspective of power. Zuboff s (1984) study illustrates shifts in several structural 
sources of power. A shift in power as a result of changes in substitutability was evident. Being irreplaceable 
was no longer a source of power for the mill operators, since most of their knowledge was embedded in 
a computer system that would run without them. Dependency and responsibility shifted from the operator 
to the technology, bringing with it a change in the unit s ability to cope with uncertainty. Management 
controlled the mill operators decision processes by limiting the amount of information workers were given. 
We have not given the operators the skills they need to exercise this kind of judgment (to run the computer 
system) because we don t trust them (Zuboff 1984). Since information was a resource, the control over 
this process also represented a shifl in resource provision. Markus s (1983) study also demonstrates 
dramatic shifts in structural sources of power. The FIS system design affected several sources of structural 
power. First, FIS challenged structural authority within the company. Prior to FIS, divisions had a dotted 
line relationship with corporate accounting; results were summarized and forwarded to corporate. With 
FIS, detailed information was input directly to the system controlled by corporate. The dotted line relationship 
changed to a formal reporting relationship (although this was not acknowledged at the time of implementation). 
Second, corporate s access to detailed data disrupted the divisions centrality in the company information 
flow. Account data which had previously flowed from the division to corporate accounting now flowed in 
the other direction. Corporate had equal access to division results, in terms of both timing and level 
of detail. Third, corporate s access to division data increased their ability to cope with uncertainty. 
Having more detailed information in a timely manner gave them the ability to react quickly in times of 
uncertainty. Finally, the project team which determined requirements for the FIS design was composed 
entirely of individuals from corporate accounting. By excluding division accountants from the design 
team, the corporate accountants controlled the decision process. With complete control over the design 
decision process, it is not surprising that the system which was implemented favored corporate accounting. 
appropriate level of analysis when conducting research. A personal view of power helps explain the behavior 
of an individual within an organization. The structural view of power provides an understanding of groups 
within an organization or the organization as a whole. The analysis of power involving any information 
system that crosses departmental boundaries will require an organization level of analysis and a structural 
view of power. Second, personal sources of power can frequently be described in structural terms. For 
instance, Zuboff (1984) stated that workers had less power after automation because their actions were 
recorded and stored for access by the supervisor. Recording actions led to tighter control. Zuboff interpreted 
this as management s increased reward and coercive power over the worker. An alternative interpretation 
would be that automation reduced the workers centrality in the workflow and control over information 
-­ thereby reducing their power as a subunit. The second interpretation uses a structural view of power 
to explain the collective resistance of a group of workers. So the ultimate source of many forms of personal 
power may be structurally determined. Third, research evidence from IS case and field studies indicate 
that power problems often result from the structural changes in the organization implied by the IS design 
(Markus 1983, Zuboff 1984). The FIS design implied a structural change in the organization (a dotted 
line relationship formalized by the technology). This shifted power to the corporate accounting group. 
The mill control interface dramatically reinforced the structural reporting relationship between the 
mill worker and manager, shifting power away from mill workers. In both cases, changes in the distribution 
of power resulted from changes in the organization structure abetted by the IS design. STRUCTURAL VIEW 
OF POWER IN IS RESEARCH Both the Markus and Zuboff studies illustrate how the design of an IS can influence 
the distribution of power in an organization, as summarized in Table 3. Though the cases were interpreted 
from both structural and personal perspectives, the most functional view of power to use in IS design 
and implementation research is structural. Three arguments support this position. First, the underlying 
intent (whether undertaken for rational or political motives) of an information system is to support 
operations, management, or decision making in organizations (Davis and Olson, 1985). Resistance to changes 
in power distribution pose the greatest threat when multiple individuals or groups are involved with 
a system. Markus and Robey (1988) emphasized choosing an CONCLUSION Previous research into the relationship 
between IS and the distribution of power in an organization has concentrated on relations between the 
IS staff and the user organization. It also looked at macro power issues that may not directly apply 
to a specific IS. Though these issues are important it is essential that future research also investigate 
the issues surrounding shifts in power distribution among users. The cases we analyzed can be explained 
by shifts in personal or structural sources of power. In each case, shifts in personal sources of power 
result from shifts in structural sources of power; the personal shifts can be explained by the changes 
in the structural power distribution. Researchers should begin by examining structural power for clues 
to group actions and reactions. IS researchers should develop methods to assess both the distribution 
of structural power prior to implementation and that implied by the system design. Systems analysts should 
be trained to understand structural power implications and to use those power assessment methods which 
researchers develop. Understanding how a system design will affkct structural sources of power in an 
organization is vital. Does the design disrupt any group s centrality to the workflow? Does it change 
the information flow or reporting relationships in the organization? Does the clesign impair a group 
s ability to cope with uncertainty or provide critical resources to the company? Systems designers make 
explicit decisions which may reinforce or upset the distribution of user power, If they do not understand 
the fit between the distribution of power and IS designs, then implementation success may elude them 
in spite of a carefully managed development process, REFERENCES Baronas, A. M. and Louis, M., Restoring 
a Sense of Control During Implementation: How User Involvement Leads to System Acceptance, MIS Quarterly, 
12/1, 1988, pp. 111-124. Bjorn-Andersen, N., Eason, K. and Robey, D., Managing Comtmter ImtIact, 1986, 
Ablex Publishing Corporation. Bjom-Andersen, N., and Pedersen, p., Com[Puter Facilitated Changes in the 
Management Power Structure, Accountin~. Or~anizations and Society, 5, 1980, 203-216. Dahl, R. The Concept 
of Power, Behavioral Scienc&#38;, 2, 1957, pp. 201-215, Davis, G. and Olson, M., Management Information 
Systems: Conceptual Foundation, Structure, ~ Development, 1985, New York: McGraw Hill Publishers. Emerson, 
R., Power-Dependence Relations, American . Sociological Review, 27/1, 1962, pp. 31-41. French, J. and 
Raven, B., The Bases of Social Power, Studies in Social Power, D. Cartwright, ed., University of Michigan: 
Institute for Social Research, 1959, pp. 150­ 167. Hickson, D. J., Hinings, C. F., Lee, C. A., Schenck, 
R. H. and Pennings, J. M., A Strategic Continger~cies Theory of Intraorganizational Power, Adrninistr~ 
Science Ou arterlv, 16/2, 1971, pp. 216-229. Hinings, C. F., Hickson, D. J., Pennings, J. M. and Schenck, 
R. E., Structural Conditions of Intraorganizational Power, Administrative Science Q!@@L, 19/1, 1974, 
PP. 22-44. Joshi, K., The Measurement of Fairness or Equity Perceptions of Management Information Systems, 
 ~ @@!jJL 1313, 1989, pp. 343-358. Keen, P., Information Systems and Organizational Change, Communications 
of the ACM, 24/1, 1981, pp. 24-32. Kling, R., Social Analyses of Computing: Theoretical Perspective in 
Recent Empirical Research, Comnuting ti> 12/1, 19802 PP. 61-110. Kling, R. and Iacono, S., The Control 
of Information Systems Developments After Implementation, Communications of the ACM, 27/12, 1984, pp. 
1218-1226. Lucas, H., Organizational Power and the Information Services Department, Communications of 
the ACM, 27/1, 1984, pp. 58-65. Markus, M. L., Power, Politics, and MIS Implementation,  Communications 
of the ACM, 26/6, 1983, pp. 430-444. Markus, M. L. and Bjom-Andersen, N., Power Over Users: Its Exercise 
by System Professionals, Communications of the ACM, 30/6, 1987, pp. 498-504. Markus, M. L. and Pfeffer, 
J., Power and the Design and Implementation of Accounting and Control Systems, Accountin~. Or~anizations 
and Society, 8/2, 1983, pp. 205­ 218. Markus, M. L. and Robey, D., Rituals in Information System Design, 
 MIS Cluarterlv, 8/1, 1984, pp. 5-15. Markus, M. L. and Robey, D., Information Technology and Organimtional 
Change: Causal Structure in Theory and Research, Mana~ement Science, 34/5, 1988, pp. 583-598. Mintzberg, 
H., Power In and Around Organizations, 1983, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Newman, M. and Rosenberg, 
D., Systems Analysts and the Politics of Organizational Control, International Journal of Mana~ement 
Science, 13/5, 19S5, pp. 393-406. Pettigrew, A., Information Control as a Power Resource, Sociolo I?Y, 
6, 1972, 187-204. Pfeffer, J. and Salancik, G. ,The External Control of Organizations: A Resource Dependence 
Perspective, 1978, New York: Harper and Row. Pfeffer, J., Power in Ormnizations, 1981, Marshfield, MA: 
Pitman Publishing Inc. Provan, K. G., Recognizing, Measuring, and Interpreting the Potential/Enacted 
Power Distinction in Organizational Research, Academy of Management Review, 5/4, 1980, pp. 549-559. 
Raven, B., Social Influence and Power, Current Studies in Social Psychology , I. Steiner, Ed., New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965, pp. 371-392. Sahmcik, G. and Pfeffer, J., The Bases and Uses of Power 
in Organizational Decision Making: The Case of University, Administrative Science Ouarterly, 19/4, 1974, 
453-473. Saunders, C. and Scamell, R., Organizational Power and the Information Services Department: 
A Re-examination, Communications of the ACM, 29/2, 1986, pp. 142-147. Zuboff, S., In the Age of the 
Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power, 1984, New York: Basic Books Inc.
			