
 INFRASTRUCTURE FOR TELEWORK: ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION AT TEXACO Gerardine DeSanctis Fuqua School of 
Business, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 Brad M. Jackson World Wide Info. Services, Unisys Corporation, 
Sugarland, TX 77479 Marshall Scott Poole Texas A&#38;M University, College Station, TX 77843 Gary W. 
Dickson College of Management N C State University, Raleigh, NC 27695 ABSTRACT Support of global, cross-functional, 
and mobile workers in &#38; Snow, 1986, Nohria &#38; E.ccles 1992, Powell 1990). To a large organization 
requires f~ responsive, and highly contlont this challenge, many firms are embracing quality integrated 
electronic communication systems. This case PNWUIIS, m-b-management and the development illustrates the 
technical, social, and political complexities of integratML cross-functional systems and proce-sses. 
involved in developing such an infmshuctum in large Central to success in this transition is the establishment 
of fins. This study shows how the investment by Texaco a sophisticated electronic communication inhstructure. 
in the late 1980s in ehxtronic communications systems Electronic means of linking people and work activities 
enabled efficiencies in the divisional form of organization, across time and space barriers is vital 
to supporting but by the 1990s, this investment also served as a flexible, dispmed, and team-based forms 
of work constraint toward further change toward a nehvork form (Monge &#38; Fulk 1995). of organization. 
Although it is widely recognized that electronic INTRODUCTION communication systems fuel the growth and 
effectiveness of new organizational forms (Daft &#38; Lewin, 1993; The new era of global commerce and 
hypercompetition is Davidow &#38; Malone, 1993), few researchers have bringing enormous challenges to 
organizations. Large considered the complexities involved in such a transition. fums that not long ago 
were highly successful with In large multi-national fins, investments in matrix and divisionalized forms 
of managing are now communication Mias@ucture has been ongoing for year,x finding themselves confronted 
with a new imperative: and divisionalized forms of management have, in many undergo radical change in 
management structure and instances, resulted in sepamte and incompatible operations or risk dmmatic failure 
in the marketplace. communications systems spread throughout an enterprise. The pressure to move toward 
a network form of Moving from disparate systems to integrated ones is more organizing--and to so do rapidly--is 
overwhelming (M&#38;x than a matter of sheer economics. Social, political, and technical matters all 
confront the organization intent on building integrated and seamless electronic Permission to make digitalkwd 
copies of all or part of this material for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that the copies communication systems. The stress on business units, are not made or +stributed for pro~t 
or commercial advantage, the copy­ work groups, and individuals involved in this transition right n@lce, 
the .tltle of the pub~catlon and its date appear, and notice is gwen that copyright la by permission 
of the ACM, Inc. To copy olhcrwise, can be enormous (Davidow &#38; Malone, 1992). to republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific permission and/or fee. SIGCPR/ SIGMIS 96. Denver 
Colorado USA This case study illustrates some of the difficulties @1996 ACM o.89791;78~..o/96 /o4. .$3,50 
confronting large organizations as they attempt to build the communication inhstructure required to support 
the network form of organizing. The case describes one fro s experiences with implementing electronic 
mail, document sharing, and groupware products and the subsequent attempt to integrate these to accommodate 
cross-fimctional teams, mobile workers and other changes associated with a network form of organizing. 
BACKGROUND Texaco Inc Texaco is among the 20 largest publicly held corporations in the world and the 
third largest oil company in the United States. Founded in 1902, Texaco consists of four major divisions 
based on regional operations--Texaco USA, Texaco Middle East/Far East, Texaco Latin America/West Afii~ 
and Texaco Europe--which altogether employ about 35,(K)0 people. For many years, Texaco has been an aggressive 
and active user of information technology, from sophisticated software and hardware for running oil refineries, 
to multinational telecommunications lines for transporting credit card information, to leading-edge workstations 
for analyzing marketing and scientific data. Each major business unit within Texaco has its own information 
technology function, which provides computing and related support to that unit. Even within major business 
units, non­integrated information technologies existed (Ricluudson, Jackson, and Dickson, 1990). A coqxxate-level 
information technology department (l I D) provides service and support to the business units and to service 
units within world-wide Texaco. Electronic Communication at Texaco Texaco was an early user of computer-based 
communication systems, introducing electronic mail, bulletin boards, and conferencing systems on a number 
of mainframes and minicomputers in the early 1980s. For example, Texaco s exploration and producing units 
used Digital Ik@pment Corporation s VaxMail product on minicomputers starting in about 1982. During that 
same time Data General s CEO mail system was added to many of the minicomputers located in refineries. 
And in 1985 coqmatc ITD pilot-tested the mail package EMC2. By the mid 1980s PCs became an important, 
growing force in the corporation s computing environment. As in other companies. the linking of PCs to 
maint%mne and minicomputers--through other than dumb terminal mode-­pmved troublesome early o~ and it 
would be many years before smooth connectivity would be possible among PCs, mainframes, and minicomputers 
located across the entapriae. Because of internal demand, electronic communication strategies could not 
wait until the computer infrastructure rnatm@ and so electronic mail grew, first on local minicomputers, 
then on mainframes, and later on PC-based networks. Starting in 1985 ~~~mto~newldmnetwti (LAN) products 
for linking PCs together. Within a year, the department was deploying LANs throughout Texaco to support 
file sharing and printing among PCs, and to link PCs to mainframes. By the late 1980s, the vision in 
the IT D was to move from mainframe-centered applications to distributed computing which W up mainframes 
and LANs. PCs networked into LANs could handle many tasks in local units and allow those units to develop 
their own applications suited to their particular problems and contexts. These LANs would then be linked 
into a global network that included the corpmte mainiiames which wem used for tasks that they best performed, 
such as large database management and computing intensive applications. The goal was a more flexible, 
intelligent use of computing resoumes which would integmte Texaco s communication system. This vision, 
however, could not be realized instantly Texaco was such an immense organhation with varied levels of 
skill and computer equipment, that LANs and wide area networks had to be implemented gradually and experimentally. 
Over time, two levels of networking emerged within Texaco the global level and the local level. Globally, 
the company was linking mainframe computers within the United States and between the United States, Emope, 
Asia, and Africa Locally, the exploration, producing, refineries, and other departments were rapidly 
developing their own networks of minicomputers and PCs, and these local networks were not intedinked 
with other local networks, or with mainfnune networks. In the late 1980s, LAN technology was still in 
its infancy and could support only local architectures fw PCs, not global ones. The result was two strata 
of electronic communication, operadng side-by-side and having somewhat similar functions (see Appendix 
A). Corporate-Wide Electronic Communication At the global level, ITD began in the 1980s to make electronic 
communication available cmporate-wide via a centralized PROFS system. Since mainframe access was available 
to nearly all Texaco employees via the global netwd electronic mail sofiware could operate on a maint%une 
system, and users could access it via dumb terminals or with their PCs running in terminal emulation 
mode. PROFS quickly became-and remains today--the major corporate-wide electronic mail system available 
in Texaco. The value of the PROFS system is well recognized (All the quotations which follow come from 
interviews and surveys of Texaco employees conducted by the authors. Statement are reported anonymously 
to protect confidentiality of research participants and, consistent with Texaco cmpomte policy, specific 
references to currently marketed commercial products are reported only in the generic senses and marked 
<>. Otherwise the quotations are verbatim] PROFS is the most reliable source of communication available 
to me when working with foreign ofllces (Angola, Nigeria, etc.), because of the unreliability of phone 
and fax lines (in those countries). International electronic mail has proven to be our only reliable 
and hat means of communication with our office in Moscow, Russia. We use it every day. Units with employees 
spread across multiple facilities and units with a strong need to communicate with people in other units 
benefitted ilom the communication support of PROFS. Employees could call in from the field and from home 
to access the system. PROFS also appealed to units that did not want to set up their own (local) email 
systems, preferring the centmlized service provided by the corporate ITI). Local Electronic Communication 
Proliferation of PC-based LANs in the late 1980s stimulated the purchase of local email systems as well. 
As in many other companies during the late 1980s, management of LANs in Texaco became the domain of the 
business units who increasingly used them rather than the corporate information technology departmen~ 
Business units selected software to suit their needs, and did their own planning and S-usually with the 
assistance of their local information technology function. During this period, Texaco had shifted to 
a decentralized management stmctme in which business units were given wide latitude in determining business 
directions and operations. This structure provided flexibility and opportunity for innovation, but it 
also resulted in less technology standardktion for &#38;y-to-day business pmctices across the company. 
For computer-based communication, this meant the emergence of islands of automation in which the many 
office environments within Texaco were running email systems that met local needs nicely but which were 
incompatible with and isolated fi-om other LANs running throughout the company. By the early 1990s at 
least nine different email products were being used in Texaco. Emil use was spreading like wildfire throughout 
the company, and people were discovering the power of being able to electronically codinate with their 
co-workers. Besides the benefits of speed documentation, and asynchronous communication, electronic mail 
also served as the conduit for comdinating meetings, exchzinging files, and creating a sense of shared 
workspace for people who worked together We use end to distribute meeting minutes, announce meetings, 
and distribute agendas for the meedngs...and through the LAN we exchange files often to coordinate our 
projects. Before long, email became core to a suite of technologies supporting interpersonal communication 
at Texaco, including the telephone, voice mail, fax, audio and videoconferencing, and the intemet. In-by 
1994, in a survey of Texaco employees, electronic mail was rated as the single most important technology 
impacting productivity, next to the telephone. EVOLUTION FROM EMAIL TO GROUPWARE Electronic mail was 
only the beginning of the possibilities for computer-based communication within Texaco. Armed with WOrd 
processing, spreadsheets, and databases attheir desktops, andlocal amanetworks to linktheir dektops together, 
the next step for PC users was group­based communication. Beta testing for Imtus Notes (Notes) began 
in the corporate ITD in 1986. Notes supported shared files, worktlow design, and electronic conferencing. 
llrough Notes, members of teams could store information and keep each other inform@ even if they did 
not see each other regularly. Electronic conferencing was particularly important to cross-functional 
teams, whose members worked in different units, and to teams which spent a lot of time in the field, 
and therefore had problems meeting face-to-face with regularity. By 1991 L.aus Notes was in roll-out 
phase at Texaco, being installed on LANs throughout the company at the rate of nearly 100 new users per 
month, increasing to 200 per month in 1992. Lotus Notes required haiing-edge PC and nehvork technology 
in order to run smoothly, so many units elected not to adopt it because of the cost of replacing current 
equipment. Less expensive systems, such as VisionQuesg Banyan Mail, and Microsoft mail were installed 
in some units, to support file sharing, scheduling, and primitive confimncing. Nearly all units were 
adopting some form of groupware by the early 1990s, whether primitive (as in document sharing) or sophisticated 
(as in workflow management). A key factor in the demand-pull for groupware was the start of Texaco s 
quality program in 1989, which increasingly incoprated a team-based management structure. This was the 
begimdng of a major shift from a hierarchical form of management to a team-based structure, and it created 
a tremendous need for interpersonal communication and inter-team coordination. Individuals who had previously 
worked on independent tasks, reporting to a single supavisor, now had to plan their progress, monitor 
their outputs, and coordinate their daily work with a group of co-workers. Conflicting approaches to 
getting the job done had to be resolved among team members, and members had to devise ways to share infmmation 
and pass work inputs and outputs to one another. Though some teams resorted to face-to-fhce meetings, 
office conversations, and manual document sharing to coordinate with one another, many othen came to 
rely on electronic communication, particularly groupware. User comments with regard to groupware are 
illustrated by the following commentx <The SyS&#38;llD has helped kMITIS -y Collect and use information 
pmtinent to the team goal. It also helps to coordinate actions and provides a single point of contact 
for all team members to pass ideas. <The system has greatly benefited coordination of team activities. 
Tluough the use of the public Team Activities template, all team members can contribute to future meeting 
agendas, track action items, and keep current on team decisions, etc. <The system has been very useful 
in transfeming data files, programs, some code, etc. behveen team members. <The system is useful for 
general iiio about the pulse of the company and computer industry. Communication twmss business units 
and subunits also increased following the quality initiative, since team­based management required each 
team to actively link its work to those of other individuals or teams in Texaco s upstream or dOWflMtIUiIll 
product Chill. Although electronic mail became an obvious conduit for coordination, groupware offered 
a richer communication environment We use <the system as a problem tmckin@esolution tool for support 
of our process automation system. Also, seveml of our teams use Notes as an information Aarin#diacussion 
data base allowing our refq customers in seven sites across the U.S. to interact with us on a daily basis. 
<he systeum has helped each team that I have participated with to sham information with team members 
and external teams. For instance, in the past eight months (me team that I work with has developed a 
database to hold the team s history, problems, and solutions. Since this team is primrily designed to 
be a service to the entire ITD departmen~ the database helped to increase the tMdS visibility and accountability 
along with mom outside (non-team members) participation. (Previously, the team had stored this same information 
in a big binder that only a few people had access to and few people were aware of.) Insure, asemail wasgmvingin 
popuhrity, so too was groupware. Organizational demands for coordination, coupled with ever increasing 
numbers of PCs and LANs tight the company, operated as joint social and technical f-for increased electronic 
communication at Texaco. ELECTRONIC COORDINATION OR ELECTRONIC CHAOS? By 1993 Texaco had invested over 
$100 million in electronic communication technology of one form or another, and in the training, selwices, 
and support smmmding it. Increasing levels of desktop technology were continually being rolled out to 
mom people, and networks wem busy with ever-inmasing volumes of electronic communication traffic. But 
the two srrata of (communication) networking had not yet merged. Although sane units could communication 
via Lotus Notes and email systems, no one system was available worldwide. PROFS remained the major electronic 
highway fw global, corpmwte-wide communicatioxx but it was mainllamebased, and users increasingly preferred 
tild-dof~s d~s, tietikge~mtie functionality and ease of use of these technologies. As workers became 
mm mobile and faced greater demands to interiink work tasks across units, there was pressure to take 
groupware facilities world-wide. The need for cross­organizational communication was intensifying, but 
unfortunately, this was not easily done in the decenhwlized LAN-based world that had evolved. The islands 
of ema.il had grown large and plentiful, and there was no smooth navigational chart for integrating them. 
My work involves communication with engineers in a variety of Texaco departments. But because IT is so 
decen-we re all on different electronic mail systems. If I want to send the same memo to three people, 
I may have to send it as many as three times using three different hardware and software platforms because 
we all use different systems! There are too many electronic mail systems at Texaco, every unit uses a 
different one to communicate. It is difficult ta keep up to date on all of them. Mail @ins to stack up 
and important documents get lost in the mess. A manager in the Western Exploration and Producing Division 
who was in the production group observed Since migrating from PROFS to <the system, I can send a document 
to Midland (Texas) or Sacramento (California), but I can t send one across the street to someone in the 
exploration group [which is on Banyan Mail]. ~echnically, it was possible, but see the following section]. 
Electronic communication had progressed to the point of ultimate paradox: entail use was pervasive, yet 
many employees could not satisfacton ly communicate with one another. File and document exchange among 
various LANs was cumbersome for some and impossible for others. THE STRUGGLE WITH CHANGING THE INFRASTRUCTURE 
Migration to an integrated communication Miashucture involved a series of stages, moving from a focus 
on technical issues to a gradual focus on building Mationships among businem units and a consensus­oriented 
approach to systems integmtion. Stage 1: A Software Approach In 1988 corporate ITD installed a software 
gateway, known as Softswitch, which allowed fde transfer and translation between ernail systems. Using 
SoftSwitch, for example, a Banyan etnail user in Houston could send a message to a Lotus Notes mail user 
in New Orleans transparent to the user, Softmvitch would translate the message to Lotus Notes format 
and route it to the appropriate place. But the Softswitch translation was perceived as cumbersome and 
unacceptable to many users, who preferred that their co-workers use the same office software systems 
as they did, for easy exchange of files, w and messages. Linking systems ad hoc proved inadequate. There 
was a need for an integmted communication infmtmc ture. Stage 2: Push for a Standard By the early 1990s, 
pressure to migrate to a standard communication system was growing, and Texaco managers found themselves 
confronted with the classic conllict between centralid and decentmlized forms of organizing. The global 
level networks were centmlly managtxL and the local networks were decenhwlized Would it be possible to 
impose some orderly Mmstructure onthechaos thathad emerged inthe business units? Everyone was calling 
for standards, but no one standmd was aueptable. As one observer put it, Everyone is basically saying, 
I think we need stanti, everyone else should use mine! The distributed systems architecture, coupled 
with Texaco s commitment to decen@alizc@ flexible management practices, meant that conversion to a single 
wporate-wide standard was muealistic. Issues of cot% training, and learning were to accompany any coqmrate-wide 
transition. It was clear that some deep attention had to be given to the political tension of reconciling 
local business unit needs with the requirement for a global communication architecture. The signifiit 
cost differences between a groupware-based standard and an email-based standard had to be taken into 
consideration when deciding which user groups requirements would be met. Stage 3: Consensus-oriented 
Ptanning A series of mundtable meetings were held in which the directors of information technology fkom 
the various operating units discussed common problems and issues with one another. Then, in 1992, corporate 
ITD formed a cross-functional team consisting of 16 people from the various businem unit information 
technology functions and chaired by the general manager of corporate information technology. This team, 
called the Information Planning Group (IPG), had the general goal of achieving synergy among the many 
information technology groups throughout Texaco. The IPGteam wasused asamechanism to spawn other cross-functional 
teams. Major areas in need of cross­functional coordination were identitled, and a series of subteams 
were established to addreM each area. Each subtciun was responsible for defining its own objectives, 
StlZ@@S, and operating approach. Each subteam included one IPG member, with the rest of the members constituting 
a collection of technology professionals from across Texaco. The subtcams reported to the IPG, but, as 
before, there were no fomlal reporting relationships across information technology uniw, participation 
in the ~ and subteams WSS vohmtiwy. one subteam WttS particularly important to shaping Organintional 
communication at Texaw the email subteam. The emaii subteam initially worked on identifying requirements 
for a corporate emaii system. If the team could get consensus on system requirements, the next step would 
be to evaluate vendor products meeting those requirements and select one to serve as Texaco s standard. 
Business units that were not using the selected standard preduct would have to agree to migrate to that 
product over time. After about a year of meetings and intense analyses of the electronic communications 
dilemma two major camps were forming, both within the team and across Texaco. On one side were the btus 
Notes users, who were continually growing in numbers and were fervently devoted to their product. Notes 
was not an emaii package per se, but it contained an adequate (some would say minimal) emaii fhciiity 
which enabled communication and file sharing among the many Notes users across Texaco. Opposing the Lotus 
Notes camp wexe those who advocated migration to a product suite, which was believed to be simpler, cheaper, 
and easier to support and use than Notes. Mlllly users of Banyan, ~, and VaxMail wem gradually shifting 
to Microsoft Mail, as they standardkd on Microsoft products for desktop and ofilce applications. Lotus 
Notes users argued that, although their product was more expensive and complicated to manage, it was 
far richer in capability, offering a full range of groupware facilities that were not available in Microsoft 
mail. (Mm and Microsoft were competing not only in the marketplace of the software industry, it seems 
they tdso were competing within the ofikes and netsvorks of large coqmrations like Texaco.) A feud was 
brewing, and though the stakes were down to two major products, sentiments were deep on each side, and 
systems integration proved to be a formidable technical and political challenge. Stage 4: Layera of Standards 
Over time, the email subteam came to the conclusion that the goal of a single, enterprise-wide product 
for electronic communication was probably not going to be met in the short term. Instead, they decided 
that rather than products, they would focus on protocol standards that productsmust meet. They identified 
three iayers of technology ciien~ server, and network backbone for which standards had to be specifki. 
The emaii feud had been centered around products at the client level. But if thethree layers couidbe 
logically sepmte&#38;thenusexs could choose their preftxred system to run at the client level, and @nddizW 
on could take place at the server and backbone levels. Foiiowing this line of reasoning, thedecision 
to bemadeby theemaiisubteam wasnot selection of an emaii package but selection of a standard messaging 
protocol for exchange of information through the network which particular products must satisfy. In 1994, 
the email team decided on the Messaging App-m Rogramming Iaterf= (MAPI) protocol as Texaco s corpmte 
messaging standmd. The recommendation was made to the IFG, and eventually approve4 that Texaco should 
migrate toward products that met the MAPI atandad The integmtion issue was considered resolved for the 
time being, and the team disbanded. It would now be possible to move toward an integrated electronic 
communication infrastructure, right? wrong. Current Status: Persistent Differences Despite consensus 
in the IF(3 and emaii planning groups, user practices had taken on a life of their own. Diversity of 
needs and autonomy in work teams led to strong user preferences that could not be shaken. Although there 
was budness unit participation in the centmiised planning of the IPO, technology and work had become 
so intertwined in many individual teams that migration to new products was increasingly redated, partictiy 
among b NOtCS users. Microsoft s lower pxices and anticipated use of MAPI wem enough reason for many 
Texaco teams to migrate to Microsoft Mail and other Microsoft products,-­andtoadvocate thatothers inthecorpomtion 
doti same. At the same time, Lotus Notes users within Texaco wem not about to abandon their product for 
what they pemeived to be the les rich Microsotl Mail product. Commitment by L@us to MAPI was mwertam 
,andin 1995, Lotus was pumhased by IBM, bringing additional uncertdty about their conformance to MAPI. 
Nevertheless, Lotus Notes instaliadons continued to gmw within Texaco through 1995, and there is no apparent 
change in this trend. As of this writing, the only global communication system available to ail Texaco 
employees is PROFS. LESSONS LEARNED FiOmtkwork described intidspaper, themareiessons learned in two areas, 
practice and the study of changing organizational forms. These are summarized below. Lessons for Practice 
Texaco provides an excellent example of a complex, global organizadon that is seeking to utilize an electronic 
communication infmtmcture to make the transition to a network type of organizadon. This case illustrates 
how the investment by Texaco in electronic communication enabled efficiencies in the divisional form 
in the 1980s, but actually served as a constraint toward fiuther change in the 1990s. The organization 
carried a certain amount of technical baggage associated with the old divisional form, and the systems 
of the prior era were expensive and difficult to integraw, complete replacement with a new stadard was 
nearly impossl%le, given cost constraints and the large sixe of the orgmization. The implication is as 
follows o Technical constraints associated with older organizational forms can represent significant 
barriers to effectively utilizing electronic communication to migrate to new organizational forms. Further 
complicating the situation at Texaco were social and political factors. IrI this instance, people had 
a large amount of ineti regarding leaving a well-known technology and learning a new one. In fac4 divisions 
adopted their technological favorite, thus creating interdivisiomd political battles. Resolution of these 
W= crucial to building a mporate-level communication Miastructure. o An inexorable relationship now 
exists between flexibilities in an organization s technology, its managemen~ and technology users, and 
the organization s ability to dynamically shift its form over time.  In the past, managers could make 
decisions on organizational form firsL and allow information technology to foilow form; for example, 
decentralization of decision making could be instituted almost without respect to technology. Now, however, 
the stakes of flexibility are too high to fail to take the issue of centmlized technical standards and 
planning into account in determining policies regarding who can decide what regarding communication technologies. 
Lessons for Research This case study emerged from a six-year relationship behveen academic researchers 
and Texaco personnel. The relationship was many faceted, starting with installation within Texaco of 
a group decision support software product developed by the academic team; and ultimately leading to a 
joint three-year study of four Texaco businem units and their use of electronic communication. During 
this time periti many trips were made by members of the research teamtounitsof Texaco, and Texaco personnel 
came repeatedly to the university research site. Our case study is based on interviews, questimmaires, 
and observation over this very lengthy period. Although the direct quotes were taken from interviews 
and surveys conducted as part of the longitudinal research pjec~ ti Te=o study goes far beyond the normal 
data gathering approach. There was a rich, long-term interaction between the university research team 
and the industry personnel. This paper, like several others, is a joint product of people at Texaco working 
with the lUliVtXSity research @KXlp In sho~ this paper represents observations made over a fairly long 
time period and involves people internal and external to Texaco. We think that this sort of relationship 
and appruach differs h most studies and represents a rare opptunity for studying organizations in depth, 
over long time periods. CONCLUSION As social technology researchers have so eloquently argued, electronic 
communication systems can serve as both enablers and constraints of organization form (e.g., Davidow 
&#38; Malone, 19%2 Desanctis &#38; Poole, 1994; Fulk &#38; De&#38;nctis, 1995; Thomas, 1994). As a resul~ 
organizations such as Texaco conhnt the dual challenge of reacting to a moving technical frontier, on 
the one han~ and a dynamic organizational environment at the same time. Movement from cenmalized to decentmlized 
forms of managemen~ development of prefemed practices within WOlk =S, and continual shifts in K@rthg 
relationships which create learning demands and srress on workers, all act as conatmm tsonafirm s transition 
toa sophisticated electronic communication infrastructure. Our case highlights the difficulty of realizing 
the integrated electronic communication infrastructure required to support new organizational forms and 
the need for more systematic research and aid to organizations who are struggling with this issue. REFERENCES 
APPENDIX A Daft R L., and Lewin, A. Y. Where are the New organizational forms? ~ , 3(4),, A History of 
Electronic Communication at Texaco December, 1993, pp. 513-528. Davidow, w. I-L and Malone, M. s. m 
Vw ~, Harper Business, New York, 1992. DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M.S. Capturing the complexity in advanced 
technology use adaptive structuration theory, ~, . . 5(2), Mtty, 1994, pp. 121-147. Fulk, J. and DeSanctis, 
G. Electronic communication and changing organizational forms, ~~, 6(l), February, 1995, pp. 1-13. Monge, 
P.R. and F-J. Global network organizations, A paper presented to the International Communication Association, 
Albuquerque, NM, May, 1995. Miles, R. E. and Snow, C.C. Network organizations New concepts for new forms, 
@ifomia ~nt ~k@aL 28(l), January, 1986, pp. 62-73. .. Nohria, N. and Eccks, ~ and O@W@QtM Harvard Business 
School Press, Boston, 1992. Powell, W. W. Neither market nor hierarchy Network forms of organization, 
in ~ in ~ ~, edited by LL. Cummings and B. M. Straw, 12, December, 1990, pp. 295--336. Richardson, G., 
Jackson, B., and Dickson, G. A principles-based enterpriw architecturtx Lessons learned ftom Texaco and 
Star Enterprise, ~, 14(4), December, 1990, pp. 385403. *--- Thomas, R J. ~ Do. Pol lllGWld Technolow 
in ~, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1994. .. Williamson, O. E. ~m .. . fititrust MDka.@na. 
A Q@ in the Econom.cs d .. Internal Orram_, Free Press, New York, ~975. 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 
1992 Initial testing begins of token ring local area networks to link personal computers First groupware 
product is used The coordinator. ITD begins to deploy local area networks throughout the company to support 
file sharing and @Ming among KS, and to ~ ~S to mainframes. Beta testing of Lotus Notes begins. PROFS 
is installed and quickly becomes available corporate-wide. Information technology function is decentmlized. 
Islands of email emerge as business units insiall various email packages on their minicomputer networks 
and LANs. The Softswitch SySttXIl is illStdkd to interconnect disparate email systems. Quality process 
is introduced and team-based management begins. By now, bushess units have acquired a range of software 
applications for their desktop computers and LA?@ demand for ability to exchange information (email, 
fdes, databases) grows. Law Notes begins to roll out throughout the company other groupware systems 
am used on a trial basis. Multiple electronic mail systems are used across business units Vax Mail, 
Unix Mail, Banyain mail, Lotus Notes mail, CEO, Microsoft Mail, etc.; Softswitch is available to interconnect 
ernoit, but support in the business units is uneven, and many users remain unaware or unable to send 
mail across systems. Fmstration mounts. LoW Notes use gI OWSto 2000 users. Cross-functional Information 
Planning Group is formed. A subgroup is formed to address the email problem. 1993 Lotus Notes use grows 
to 5000 usem, other fmwwe systems are implemented systems on a more limited basis. 1994 The Messaging 
Application Programming Interface (MAPI) is selected as the corporate messaging standard. The decision 
is made to migrate toward products that meet the MAPI stanti though few do at the time. Both Microsoft 
and Lotus promise MAPI products. 1995 Some business units migrate from Banyan, CEO, etc., to Microsoft 
M@ others add Lotus Notes. Tension intensifies between those desiring standardhadon on Microsoft products 
and those preferring Lotus Notes. 1995-1998 Integration or migration? Texaco has a common directi~ (MAPI 
standard) but not a common product. Will vendor developments provide smooth integration of competing 
communication products? Mom importantly, will diverse work groups agree on a common Wastructure for linking 
one another together? ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank the Information Technology Department of Texaco 
Inc, particularly Ed McDonald, for the oppomnity to conduct this case study. We also would like to acknowledge 
the assistant of Dr. Gary Richardson of Texaco. The mearch was supported by National Science Foundation 
Award SES-9109167 and by a grant from Texaco Inc. The views expressed here are solely those of the authors 
and not of the research sponsors.
			