
 Instituting and Advocating Technology Training and Sharing of Ideas for Online Courseware Donna Patterson 
Valparaiso University User Support Specialist Schnabel 36 C Valparaiso, Indiana 46383 (219) 464-5507 
donna.patterson@valpo.edu ABSTRACT How can you invite and encourage faculty to share their knowledge 
and ideas about courseware? A successful faculty technology training program promotes interdepartmental 
collaboration and sharing of such information. This presentation will focus on key strategies used to 
promote technology sharing amongst faculty while assisting in courseware implementation, training, documentation, 
and support. The issue of courseware purchase is not a unique one. Most universities have had an online 
presence for some time. The issues at hand in the decision of purchasing courseware for our university 
was: Resource limitations  Size of faculty and staff  Late adoption of courseware  Courses of action 
decided upon and taken to accomplish this goal included training of those who would instruct faculty, 
creating documentation, providing faculty workshops and other various support services. Categories and 
Subject Descriptors K.3.1 Computer Uses in Education  General Terms Documentation Keywords Courseware, 
training, documentation, collaboration 1. Introduction A successful faculty technology training program 
promotes interdepartmental collaboration and sharing of such information. In January 2001, Valparaiso 
University Courseware Selection Committee chose to purchase and institute Prometheus online courseware 
by March 2001. This decision came with a challenge to have faculty trained and courses activated by Summer 
Session I Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGUCCS 03, September 21 24, 2003, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA. ACM 1-58113-665-X/03/0009. (May 22, 2001). Two years after our adoption of Prometheus, Blackboard 
Inc acquired Prometheus and a secondary training challenge began. 2. Key Strategies The course of action 
decided upon and taken to accomplish this goal consisted of Electronic Information Services/Instructional 
User Support soliciting the services of University Instructional librarians, Courseware Administrators, 
and pioneering faculty. Each contributed expertise, experiences, and expectations to formulate the key 
strategies of training, workshops, open labs, mailing list, documentation, and support. 2.1 Training 
Training objectives were accomplished by segmenting the courseware community into two specific levels 
of information support and delivery. Each community was challenged with its specific goals. Each community 
worked together to obtain the initial goal of implementing and sharing courseware knowledge. 2.1.1 Technology 
Team This team consisted of Electronic Information Services/ Instructional User support collaborating 
with University Instructional Librarians, supported by Courseware Administrators. The main purpose of 
this team was to receive first level training of courseware and become first level information delivery. 
 2.1.2 Faculty Faculty participation in courseware usage is essential to a successful interdepartmental 
collaboration Eight pioneering faculty were selected to test the courseware implemented. The main objective 
of the faculty was to review, advise, and support the courseware training team in regards to faculty 
overall perception and technological and pedagogical needs to complete a successful courseware implementation.. 
 2.2 Workshops Faculty workshops were scheduled for courseware training. Faculty received a stipend 
certificate for attending training. Test faculty were invited to share their experiences, courses, and 
how­to s by showcasing their online course to workshop attendees. This proved to be extremely motivational 
and inspiring for those in the workshop. First-hand pedagogical questions and concerns were addressed, 
along with technical training. Workshop schedule consisted of morning technical training followed by 
a faculty showcase. A lunch, graciously provided by the provost s office, further encouraged faculty 
sharing of concerns about multiple sections, online testing, creative delivery of content, and class 
community. Afternoon hands-on help was provided for those who wished to begin creating and online presence 
immediately. 2.3 Open Labs To address the issue of providing one on one consultation and troubleshooting, 
courseware open labs were offered. These open labs were made available strategically to faculty days 
before and after the beginning of the semester. The open lab environment provided individual consideration 
and consulting to faculty requiring additional information, support, or technical assistance. 2.4 Mailing 
List A courseware mailing list was instituted allowing faculty and staff to communicate asynchronously 
and inform, advise, and troubleshoot through sharing of experiences. 2.5 Documentation Faculty attending 
workshop sessions received with step by step documentation on creating an online course. Electronic Information 
Services/Instructional User Support created FAQ s, and troubleshooting documentation along with workshop 
session documentation. All support documentation was available to the Valparaiso University community 
via website. 2.6 Support Creating and maintaining technical support dramatically impacts the success 
of any courseware implementation. At the beginning of the courseware implementation, Instructional User 
Support met with the Help Desk staff and coordinated special training sessions to train Help Desk staff 
and student workers. The guiding principle of this training was that the courseware itself was used to 
create a training program for support staff. A sample course was created and the entire support staff 
had access to the course, which by example guided them through all aspects of creating an online course, 
while supplying troubleshooting techniques. This course was a key tool in addressing and answering faculty 
and student questions.  3. Summary The challenge of courseware adoption and implementation takes multilevel 
collaboration and cooperation. Knowledge gained from initial courseware adoption was instrumental in 
the secondary challenge of implementing and adoption of yet another courseware program. Using key training 
strategies not only promoted an initial courseware implementation success, but also set the groundwork 
for secondary adoption. Faculty were anxious to pioneer yet another courseware and mentor, advise, and 
assist colleagues. Technical staff had a proven successful plan of action for training, documentation, 
and support. 4. Acknowledgments The presenter wishes to extend her sincere appreciation and thanks to 
many Valparaiso University associates, especially the following: Dr. Katharine Antommaria-Ingham, Director 
of Teaching Resource Center, and Dr. Renu Juneja, Associate Provost, for their endless support in courseware 
adoption and participation. To the pioneering eight faculty who graciously donated their time and effort 
while becoming courseware ambassadors and mentors to colleagues: Dr. Dan Arkkelin, Dr. Mary Christ, Dr. 
Mark Farmer, Dr. Del Gillispie, Dr. Doug Kocher, Dr. Carole Pepa, Dr. Ann Reiser, and Dr. David Truemper. 
Thanks to the technology team of Electronic Information Services/Instructional User Support and University 
Instructional Librarians for successful implementation and support.  
			