
 INTERNAL AUDIT: A USER OF COMPUTER-BASED INFORMATION SYSTEMS James G. Vincent Southeast Banking Corporation 
Miami, Florida ABSTRACT With the advent of data communications, computer-based in- formation systems 
became more user-oriented. At Southeast Banking Corporation, internal auditors interact with infor- 
mation systems on a continuous basis via audit software. Auditors who participate in the development 
of new systems are employing "preventive auditing" techniques and are re- sponsible for ensuring that 
adequate auditability/control- ability features are built into the system. The auditor reviews systems 
in order to render an opinion of the ade- quacy of the organization's system of internal controls. This 
implies that the auditor is, in fact, a "user" of data produced by computer-based information systems. 
 INTRODUCTION The growth in data processing over the years has been pheno- menal. The use of data communications 
to connect processing facilities at many locations is only one example of how new technology has complicated 
auditing and control. The number of data communications terminals installed was less than 250,000 in 
1970, but by the end of 1975, the figure was al- most a million. A further jump to three million terminals 
is expected by 1980, thus multiplying the number of locations subject to control and audit. At Southeast 
Banking Corporation, traditional systems were designed with the thought in mind of processing one parti- 
cular application, e.g., Demand Deposit, Savings or Commer- cial Loan. Advanced computer-based information 
systems 41 perform multiple functions simultaneously and cross depart- mental boundaries. In some instances, 
advanced systems in- teract directly with advanced systems of other banks and corporations, e.g., Automatic 
Clearing House (ACH) . These systems may lead to increased efficiency and effective in- formation management, 
but they also require new approaches pertaining to control and audit problems. Such sophistica- tion 
frequently makes it impractical to use traditional con- trol and audit techniques developed for, and 
appropriate to, earlier systems. Advanced systems generally consist of one or more of the following characteristics: 
 o Data communications  o Data base management  o Automatic transaction initiation  With the advent 
of data communications, computer-based in- formation systems became more user-oriented (e.g., computer 
operator was not needed to execute jobs, user has the abi- lity to execute his jobs via a terminal when 
needed). The third and fourth generation computer systems facilitate re- mote data entry and effective 
development, and use of new software for users at all organizational levels including: top management, 
first-level managers, operations personnel, clerical personnel, EDP personnel, auditors, etc. These activities 
were made possible as a result of advances in computer technology as follows: I "The operationalization 
of the unique file system that now makes it possible for the computer system to provide program libraries 
and data files dynamically without operator assistance." "Development of user query languages that allow 
the user to have access to the con- tents of authorized files and to develop and execute special routines 
for manipulating the data they contain." o "Economical use of telecommunication systems without specialized 
training." iAwad, Elias M., Introduction to Computers in Busi- ness, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1977, p. 80. 
 These trends suggest that "no individual or group of indivi- duals knows at any given time which application 
is being pro- cessed by the system or for whom it is doing the processing." The situation makes the detection 
of fraud, theft, or system failure more difficult. It is common knowledge that the ul- timate responsibility 
of safeguarding the assets of the cor- poration rests with the internal auditors. Perhaps the most widely 
publicized computer case involving a banking system was a $1.5 million embezzlement from a ma- jor eastern 
savings bank. One of the reported facets of the creative embezzler's modus operandi was the use of a 
computer terminal. As a supervisory teller, the embezzler was able to use features of the system (including 
overrides) not known to other tellers or even to some bank officials. I In the past, auditors and data 
processing professionals have emphasized an "after-the-fact" approach in auditing new computer-based 
information systems. This methodology is outdated. In keeping with changing times, today's ap- proach 
is that of "preventive auditing." Recognizing the embryonic "State-of-the-Art" in systems auditing, 
I have elected to produce this paper in order to identify how auditors as users interact with computer-based 
information systems and, in addition, establish specific guidelines to be used by auditors who are involved 
in the development of new systems. Emphasis is placed on identifying the various users of computer-based 
information systems, reasons for audit involvement, establishing audit checkpoints, specifying auditability 
and controlability features, etc. iEDP Auditing: Expectations vs. Reality, William E. Perry, H.C. Warner, 
The Magazine of Bank Administration, March, 1979. 43 USERS OF COMPUTER-BASED INFORMATION SYSTEMS The 
term user refers to any individual who has a direct in- terest in, and authorized use of, the information 
which is part of the systems data base. The major elements of com- puter-based information systems 
are users, processes and data.* Users -"There are internal personnel at all levels and outsiders who 
prepare and require information through interaction with the system. This information consists of data 
related to past or future events presented in a format that is understandable and meaningful to the specific 
user." Processess -"The techniques, procedures, programs, or other steps that translate the user's request 
into the information required to perform a given job function." Data -"The stored representation of 
the events, records, plans, policies, procedures and programs." Users may interact with computer-based 
information systems either directly through terminals or other kinds of input, or indirectly through 
predefined processes that are part of another computer system that is in direct contact with the primary 
computer (e.g., auditors are now using terminals for modifying audit software and executing jobs when 
needed. Audit software is used to access data in order to print confirmations and generate special reports). 
 Users of computer-based information systems can be classified into the following categories: management, 
systems analysts, operations personnel, application programmers, system pro- grammers, EDP control personnel, 
computer operators and auditors. These users interact with computer-based informa- tion systems as follows: 
 Management -This group is primarily involved in the planning and control aspects of the enterprise. 
 Systems Analysts -Individuals responsible for as- sisting management in the areas of analysis, planning 
and reporting. 1Management, Control and Audit of Advanced EDP Systems, AICPA, 1979. Operations Personnel 
-Individuals primarily concerned with entering, updating, retrieving and processing data. Application 
Programmers -Develop the requires software in order to translate the data into the information required 
for planning, control and operational purposes. System Programmers -Generate, update and modify sys- 
tems software normally furnished by the hardware vendor. EDP Control Personnel -Responsible for safeguarding 
the EDP environment including the creation and changes to the corporate data base. Computer Operators 
-Primarily responsible for moni- toring and controlling the computer hardware. Auditors -This group 
includes both the internal and external auditor. Internal auditing is a managerial control which functions 
by measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of other con- trols. This encompasses reviews of manual 
systems as well as automated systems. Auditors who perform system develop- ment reviews are responsible 
for ensuring that adequate auditability/controlability features are built into the system. Subsequent 
reviews are also required after the system becomes operational in order to ensure that the in- formation 
being reported is reasonable and accurate. Upon conclusion of the audit, the auditor must give an opinion 
regarding the adequacy of the overall system of internal controls. Specialized audit software is available 
to audi- tors in performing audits of systems which are operational. At Southeast, we use audit software 
to produce special re- ports similar to those referred to herein. o Commercial Loan -loan stratification 
in $100,000 increments, frequency of various commercial loan rates. Certificates of Deposit -report 
reflects those accounts in violation of Regulation Q (e.g., excessive interest rates). REASONS FOR 
AUDIT INVOLVEMENT Changes in internal audit activities and data processing technology have occurred 
concurrently with the expansion of both Government requirements and management's information needs. In 
the beginning, Internal Audit's main purposes were the safeguarding of company assets and the detection 
of fraud. As time passed, financial auditing gained im- portance in order to reduce the cost of external 
audit. Then, as operations grew more complex and decentralized, operational auditing achieved recognition. 
Management auditing has recently become popular, in part because of the tremendous size of today's corporation 
and the resultant need for a coordinated management effort. Throughout this evolution, Internal Audit 
has remained in a reactive mode. Historically, it has responded "after the fact." Today we are moving 
into an era of "preventive auditing." This new methodology denotes Internal Audit involvement during 
the development of new systems. The Internal Audit Function Internal auditors at Southeast are presently 
practicing preventive auditing techniques. The philosophy behind this approach is that internal auditors 
should try to work with others in the organization by making constructive recommenda- tions before a 
breakdown occurs in the overall system of in- ternal controls. Our department is divided in two sections; 
financial auditors and EDP auditors. Both sections report to the General Auditor who, in turn, reports 
directly to the Chairman and the Audit Committee of the Board of Direc- tors being audited. Independence 
is extremely important in order to be effective. In addition, support from top man- agement and the Audit 
Committee is vital. Auditors have been referred to as the 'eyes and ears of the Board', direc- tors want 
independent assurance that their policies are being complied with and that they can rely on the bank's 
financial statements. With the passage of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, directors can now 
be held liable for whatever happens within an organization. The Act applies solely to companies subject 
to the reporting requirements of the Securities Ex- change Act of 1934. One of the provisions in the 
Act esta- blished certain standards with respect to a company's books and records, and of significant 
importance, the system of internal accounting controls. The Act requires that the overall system of 
internal controls should provide reason- able assurances that the following mandates, as provided for 
in the Act, are being adhered to: I o "Transactions are executed in accordance with management's specific 
authorization." O "Transactions are recorded as necessary (a) to permit preparation of financial statements 
in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles or other applicable criteria, and (b) to 
maintain accountability for its assets." o "Access to assets is permitted only in accordance with management 
authorization." O "The recorded accountability for assets is compared with existing assets at reasonable 
 intervals and appropriate action is taken with respect to any differences." While the financial auditors 
are primarily concerned with operational audits and appraising the accuracy and reliabi- lity of financial 
statements and information, EDP auditors are primarily involved in systems development/physical secu- 
rity, reviews and ongoing audits of computerized systems. EDP auditors also produce confirmations and 
special reports upon request of the financial auditor. Determining the ade- quacy of internal controls, 
promoting operating efficiency and ascertaining compliance with laws, regulations and man- agement policy 
is, however, an ongoing responsibility of both the financial auditor and the EDP auditor. Auditor's 
Role As A User Due to the high degree of concentration of data and finan- cial assets in computer-based 
information systems of ever- increasing complexity, corporate management, auditors and iRicchiute, David 
N., The Internal Auditor, Dec., 1978. system managers have a definite stake in the quality and reliability 
of new systems. As previously discussed, the auditor is responsible for reviewing computer-based informa- 
 tion systems in order to render an opinion of the organiza- tion's system of internal controls. This 
implies that the auditor is in fact a "user" of the information produced by the system; therefore, 
it behooves the auditor to become in- volved during the creation of new systems despite remaining arguments 
to the contrary by those who contend that Internal Auditing would compromise its independence. Although 
auditing EDP activities is a highly desirable and necessary function, it is not a source of consolation 
to system managers to be the recipient of audit reports and/or critiques after the system is implemented. 
 Complex computer-based information systems are expensive to develop and maintain. Establishing criteria 
for systems controls during the design phase is usually less costly than adding them after the system 
becomes live and operational. Adherence to this philosophy also reduces the exposure which would have 
been created due to non-existent and/or inadequate system controls. An initial involvement by the auditor 
at the design stage enables a firsthand review of controls while the project team is still intact. In 
addition, banks are constantly being subject to regular examination by regu- latory authorities including; 
Comptroller of the Currency, F.D.I.C., State Bank Examiners, External Auditors, I.R.S., etc. These individuals 
also have an interest in specific areas including; the soundness of the company's computer- based information 
system, reliable audit trails, documenta- tion, procedures, internal controls, etc. Requirements set 
 forth in the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act certainly lend credence to the statements noted herein. 
 An effective program in new system design reviews by Inter- nal Audit can ensure that the regulatory 
authorities' re- quirements are satisfied and also reduce the examination effort required by the aforementioned 
parties. Establishing Audit Checkpoints Stanford Research Institute recently completed a two-year research 
project which documented the state of the art -or at least the state of current practice -in DP auditing 
 around the world. The project was conducted for The Insti- tute of Internal Auditors, and was funded 
by a $500,000 grant from IBM. Referred to as the Systems Auditability and Con- trol project, the study 
was undertaken on the belief that many large corporations have developed practical audit and control 
techniques. The scope of SRI's research included visits to 45 organizations in Canada, the United States, 
Europe, and Japan, plus a questionnaire mailed to 1,500 additional organizations in those areas. A byproduct 
of the study was the collecting and organizing of hundreds of controls that were found to be in actual 
use within the various corporations. One of the best techniques revealed was the use of the system development 
life cycle (DLC) for building in quality control or audit checkpoints. The technique divides the system 
development cycle into 5 distinct phases (Exhibit "A"), with formal management qua- lity control checkpoints 
(Exhibit "B") being placed during and at the end of each major phase.* The objectives in using this 
technique are as follows: o Provide a structual management scheme for controlling costs and schedules. 
 o Ensures proper and responsive communica- tions channels among respective parties.  Internal Audit's 
role in Systems Development is clearly de- fined in Southeast Banking Corporation's "Operating System 
Planning and Development" plan (Exhibit "C"). The quality control checkpoints have been modified to some 
extent in order to accommodate the needs of Southeast Banking Corpora- tion. The plan is broken down 
by the various project phases. Within each phase the tasks are identified along with the required deliverables. 
Also reflected within each phase are the parties responsible for review and approval of the com- pleted 
documents. Isystems Auditabilit[ and Control -Control Prac- tices, The Institute Internal Auditors, 
Dec., 1977. (Study performed by Stanford Research Institute). Auditor Maintains Independence and Objectivity 
 In new systems development, the auditor's role should be that of a consultant. The auditor provides 
specifications in areas of control not normally dealt with by EDP specia- lists, i.e., Comptroller 
of the Currency, F.D.I.C., I.R.S., S.E.C. and other governmental and regulatory agencies. In addition, 
the auditor should establish specific guidelines for ensuring adequate audit trail and should participate 
in progress meetings in order to ascertain that development of the new system is proceeding as planned 
and on schedule. Similarly, the auditor should review Pertinent documents produced during the various 
phases of development for com- pleteness, appropriate approval, adherence to existing stan- dards, and 
corporate policies. The auditor should not be responsible for the actual design of the system. There 
is a possibility that Internal Auditing could lose some of its independence and objectivity, at a later 
stage, when asked to perform a post-implementation re- view of the system. The key objective is that 
by becoming properly involved in systems development, the auditor may contribute to the success of the 
project by employing "pre- ventive auditing" techniques. For those who still feel skeptical about this 
philosophy reflected herein is the official policy of The Institute of Internal Auditors on the subject 
of objectivity: "The objective of Internal Auditing is to assist members of management. .... This 
involves going beyond the accounting and financial records to obtain a full under- standing of the 
operations under review. .... Objectivity is essential to the audit function. Therefore, an internal 
auditor should not develop and install procedures, prepare records, or engage in any other activity 
which he would normally review or appraise and which could reasonably be construed to compromise his 
 independence. His objectivity need not be ad- versely affected, however, by his determination and 
recommendation of the standards of control to be applied in the development of systems and procedures 
under his review." Criteria for Determining The Extent of Audit Involvement The auditor can participate 
in the development cycle in several different ways. The method selected depends on the level of trained 
resources available to perform the reviews, organizational factors, adequacy of existing EDP standards, 
level of competency of EDP personnel in system controls, environmental factors affecting the organization 
 such as specific mandates set forth by regulatory authori- ties, etc. Additional criteria pertaining 
to the system being developed are as follows: o Complexity of the system being developed  o Cost and 
time duration of the project  o Impact of the system on financial statements  o Technology to be applied 
(on-line real time)  o Exposure if adequate controls are not designed into the system  o Number of 
departments/organizations influenced by the system  o Interaction with other systems  o General importance 
of the data (security issues, etc.)  These are just some of the items to be considered; however, possibly 
they can be used as a basis for audit participa- tion by assigning values to the aforementioned "criteria." 
Quantitative measurements techniques and/or modeling could then be applied in determining which approach 
(Major Audit Involvement, Audit Involvement at Predetermined Checkpoints or Minimal Audit Involvement) 
should be used on a given system prior to Internal Audit involvement. Major Audit Involvement -This 
represents the greatest level of involvement and gives the auditor a continuous view and exposure to 
the system being developed, but has potentially the danger of some loss of indendence and of becoming 
too familiar with the system to the point of losing objectivity. The auditor maintains separate accountability. 
 Audit Involvement at Predetermined Checkpoints -In this stage-wise approach, the auditor becomes involved 
only when there is material for him to evaluate, comment upon and make recommendations. It is like seeing 
the important points of a movie. It has the distinctive characteristic that the auditor sees data after-the-fact, 
thus requiring some time for him to react to make recommendations. Mean- while, the project may keep 
on moving. Minimal Audit Involvement -The auditor provides basic control guidelines to EDP in advance 
of or during systems development. He then reviews compliance by EDP of the suggested guidelines as well 
as reviews the status of the system, he may specify auditability rules. The auditor primarily plays a 
guiding and monitoring role. I The adequacy and effectiveness of controls included in com- puter application 
systems are affected by the methods and procedures used during the systems development process. Controls 
over the systems development process are important for three reasons. Primarily, good development controls 
assist in managing costs and schedules. Secondly, they help ensure that appropriate application controls 
are built into application systems being developed. Thirdly, they ensure that application controls are 
properly tested be- fore application systems become operational. By carefully controlling the systems 
development process, one can achieve higher levels of accuracy and reliability in developing com- puter-based 
information systems. In addition, it can readily be determined that the system was developed within the 
stated budget and on schedule. CONCLUSIONS Traditionally, auditors have not been viewed as users of 
 systems. Auditors do have, however, a definite stake in the accuracy and completeness of information 
produced by iSome of the concepts reflected herein were developed by Javier F. Kuong, Systems Auditing, 
Management Advisory Publications, 1977. computer-based information systems. Auditors are constantly 
being called upon to render an opinion concerning the sound- ness of controls built into computer-based 
information sys- tems. In addition, auditors may interact with computer- based information systems via 
terminals or other types of input. "Terminals may be used for modifying audit software and executing 
jobs when needed. Audit software is used to access data in order to print special reports and confirma- 
tions. This implies that the auditor is, in fact, a "user" of the information produced by the system; 
therefore, it behooves the auditor to become involved in developing new systems despite remaining arguments 
to the contrary by those who contend that internal audit would compromise its indepen- dence. The results 
of a comprehensive study of this question in- volving executive management, CPAs, internal auditors, 
and data processing management, suggests that auditing systems under development will not impair internal 
audit indepen- dence under the following conditions: o "There is top management support of internal 
audit activities. (This, of course, is always a requirement for an independent staff, but this point 
was re-emphasized in relation to EDP auditing)."  o "The internal auditor avoids design phase audit 
activities in which he might be per- ceived as a "designer" of the system. Rather, design phase audit 
activities should be limited to activities focusing on either com- pliance testing of systems design 
procedures or a review for the adequacy of controls built into the new applications."  o "The internal 
auditor must have the EDP technical competence to be self-reliant and thus independent of data processing 
personnel."  o "There is adequate supervision and review of staff. ''I  An initial involvement by 
the auditor at the design stage enables a firsthand review of controls while the project team is still 
intact. Banks are constantly subject to ex- amination by regulatory authorities. These individuals 
also have an interest in the soundness of the organization's computer-based information systems. An 
effective program in new system design reviews by internal audit can ensure that the requirements set 
forth by the aforementioned parties are met and also reduce the examination effort re- quired. The 
auditor's role should be that of a consultant. Manage- ment views the auditor as an expert in the areas 
of internal controls. System designers/programmers are technicans and are viewed as the experts in data 
processing concepts. The pressure placed upon system designers to convert a new sys- tem by its' scheduled 
date of completion often results in desirable control objectives being either partially or com- pletely 
eliminated. The auditor's main objective is deter- mining the adequacy of controls and their possible 
impact on the financial assets or statements. In addition, the auditor must ensure that the recommended 
controls have, in fact, been built into the system and that they are inter- acting as originally intended. 
Developing advanced systems is complex and costly; therefore, this effort requires close scrutinization 
by the auditor for the reasons noted herein. The purpose of this paper was to identify users of computer- 
based information systems and, in addition, define and establish specific guidelines to be used by auditors 
who are involved in the development of new systems. It would be impossible to identify each and every 
control technique de- vised, whether it be hardware, programmed or otherwise. The auditor must be able 
and willing to demonstrate his own "initiative" in recognizing those situations which require iDavis, 
Gordon B., CPA, Ph.D, Rittenberg, Larry E., CPA, Ph.D, The Roles of Internal and External Auditors in 
EDP Systems, The Journal of Accountancy, p. 55, Dec., 1977. additional research in order to recommend 
appropriate con- trols. In some instances, the auditor will have to use his own ingenuity. This author 
never purported that auditing systems under development would be an easy task. The key objective is 
that by becoming properly involved in systems development, the auditor may contribute to the success 
of the project by employing "preventive auditing" techniques. [ EXHIBIT "A" ® ®i o I~.~ ® .IJ 0 
~Q ~ ..C q.4 0 0 ~ 1.4n=l 0 q-I ID.., ~0 -IJ I,-i .la ~..C 0 U 4-I >I ® ,-I rc:l : 4-I ,.Q C) 0 -,-I 
0 ,-.~ n21 ~"{3 c: O0 -CI IZZ, h U mO., ~j m I=P":* ~ ~.~ ~-.. &#38;#169; ~ ::jc, I ~ O0 ,4 ~ ..IJ 
Om 4J rcl iD~ ® &#38;#169; .,-I o ~ ,.C .,-I: In ,~I -o ® o ..l.J P..,.I-~ -,-I 0 ~-,.4 izl~.,-I | 
 ,.4 l.J O~ t 1.4 .0 ~ ,q4 u ..121= ~ ~1111 ~'1 4.J 0'11 4J ~/1  'iiI il -~ ~ -~4 a~ 0 m O0 0~'~ 
II 00.I~ 0 "r-~ 0 I it I 56 EXHIBIT "B" Initiation Phase -consists of 8 tasks o Organize the project 
(Checkpoint l)  o Analyze the present system  o Summarize cost of present system  o Determine new 
information requirements (Checkpoint 2)  o Prepare conceptual system design  o Estimate user costs 
and benefits  o Estimate data processing costs/benefits (Checkpoint 3)  o Approve/disapprove recommendations 
  Checkpoint 1 - Review project organization (ongoing) - Review the arrangements the user has made 
with systems personnel - Review the plans and work program for the design Checkpoint 2 - User specifications 
 - Review the analysis of the present system - Review the costs of the present system - Review project 
control (ongoing task) - Develop conclusions Checkpoint 3 - Review the conceptual design documentation 
 - Discuss the practical considerations of the conceptual design - Review new system requirements 
- Review cost/benefits (both user and EDP) - Prepare a presentation to management on the audit findings 
 - Develop conclusions - Report audit exceptions (if any) System Desi@n Phase -consists of l0 tasks 
 o Organize the project  o Design output reports  o Design computer processing  o Design file reguirements 
 o Design input requirements  o Establish equipment requirements  o Determine installation approach 
 o Estimate user costs and benefits  o Estimate data processing costs/benefits  o Approve/disapprove 
recommendations  Checkpoint 4 - Review the organization of the project -Commence monitoring that 
performance (Checkpoint 4) (Checkpoint 5) (Checkpoint 6) (Checkpoint 7) (Checkpoint 8) - Review communications 
between the project team and management (ongoing)  - Review project definition and other miscellaneous 
considerations  - Review - Develop Checkpoint - Review - Review - Review - Review - Develop 
Checkpoint - Review  - Review  - Review  - Review - Develop Checkpoint - Review - Review 
- Develop detail work programs conclusions 5 detailed design output reports the method of developing 
these reports report documentation project management (ongoing) conclusions 6 the design of the computer 
processing the design file requirements the design input requirements project management conclusions 
 7 the equipment requirements adherence to existing standards (ongoing) conclusions Checkpoint 8 - 
 Review system auditability/controlability - Data integrity -includes exception reporting, means for 
correcting data, etc. - Adequacy of proposed controls - System documentation (ongoing) - Identify 
weaknesses/omissions and disregarded specifications - Identify audit trail components, e.g., transaction 
registers, F/M reports, etc. - Review cost/benefits - Review adherence to existing standards - 
Review project management - Develop conclusions - Report audit exceptions (if any) Detailed Design 
and Programming Phase -consists of i0 tasks o Organize the project (Checkpoint 9)  o Document data 
base files  o Design source documents  o Prepare program run write-ups (Checkpoint i0)  o Flowchart, 
code, test, debug, and document programs  o Plan the system test  o Plan the conversion  o Develop 
control procedures  o Develop clerical procedures (Checkpoing ll)  o Obtain management approval  
Checkpoint 9 - Review organization of the project - Review equipment considerations - Review planning 
considerations - Monitor performance of the project team - Establish list of control requirements 
- Develop conclusions Checkpoint i0 - Review the documentation of the data base files - Review 
the design of the source documents - Review the program write-ups - Develop conclusions Checkpoint 
ii - Review detailed system design - Review programming and debugging - Review system test plan 
 - Review coversion plan  - Review development of the clerical procedures  - Develop conclusions 
- Report exceptions (if any) System Test Phase -consists of 8 tasks o Organize the project (Checkpoint 
12)  o Review system for adherence to standards  o Create test data  o Perform system test  o Evaluate 
test results  o Train users and operations personnel  o Build master files (Checkpoint 13)  o Approve/disapprove 
test results  Checkpoint 12 - Work continuously with the system development team throughout this phase 
to ensure that the system runs according to specifications - Review project organization - Review 
documentation - Determine that system is functioning as intended - Monitor project performance - 
Review equipment considerations - Develop conclusions Checkpoint 13 - Monitor system performance 
 - Evaluate test results - Auditors are working hand-in-hand with the system and programming personnel 
to review the system for adherence to standards, create test data, build master files, etc. - Attend 
user training sessions - Develop "final" conclusions - Report audit exceptions (if any) Implementation 
Phase -consists of 4 tasks o Organize the conversion team (Checkpoint 14)  o Conversion  o Monitor 
system performance (Checkpoint 15)  o Final acceptance of the system  Checkpoint 14 - Review project 
organization/planning - Monitor system performance - Review the communication with management, users, 
system personnel, etc. - Develop conclusions Checkpoint 15 - Review system functions - Review user 
capability  - Review computer operations  - Review system organization  - Review completion of assignments 
 - Review documentation - Review adherence to standards - Develop conclusions - Report audit exceptions 
(if any) EXHIBIT ..-~L "C" . . . . . ..... ~N .~. F~ ~, ~ ~- ~~ ~. ~ m o ~oo c ~ ~ ~ oea N i ~ t ~ o 
~o iN~ o ~ 9 ~ o ~ o ~ -~ | I ' .. ~ ~o ~uu~c~ = E~ ~u. j I g= ~ ~ ~ 62 I 
			