
 -16- INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS FOR EXTERNAL RESULTS by Rita Seplowitz Saltz Technical Writer West Virginia 
Network for Educational Telecomputing 837 Chestnut Ridge Road Morgantown, West Virginia 26505 (304) 
293-5192 "In that direction," the Cat said, waving its right paw round, "lives a Hatter: and in that 
direction," waving the other paw, "lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad." "But 
I don't want to go among mad people," Alice remarked. "Oh, you can't help that," said the Cat: "we're 
all mad here. I'm mad. You're mad." "How do you know I'm mad?" said Alice. "You must be," said the Cat, 
"or you wouldn't have come here." --Lewis Carroll, AI ice's Adventures in Wonderland (The conference 
session planned includes some discussion, followed by video-taped selections to prompt problem-solving 
by session participants. An instrument for evaluating internal communication may be developed.) The 
quality of service and information that a computing facility provides to its computer users depends largely 
upon the quality of communication among the members of the installation's staff. In a one-person center, 
where director, programmer, operator, and consultant are all embodied in a single individual, internal 
communication is no problem--barring the presence of the Jekyll-Hyde syndrome. When the dramatis personae 
increases in number, the capacity for miscommunication also increases. Assuming communication difficulties 
can be traced either to the transmitter or to the receiver, the presence of two people on the staff presents 
two possibilities for error; the presence of six people permits thirty possibilities for error. Communication 
is complicated by the number of individuals involved in each transaction. In the case even of computer 
center personnel, communication is further complicated by the different backgrounds and functions of 
the individuals involved. While the commonality of employment unites the group, only a few other unifying 
constants ("we're all mad here .... ") exist. Typical computer center staffing includes programmers, 
operators, and managers. We expect to find systems programmers, consultants, clerical employees, hardware 
people, and a business office that handles payroll, purchasing, and related functions. In some installations 
we find data entry operators, librarians of various sorts, analysts, documentors, technicians, couriers, 
COM and unit record operators, billing and accounting personnel, and marketing specialists. The effective 
functioning of the installation--and of user services within that installation-- depends as much upon 
the interactions among these individuals as it does upon the integrity of the system hardware. II Farb 
I suggests that, rather than Homo sapiens, we are Homo loquens, Man tF6 Talker. Language is our most 
prevalent medium of human exchange. "Talk is cheap." It is helpful, though not mandatory, that all parties 
to an exchange share a common language. However, clarity of communication is not ensured even to members 
of the same speech community. -17- GROUCHO: If we're successful in disposing of these lots, I'll see 
that you get a nice commission. CHICO: How about some money? --"The Cocoanuts" (1929) The Marx Brothers 
dialogue above, although contrived for the film, is genuinely representative of the kind of interchange 
that occurs regularly in human affairs. Groucho's reply to Chico's inquiry is: "You can have your choice." 
Agreement is reached. Both parties concur on the apparent meaning of what is being said; the exchange 
can be accepted as valid communication. Sometimes speech is not enough. What is meant to be said must 
be written instead. "The horror of that moment," the King went on, "I shall never, never forget!" "You 
will, though," the Queen said, "if you don't make a memorandum of it." --Lewis Carroll, Through the 
Looking-Glass "Talk written down" does permit re-examination and possible reinterpretation of the information 
which the transmitter is attempting to convey. However, written language does not give any greater assurance 
of clear communication than does oral language. In fact, with oral presentation, the receiver can get 
clues to meaning from the transmitter's inflection, tones, and body signals. III USER SERVICES STAFF 
MEMBER: Didn't you get the Assistant Director's memo? SYSTEMS PROGRAMMING SUPERVISOR: Oh yes, but I 
couldn't figure out what it said. --Actual conversation (1977) The absence of communication--or the 
absence of clear communication--among members of a computer center staff can lead to some monumentally 
embarrassing situations. Items: --Teleprocessing dial-up numbers change, literally overnight. Two managers 
and a third individual who performed the re-wiring are the only staff members who know that a change 
has taken place. --User services publishes a technical memorandum which includes control cards for a 
new catalogued procedure. Later the same week, queries from frustrated users lead staff to discover that 
a library has been recatalogued, causing any job invoking the procedure to blow off the system. --An 
easily correctable system problem disables remote lines for more than two hours prime time before personnel 
capable of remedying the situation are made aware that the problem exists--and this despite numerous 
user phone complaints. What contributes to this kind of snafu? How can events of this type be avoided? 
The fault, dear SIGUCC, is in ourselves...we must look within. IV At your computer installation, are 
there known procedures for reporting user problems, system problems, any problem? Are there known procedures 
for recording trouble reports? Is every staff member aware of each procedure? Or are there some "un-people", 
for example, part-time students, data entry operators, secretaries, who are considered peripheral to 
the main flow of business and whom you would not burden with such matters? Do you provide some kind 
of orientation for new employees, including an introduction to the problem-reporting procedures? Do you 
have some kind of central repository for information within the center--a logbook, a procedures manual, 
an employee guidebook? Does every employee know what and where this repository is and what purpose(s) 
it serves? Are your written communications unambiguous? Do you avoid esoteric references that may elude 
most members of the staff? Are all authors of internal documents equally scrupulous about clarity of 
expression? Does each employee understand the purpose and philosophy of the installation? Does each 
understand his or her own function within the installation? Does each individual understand generally 
the function or area of responsibility of every other employee? When responsibility for a piece of software 
shifts, are staff members made aware of the change? When a problem- reporting procedure is altered, is 
every member of the staff informed intelligibly? (Shouting in passing at someone who is talking on the 
phone, consulting with a user, or correcting a card deck in a noisy keypunch room doesn't count.) How 
smooth are inter~territorial exchanges of information? Does Systems tell User Services? Does User Services 
Fell Systems? Or is yours a case2where ...the Cabots talk only to God." ? When a change in policy or 
procedure is going to affect the user community or a substantial subset thereof, is there sufficient 
advance notice to all staff members? What kinds of formal and informal mechanisms do you have for internal 
communication? What opportunities for group interchange exist within the working environment? How well 
do the members of your staff communicate with one another when they do have the means and the opportunity? 
 What opportunity for input to management decision-making is available to the "lay" staff member? Are 
exchanges between staff and upper- echelon management possible directly, or are all such exchanges filtered 
through intermediate management? Communications difficulties within a university computer center impact 
not only the quality of user services, but the morale of the installation as a whole. When an individual 
receives from a group verbal and non-verbal signals of acceptance, the individual tends to respond with 
acceptance. When such supportive signals are lacking, people tend to react defensively, and try to protect 
their self-image. 3 Where clear communication is lacking, misinformation abounds. The absence of, or 
concealment of, truth provides a fertile base for the growth of surmise, suspicion, and rumor. Decisions 
are made on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information, and anything or anyone is used as the excuse 
for a bad decision. "The systems people said .... " (Translation: A specific systems programmer told 
me .... ) "User services wanted .... " (Translation: I heard a member of user services complaining .... 
) There are management stances which contribute to the fragmentation of an installation's staff, encouraging 
the formation of arcane subgroups, each privy to its own piece of "truth", and each jealously guarding 
its secrets against the omnipresent indefinite "Them". Secrecy and defensiveness stand paramount, and 
the flow of information is dammed. Foremost among the destructive management stances is the secrecy syndrome. 
 VI The secrecy syndrome is very popular among managers who are overconfident of their own decision-making 
ability, and, for only the purest of motives, with the over-paternal or over-maternal managers who feel 
that staff members should not be burdened with knowledge that "doesn't affect them". Does it seem that 
budget cutbacks for the next fiscal year will require reduction of the consulting staff? Why worry anyone 
until you know for sure that the money will not be there. Staff offices are to be relocated within the 
building? Your executive wisdom is sufficient to assign the new space without surveying the staff as 
to their preferences. A small amount of funding is available for new furnishings to equip the new offices? 
Surely, you can decide what each of "your people" will require. Is a newly appointed manager-elect in 
town to visit the facility? Introduce him to the four or five important people at the center-- the rest 
of the staff will find out who he is when he takes office. Closely related to the secrecy syndrome are 
the let-em-read-it-in-the- papers ploy and the handwriting-on-the ~ wall approach. The handwriting-on-the- 
wall manager is addicted to bulletin board messages, chalkboard notices, and pronouncements printed in 
red marking pen block letters on lined yellow tablet pages; the last-named are taped to doors, windows, 
or walls in and about the computing facility. The let-em- read-it manager holds the notion that staff 
can find out about things when the general public learns about them. No special privileges here! Items 
appear in Hot News listings, bulletins, the newsletter, the memo mailed to "all account holders". And, 
if an unwary staff member is so rash as to ask whether the rest of the staff gets advance notice, the 
indignant answer is: "What for???!!!" An individual working under either of these two types of management 
must read well and be very attentive to detail. -19- VII It is not true that all internal communication 
problems result from managerial stance. It is true, however, that ultimate responsibility for internal 
communication does rest with management, and that certain managerial postures encourage poor communication 
patterns and foster the spread of misinformation. An example: the one-on-one approach. This is another 
strategem practiced by the manager who does not want to burden his or her staff unnecessarily. Naturally, 
group meetings of any sort are eschewed. Instead, the manager contacts "key people"--and, occasionally, 
all staff members--one at a time, to solicit opinion or convey information. From a management point of 
view, this has several advantages. Each interview can be custom-tailored with the specific staff member 
in mind. No one except the manager needs to know the consensus which derives from these sequential dialogues. 
At no time does the manager suffer from inadequacy at conducting a group meeting, and at no time is the 
manager subject to embarrassment in front of his or her subordinates because of inadequate preparation. 
Further, each staff member consu]ted can be given the impression that they have received a confidence: 
a feeling of intimacy is suggested. A sibling strategem is the social contact ploy. (One common varla~ 
is known as the "Can I buy you a drink?" approach.) In this one, the one-on-one can be expanded at the 
manager's will to include a small, select group. At times the social contact method of information- sharing 
occurs spontaneously rather than by design: this takes place when a subgroup of staff members frequents 
some accessible public place, e.g., the local Last Chance Saloon, the community Pizza Pit, the computer 
center rest room. 4 A major side effect accompanies this kind of communication, however: The non-managerial 
staff may feel free to engage in their own information-passing technique, the game of gossip. This, and 
its kissing cousin, the rampant rumor ruse, are unfortunately efficient at spreading non-uniform information 
among other members of a center's staff. In fact, the game is so simple that even beginners can transcend 
the bounds of the computer center: real and/or distorted information may be shared at will with spouse, 
family, and "just good friends". As a result of the prevalence of these two techniques, the university's 
student user "Crash Club" just may be in possession of better information at any given time than the 
 center's resident consultants. There is one individualized information game which has become exceedingly 
common in the field. It is called Eureka!, and any individual on a center's s~ can play; no preparation 
is needed. The rules: you accidentally discover that some significant change has taken place at the institution 
by which you are employed. This can be a personnel change, a software change, a change in long-distance 
phone call procedures...content does not alter your score. Caution: The edge can be taken off your game 
~y insensitive colleagues who greet your best discoveries with shouts of "Oh, didn't YOU know that?I" 
 VIII Three other common communication styles deserve mention. The first is called dictum, also known 
as papal bull. This de~ly is a written form, though sometimes it is given added emphasis by being intoned 
in somber, unyielding tones before a staff audience before it is distributed. Content normally consists 
of one or more "shalt" or "shalt not", and the weight of the communication ordinarily suggests graven 
stone tablets. A second, and very rare, approach is overkill. Every bit (no pun) of information appears 
in memo format, all references and cross-references cited with full bibliographic detail. Content does 
not have the gravity of the papal bull, but the quantity of paper generated helps make up the difference. 
Massive loose-leaf notebooks containing all distributions of overkill messages are maintained by clerks 
on round-the- clock shifts. Overkill is practiced so seldom outside the military that it is included 
in this discussion only as a curiosity. The third of these approaches, and the last to be presented 
in this paper, is the hierarchal filter method. This enables the manager to establish a -20- priestly 
caste of middlepeople, whose function it is to speak for him or her to the general center populace, and 
to represent to the manager the voice(s) of the lesser employee(s). At no time is a low-level staff member 
permitted directly into the Presence. This permits the manager to avoid presenting or facing the truth 
directly, and allows the intermediary "filter" a great latitude for creativity in presenting the message 
sent by one party to the other. IX We respond only to what we recognize, to what holds meaning for 
us. ,--Edmund Carpenter, Oh, What a Blow That Phantom Gave Me! (Abbott and Costello arrive at the 
bank.) A: Teller! C: Tell who? A: Teller! C: I'll tell 'er. Where is she? A: No! Teller in a bank! 
 C: Tell 'er in a bank. Tell 'er outside. Tell 'er any place you want! I won't listen. A: Listen--when 
I say "teller" I don't mean "tell 'er. " C: Well, what do you mean? A: Teller. C: Teller. A: Now 
you've got it! C: Now I've got it! I don't even know what I'm talking about! --"Hit the Ice" (1953) 
 Within any typical computer installation, many languages and dialects are spoken. Professionals who 
understand SYS.GO may or may not understand BAL and PSW. Some staff members may be so linguistically 
naive as to confuse a simple IPL with a cold start. And even a very bright and aware receptionist may 
refer to a consultant a caller who phones in with the obscure error message, "B-A-D JOB Card. ''5 However, 
for everyone who works within an installation, there must be some intersection of language, some common 
area within which all parties can agree on what a given communication appears to mean. A university 
computer center's total community embraces a wide assortment of people: on-site employees; remote employees; 
family; friends; university faculty, staff, undergraduate students, graduate students, extension students; 
university deans and other administrators; governing boards and sometimes state legislators; vendors; 
service representatives; officials of funding agencies; advisory committees; and stray members of the 
greater community at large. How can we possibly communicate effectively with all these "outsiders" when 
we can't speak clearly within our own house? To perform properly as user services professionals, we must 
evaluate the caliber and quality of the communication we practice both as individuals and as human components 
of the total computing facility. Abbott: I'm telling you. Who's on first, What's on second, I Don't 
Know is on third... --"Naughty Nineties" (1945) When, in the course of events, we try to explain, express, 
inform, question, learn, or understand, we face many invisible obstacles. What Person-I says may be or 
may not be what Person-2 hears. Replies may be distorted, cryptic, untrue, or simply absent. Dialogue, 
at best, is difficult. Yet language remains the means on which we most rely to convey meaning to others. 
If we are conscientious in our efforts, we must continually ask, "Am I doing a good job? How can I improve?" 
As individuals, we have the responsibility to send and to receive as clearly as we can, and of clarifying 
when we sense that a message we have sent has been lost or garbled in transmission. These responsibilities 
are magnified when the efficacy of communication affects the quality of our professional performance. 
If we are part of a positive, productive environment, it must be largely because we and our co-workers 
understand our mutual concerns and understand one another. The essence of communication is mutual understanding. 
 -21- FOOTNOTES i) Peter Farb, Word Play. New York: Alfred E. Knop--p-f~, 1973. 2) And this is good 
old Boston, The home of the bean and the cod, Where the Lowells talk to the Cabots And the Cabots talk 
only to God. --Toast by John Collins Bossidy, Holy Cross Alumni Dinner (1910) 3) Jack Gibb, "Group Climate" 
in Communication Probes, ed. Peterson, Goldhaber and Pace. Science Research Associates, Inc., 1974. 
4) Stan Yagi, discussion. ACM-SIGUCC User Services Conference III, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, 1975. 5) 
Based on incident reported by a participant in ACM-SIGUCC User Services Conference IV, Tucson, Arizona, 
1976. 
			