
 Internet-Scale Code Search Rosalva E. Gallardo-Valencia Susan Elliott Sim University of California, 
Irvine University of California, Irvine rgallard@ics.uci.edu ses@ics.uci.edu Abstract Internet-Scale 
Code Search is the problem of finding source on the Internet. Developers are typically searching for 
code to reuse as-is on a project or as a reference example. This phenomenon has emerged due to the increasing 
availability and quality of open source and resources on the web. Solutions to this problem will involve 
more than the simple application of information retrieval techniques or a scaling-up of tools for code 
search. Instead, new, purpose-built solutions are needed that draw on results from these areas, as well 
as program comprehension and software reuse. 1. Introduction Open source is the practice of distributing 
source code along with the executable code for a computer program. The increasing availability of high 
quality open source code on the Internet is changing the way software is being developed [9]. It has 
became commonplace to search the Internet for source code in the course of a software development project. 
Developers are increasingly using an Opportunistic Software Systems Development (OSSD) approach to put 
together software pieces that they found. This approach is used to face the market demands of delivering 
software quickly and with more functionality [6]. Although, these software pieces provide functionality 
that programmers need to include in a system, often, they are unrelated and were not designed to work 
jointly. Developers who are using these approaches search the Internet looking for open source to reuse 
in their projects. We will refer to this specific type of source code search as Internet-Scale Code Search. 
Locating the right component for as-is reuse or a reference example at the right time can have significant 
impact on how the project progresses. The Internet-Scale Code Search has many similarities with other 
areas of research and we should build on their contributions. These areas include software reuse, code 
search, information retrieval, and program comprehension. We will discuss the similarities and differences 
with these areas. In this paper, we argue that Internet-Scale Code Search is a new kind of problem. Not 
only is Internet-Scale Code Search more than the sum of the parts, different kinds of technological possibilities 
are available due to emerging computational practices.  2. What is Internet-Scale Code Search? Internet-Scale 
Code Search is searching the Internet for source code to help solve a software development problem. Results 
from a web-based survey have shown that developers search for code on the Internet with the motivation 
of finding a piece of software to reuse or a reference example to use as a guide. The target piece of 
software varies on size ranging from a block (a few lines of code), a subsystem, and a system [11]. Some 
examples of search targets from a previous empirical study are summarized below. Table 1. Examples of 
software pieces classified by motivation and target size. As-Is Reuse Reference Example Block Code snippets, 
wrappers, parsers To learn language syntax and idioms Sub system Algorithms, data structures, GUI widgets, 
libraries To help in the implementation of algorithms, data structures, GUI widgets. To aid in the use 
of libraries System Stand-alone tools, ERP packages, DBMS To get ideas about an existing similar system 
 In the cases where developers are searching for a component for as-is reuse, the search parameters are 
more tightly defined, and developers are most often looking for a piece of functionality, that is, a 
portion of SUITE 09, May 16, 2009, Vancouver, Canada code that will perform a particular task. This 
type of search target was also evident in the studies by Chen et al. [1], Madanmohan and De [4]. Developers 
preferred components that could be used as-is, with little or no modification. In fact, they avoided 
components that required an understanding of the inner workings. Developers are also motivated to search 
for a reference example of how to use or do something. In other words, software developers are using 
the web as a giant desk reference manual. While this kind of knowledge reuse has been acknowledged in 
the software reuse literature, it has been overshadowed by as-is component reuse. Searches for reference 
examples are qualitatively different from those for reusable components. The underlying problem being 
solved is different and so too are the selection criteria. Some tools that support Internet-Scale Code 
Search are available on the Web. These tools include Google Code Search1, Koders2, Krugle3, and Sourcerer4 
among others. Although these tools already help developers to find open source, a better understanding 
of the challenges behind code search on the Internet can suggest improvements to these tools. 2.1. Motivating 
examples Here, we present some motivating examples of Internet-Scale Code Searching. These are composite 
descriptions based on data collected in our earlier empirical study [11]. Waldo was writing a Java program 
to send out meeting notifications by email. His program needed to send notifications of meetings in participants 
local time zones. To do this, he needed to use the Calendar classes, which have a complex interface and 
can be used in many different ways. Rather than reading the Javadocs, he searched the web for examples 
of how the classes were used. Waldo found a number of useful blog posts and tutorials that gave him the 
information that he was looking for. The example above describes a developer looking for a reference 
example for a subsystem, i.e. the Calendar classes in Java. In such cases, general­purpose search engines, 
such as Google and Yahoo, do reasonably well. The code that Waldo found was surrounded by natural language 
explanations that matched his search keywords. It should also be noted 1 http://www.google.com/codesearch/ 
2 http://www.koders.com/ 3 http://www.krugle.com/ 4 http://sourcerer.ics.uci.edu/sourcerer/search/index.jsp 
that he was not looking for a program element or identifier. Wenda was looking for an implementation 
of the Trie tree data structure in C. A Trie tree is an ordered tree data structure where the keys are 
strings. She started out using a general-purpose search engine, but got too many matches. She added C 
as a search term to reduce the number of matches, but this did not help at all. She tried some code-specific 
search engines, but c appeared a lot, so she switched to filtering by programming language. Also, trie 
was a substring of retrieval, so these too were a false start. Wenda ultimately found what she needed 
by going to a site were developers share ideas and resources with each other, such as www.codeproject.com. 
Here, she found a number of annotated examples that she could reuse as-is in her project. This second 
example depicts a developer looking for a subsystem-sized reusable component. She wanted source code 
that implemented a well-understood abstract data structure. The main goal behind these searches is that 
the source code is commonly available and saves time. This example illustrates ways in which both general-purpose 
and code-specific search engines fall short. C was not a good search term, because it is too short and 
too common. Trie and tree were not much better. Also, it was difficult to judge the suitability of the 
various matches returned for Wenda s project. While some of the code returned by the code search engines 
had good comments, they generally lacked instructions for (re)use. As well, extracting the code and incorporating 
into her project would have required a non-trivial amount of work. In the face of uncertainty regarding 
the costs and benefits of adapting unfamiliar code, the safest option is often to implement it yourself. 
  3. Comparison with code search Code search typically occurs within an Integrated Development Environment 
while working on the source code for a single project. This activity is often done during the development 
and maintenance of software, and involves searching for specific program elements in a software project. 
Developers have mainly four motivations to search for pieces of software: defect repair, code reuse, 
program understanding, and impact analysis. The pieces of software they are looking for are declaration, 
definition, use, and all uses of functions, variables, and classes [8]. Internet-Scale Code Search involves 
looking in not just one project but in a great number of different open source projects. In addition, 
Internet-Scale Code Search will also search for source code in other types of information besides to 
source code repositories. It also includes searching on web pages, forums, mailing lists, and other sources. 
 Internet-Scale Code Search is an activity that is not restricted to the maintenance of software; this 
type of search expands to different phases in the software development process, such as feasibility study, 
analysis, design, implementation, testing, and maintenance. Internet-Scale Code Search will build on 
the contributions from research into code search activity and scale it where possible to the Internet. 
However, we believe the usefulness of searching for program elements or certain kinds of identifiers 
will have limited applicability. More often, developers are looking for functionality or knowledge, and 
not for where a method or variable is declared.  4. Comparison with information retrieval The area of 
information retrieval focuses on finding material of an unstructured nature, usually text, that satisfies 
an information need from within large collections stored on computers [5]. Internet-Scale Code Search 
is different because the material that developers are searching for is source code, which is structured 
in nature due to the fact that it follows strict syntax rules specific to a programming language. Information 
retrieval commonly allows keyword­based searches. However, developers are searching for source code in 
terms of features, functionality, and requirements; source code is written in a programming language, 
while search keywords are in natural language. The only place where natural language appears in source 
code is within comments. Consequently, searches for code tends to rely on the comments and the text surrounding 
an excerpt of source code. Blocks of code on web pages have more descriptive text around them than in 
a version control repository. For these reasons, general-purpose search engines work surprisingly well 
in code search. Still, there is room for improvement, as our second motivating example illustrates. The 
effectiveness of conventional information retrieval techniques can be attributed to both human ingenuity 
and metadata. Developers often find creative ways to make use of the tools available. For instance, they 
use general-purpose search engines to find repositories or caches where they can search further. Metadata, 
we believe, will play a major role in the design and implementation of improved Internet-Scale Code Search 
engines. 5. Comparison with software reuse Software reuse is the process of finding and using existing 
components or libraries in the creation of new software [3]. It is now common to create software by hacking, 
mashing, and gluing together existing open source code [2]. Although, software has not been built from 
scratch since function libraries were invented, the Internet, open source, and Opportunistic Software 
System Development have significantly increased the scope and scale of source code being reused. The 
Internet-Scale Code Search process differs from software reuse, where the recommended process is to identify 
the requirements and use them to evaluate the suitability of candidate libraries. Instead, the requirements 
are defined iteratively based on the available functionality. This process more resembles engineering 
design than looking for a set of lost keys. The former process proceeds by optimizing constraints in 
a cost effective manner. The latter process seeks to find an object that is known to exist, is well defined, 
and can only be located in a limited number of places. In other words, software developers acquire an 
understanding of what they are looking for by searching. Software reuse contributes knowledge about the 
different facets of reuse, such as substance, scope, technique, and products [7]. Internet-Scale Code 
Search can use this knowledge when developers are looking for open source code on the Internet opportunistically. 
 6. Comparison with program comprehension Program comprehension research has focused on the cognitive 
theories that help us understand how programmers comprehend software in a single body of source code 
and on the tools to aid users in their comprehension tasks [10]. A key step in the Internet-Scale Code 
Search process is the evaluation of thousands of candidate matches that have been returned by a search 
engine in order to find the right piece of open source code to incorporate into a project. This evaluation 
requires developers to understand the source code, but in contrast with program comprehension, this evaluation 
involves discerning the characteristics of a candidate piece of code without becoming entangled in the 
internals. In conventional program comprehension, developers use source code and documentation to understand 
the program [10]. We believe that program comprehension in Internet-Scale Code Search is very different. 
Developers tend not to look at the source code when selecting a component for reuse, but rather, they 
rely on surface features and external information sources. Preliminary research has identified two kinds 
of judgments. Relevance judgments are made by software developers while identifying promising candidates 
among the available matches. These decisions are rapid, taking only a few seconds, and use relatively 
little information. Suitability judgments are made when determining whether a promising candidate is 
appropriate for the software project. These decisions are slower and typically involve a careful cost-benefit 
analysis. These judgments are made based on characteristics of the open source project, fellow users, 
price, terms of license, documentation, and functionality.  7. Summary In this paper, we argued that 
Internet-Scale Code Search is a novel problem, in need of novel solutions. Although, it is similar to 
a number of existing problems, research is needed to combine and create research contributions. This 
emerging field is similar to software reuse, source code searching, information retrieval, and program 
comprehension. Internet-Scale Code Search is similar to software reuse, because developers are often 
looking for code to reuse as-is on their projects. But they also look for code to use as reference examples. 
Source code searching and Internet-Scale Code Search have in common the fact that developers are searching 
for source code. But, in the former developers are typically looking for program elements within a single 
project. In the latter, they look in a great number of open source projects on the Internet. Like information 
retrieval, Internet-Scale Code Search involves searching large collections. An important difference is 
that developers are searching for source code and not for natural language text in unstructured documents. 
Some program comprehension is needed during Internet-scale code search, but not the kind normally performed 
during software maintenance. During Internet-Scale Code Search, developers need to evaluate thousands 
of candidate matches using superficial information and from different sources. In summary, Internet-Scale 
Code Search is a new problem that has arisen as a result of evolving technologies and software development 
practices. The solution to this problem will require similar innovation and creativity to both use existing 
results and to create know-how.  8. References [1] Weibing Chen, Jingyue Li, Jianqiang Ma, Reidar Conradi, 
Junzhong Ji, and Chunnian Liu. An empirical study of software development with open source components 
in the Chinese software industry. Software Process: Improvement and Practice, 13:89 100, January 2008. 
[2] Bjorn Hartmann, Scott Doorley, and Scott R. Klemmer. Hacking, mashing, gluing: A study of opportunistic 
design. Technical Report CSTR 2006-14, Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, September 
2006. [3] C. W. Krueger. Software Reuse. ACM Computing Surveys, 24(2):131-184, June 1992. [4] T.R. Madanmohan 
and Rahul De . Open source reuse in commercial firms. IEEE Software, 21(6): 62 69, 2004. [5] C. Manning, 
P. Raghavan, and H. Schutze. Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
[6] Cornelius Ncube, Patricia Oberndorf, Anatol W. Kark, "Opportunistic Software Systems Development: 
Making Systems from What's Available," IEEE Software, 25 (6): 38­41, Nov./Dec. 2008. [7] Johannes Sametinger. 
Software Engineering with Reusable Components. Springer, New York, 1997. [8] S. E. Sim, C. L. A. Clarke, 
and R. C. Holt. Archetypal source code searches: A survey of software developers and maintainers. In 
Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Program Comprehension, page 180, Los Alamitos, CA, 1998. 
IEEE Computer Society. [9] Diomidis Spinellis and Clemens Szyperski. Guest editors introduction: How 
is open source affecting software development? IEEE Software, 21(1):28 33, 2004. [10] Margaret-Anne D. 
Storey. Theories, tools and research methods in program comprehension: past, present and future. Software 
Quality Journal, 14(3):187 208, 2006. [11] Medha Umarji, Susan Elliott Sim, and Cristina V. Lopes. Archetypal 
internet-scale source code searching. In Barbara Russo, editor, OSS, page 7, New York, NY, 2008. Springer. 
  
			