
 INTEGRATING COMPUTING INTO THE CURRICULUM Thomas (2. Laughner C. Joseph Williams Educational Technology 
Consulting Of&#38;e of University Computing University of Notre Dame In the past, using computers in 
the curriculum has been viewed primarily as a@mct to and apart from classroom presentations. With the 
advent of computer-based presentation software and computer projection systems, computers are becoming 
a more integral part of presenting material in the classroom. Currently, classrooms properly equipped 
for computer-based presentations are limited and the problems of setting up portable equipment ofl,en 
discourages faculty from their use. Because alf the lack of presentation facilities, university computer 
centers often may not offer specific support in this area and, as a result, may not consider the implications 
of computer presentation in the development of courseware materials. When presentation facilities are 
readily available in classrooms, new ways of thinking about creating independently-usable courseware 
are possible and, indeed, may be necessary to help teachers malke use of presentation facilities and 
understand the potential of creating more interactive products. At the University of Notre Dame, a new 
classroom building, DeBartolo Hall, provides state-of-the-art presentation capabilities. Notre Dame faculty 
are surrounded by media and computer-based presentation possibilities. In addition to Media-on-Call, 
an optical-fiber-based system for delivering conventional media forms to all 83 classrooms, DeBartolo 
Hall also offers many computer-presentation resources. Thirteen classrooms are equipped with specially-built 
plodia housing a videodisc player, CD-ROM drive, and one of four different computer platforms: Sun NeXI 
, DOS, and Macintosh. All classrooms with a capacity of 50 seats or more have ceiling mounted, large 
screen color, computer-display-capable projectors and the remainder of the classrooms have accessto color 
or black and white LCD displays for use with overhead projectors which are available in eve!ry classroom. 
Two collaborative classrooms contain 30 DOS/Windows and 30 Macintosh computers for use in hands-on classes. 
A computer cluster with 78 computers, 10 of which have multimedia capabilities, is available to students, 
faculty, and SM twenty-four hours a day. The completion of this state-of-the-art facility comes at a 
time when the multimedia capabilities of microcomputers are changing the way we use computers and media 
in the curriculum. This environment is encouraging many faculty immediately to want to use computer technology 
to help create and enhance their classroom presentations. Evolving Presentation Materials With the media 
and computer presentation capabilities of DeBartolo Hall, an overriding perspective in our support effort 
for faculty development is the idea that courseware development begins with classroom presentation materials 
which then can be evolved over time into materials which can be accessedby students independently. This 
view differs from the usual movie-making model of development which, like movie production, says that 
a completa design, all the required talent, and all media elements must be gathered together and produced 
within a certain time frame to produce a finished product in some distributable; hard medium. (Seeefigure) 
Our movie mentality for courseware development may come horn the first use of media in the classroom 
training films produced during and &#38;r World War II. It is also, of course, the model used for commercial 
products which must be completed in a certain time frame, distributed, and sold to recuperate the production 
investment. The movie model requires greater effort in up-front planning and production, and the costs 
of resources and talent is greater over a shorter period of time. There is often less opportunity for 
testing various design possibilities and usually very little time to test the validity or effect of the 
final product, if modifications are even possible. Permisswn to copy without fee all or part of this 
material is granted provided that the copies are not made or daktributed or direct commercial advantage, 
the ACM copyrig?tt notice and the title of the publicatwn and its date appear, and notice is given that 
cowing is by permission of the Assoeiutwn for Computing Machinay. To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fe andJor specifi permission. Copyright 1992 ACM 0-89791 -546-1 /92 J(X)11 /0263.. $1.50 stepping 
into the Iuture  o    ACM SIGUCCSXX 1992 . 263 Within a university, an evolutionary model is a more 
effective method of developing instructional materials, especially if computer-based presentation is 
emphasized as a starting point. The evolutionary model does not require planning for every design elements 
at the start. A simple element might be used first (e.g. only digitized images, or the text normally 
shown in transparencies) adding additional elements (sound, video, animation, etc.) as they are needed 
or found. Basic navigational interaction, moving from one frame to another, is all that s requiredin 
this first step. More complex interaction elements can be added later to make the materials independently 
accessible by students from clusters or networks. (See figure) The time frame for evolutionary development 
is essentially open-ended. The nature of the medium (computer presentation) means that the materials 
may stay in their contantly evolving form no level of completeness, required by conventional media, is 
required (except that the materials can be effectively accessed). Costs and production efforts are spread 
over a period of time decreasing up-front requirements, and testing of various elements and their integration 
can occur as they are developed and added. Helping Faculty Develop Educational Technologies To help faculty 
begin to use the capabilities of DeBartolo Hall with this attitude of continually evolving computer-based 
curriculum materials, the OfEce of University Computing (OUC) at the University of Notre Dame has begun 
an Educational Technology Consulting effort. Our efforts provide: c information on how computers and 
digital media are being used in education, demonstrations of educational products and computer software, 
c workshops on using computers for classroom presentations and courseware development,  computer and 
instructional design consulting to assist in producing computer-based teaching and learning materials, 
  access to specialized equipment and computer applications for producing digital images, animation, 
sound, and video,  support in requesting special funding to help faculty get started.  Helping Facmlty 
Stay Informed To help Notre Dame faculty stay a~east of developments, Educational Technology Consulting 
coordinates a series of presentations, Technology for Academia, focusing on the creative integration 
of computing resources and technology in academic fields. Teachers and scholars who have produced courseware, 
designed courses using computer presentations, or who use specific computer applications in their work, 
are invited to campus to share and discuss their efforts, Another source of information is Imagine: The 
Apple Computer Education TV Series. This series of five teleconferenced video programs, produced by Apple 
Computer, Inc., is broadcast horn January through May. Provisions are made for viewers to participate 
in the teleconference and ask questions through telephone connections. The OffIce of University Computing 
also provides news and information related to educational technology issues and events electronically. 
Announcements of special presentations, information on resources provided by the Mice of University Computing, 
summaries of technical developments, and discussions of educational technology-related issues are made 
available to faculty, staf, and students. Helping Faculty Get Started Purchasing technology-based materials 
or producing original materials costs money. To help faculty get started, the ~lce of University Computing 
and the Educational Media Department have jointly established a fund, called the Jump-Start Educational 
Technology Grant Program, to help support faculty begin using educational technologies. Small grants 
are available to help faculty develop innovative classroom presentation projects and courseware materials 
that involve the use of technology. Possible uses for these fuds might include: stipends for undergraduate 
student aides working with faculty on a project,  special computer software,  special content materials 
(e.g. content resources or developed courseware,  accessto special hardware (e.g., scanners, audio digitizers), 
 special services (e.g. video production, slide production, etc.),  Helping Faculty Learn The Office 
of University Computing offers hands-on training classes in the use of presentation and authoring software 
as well as a wide range of classes on computer operation, other software, and computer networks. Student 
aids, funded through the Jump Start program, work closely with faculty on project development to assist 
faculty in learning presentation and authoring sofiware using their own content. This approach is especially 
important to help faculty start their projects and help in their initial learning of the software which 
eventually they will use to develop and modify their projects on their own. In-progress workshops are 
also planned to review works in progress and help faculty experience the technical and design decisions 
required at various stages of project development. 264. ACM SIGUCCSX19920. 0000.0.000 .0. g~rntng fr@nt 
My pla%t Helping Faculty Locate and Create Materials Educational Technology Consulting oversees an Educational 
Technology Lab which has a variety of resources to assist faculty in developing classroom presentations 
or course materials. The Educational Technology Lab maintains a database of resources at Notre Dame and 
from other sites around the country to help locate existing courseware for use in a specific discipline. 
Samples of various courseware are available for review, Books and periodicals related to educational 
technology are also available. Capabilities of the Educational Technology Lab include: Print scanning 
and special image manipulation software e Video (still and motion) digizing, editing andl output -to 
tape  Audio digitizing, sound effects and music library  Animation soflware _ Clip resources  Example 
products demos  Templates for authoring and layout  Existing product searches  The University of Notre 
Dame s Educational Media Department provides other necessary resources for courseware development. Two 
of Educational Media s sections, Creative Services and the Vitdeo Library, offer production equipment 
and content resources not available in the Educational Technolo~ Lab. Creative Services helps faculty 
find or produce photographs, computer graphics, audio, or video, These materials are available for classroom 
showing in conventional media forms through the DeBartolo Hall s Media-on-Call optical fiber media delivery 
system and can be digitized to become parts of computer-delivered presentations. Helping l?aculty Shift 
Perspectives You can t distribute a movie until all the various elements are in place and put into the 
final form of film. Once the movie is on film, you can t go back and change a particular part of the 
movie. The computer changes this paradigm. As with word processing, we have a great deal more flexibility 
to experiment with different combinations, structures, and elements, only now we are working with more 
than just words. We can experiment, prototype, compare, and rearrange multimedia elements before committing 
them to a final form. And, if the computer is the presentation medium, this can be almost an open-ended 
process of continual refinement and evolution, producing useful products along the way. stepping into 
the future      ACM SIGUCCSXX 1992 265 Movie Model Script Design Images \sound Animation Video 
Nmigation Interaction Feedback Analysis Reporting Evolution Model Anirnution 2660 ACM SIGUCCSXX19920 
 000* *oameo *OO gtut?aitkg fama ~lc pow!, 
			