
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. AlexopouJos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D. Goldsman INTRINSIC DYNAMICS AND PHARMACOMETRIC MODEL DISCRIMINATION Meyer Katzper Food and Drug Administration 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Rockville, Maryland 20857, U.S.A. ABSTRACT Comparison of two 
competing pharmacometric models is undertaken using graphic representations to elucidate their similarities 
and differences. The effect compartment model and the indirect response model are simulated and compared 
for a range of parameters to determine to what extent their dynamic characteristics can be matched. Visual 
tools such as hysteresis curves are used to examine model dynamics in a variety of ways. Differentiation 
is facilitated to the extent that competing models have distinctly defined dynamics. For the models studied 
here, the degree of difference depends on the region in parameter space which in turn relates to clinical 
response. INTRODUCTION Clinical trials are used to establish the safety and efficacy of drugs. Dose levels 
and frequency of medication are set for testing both safety and efficacy. Data from clinical trials are 
then studied to characterize the response to medication levels in terms of successful endpoints and adverse 
events. Efficacy and adverse events are both affected by the amount of drug the person is exposed to. 
Trials serve to estimate optimal dosages. Optimality varies by individual depending on drug concentration 
and drug sensitivity. The same dosage leads to different concentrations in individuals due to many causes, 
such as variability in rates of metabolism and drug clearance. Pharmacokinetics, therefore, focuses on 
determining blood plasma concentrations of drugs. Pharmacokinetics deals with the response to the presence 
of drugs. A central idea is the postulation of a direct link between concentration and response. This 
framework led to progress in many cases by guiding the adjustment of dosages to get desired concentration 
levels. Taking the concentration-response viewpoint literally failed to explain cases where greater effects 
occurred after concentrations were falling. This paper deals with two classes of models formulated to 
account for this and the similarities and differences in model predictions. 2 BACKGROUND Compartmental 
analysis assumes that the distribution of drugs in the body can be modeled by a discrete number of well 
stirred compartments. In the simplest case one compartment can satisfactorily fit the plasma concentration 
data. We deal with such a case. Effects considered are those which lag plasma concentration. We do not 
consider lag cases where the cause for delay of effect is the time needed for a drug in plasma to equilibrate 
with a target organ as such cases are accounted for by multicompartmental models. When delayed effects 
are graphed versus plasma concentration, the data form loops with two values associated with a single 
concentration (Roland and Tozer 1995). An example is shown in Figure 3b. Such graphs are referred to 
as hysteresis curves and are known in other disciplines as phase space diagrams. A way out of the multiple 
value dilemma regarding concentration and effect is known as the effect compartment model (Segre 1968, 
Verotta and Sheiner 1991). This approach postulates that the drug acts from a hypothetical effect compartment 
which uses an unobservable amount of drug. Concentration in the effect compartment, for cases considered 
in this paper, lags the concentration in the central blood compartment. By adjusting the elimination 
coefficient of the effect compartment (Keo), it is possible to collapse the hysteresis loop so that effect 
versus effect compartment concentration is a univalued function. Essentially the effect compartment concentration 
profile is shifted so that its time course coincides with the course of the effect. In our study of data 
for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) given for pain and fever, we have used this effect 
compartment methodology to account for the data. However, delay mechanisms in such cases might arise 
from the existence of a classical feedback loop controlling the level of fever or pain (Katzper and Holford 
1990). In the case of fever, the effect compartment approach is now not considered reasonable on physiological 
grounds (Roland and Tozer 1995). 1066 Intrinsic Dynamics and Pharmacometric Model Discrimination Later 
observations showed that open control loop mechanisms are sufficient to model many cases of interest 
including pain and fever (Dayneka et al, 1993, Katzper 1992). Jusko has disseminated this approach, calling 
it the indirect pharmacodynamic response model and applying it to a wide variety of drugs. In this model 
the effect is seen as the result of a balance of physiological forces, and the drug acts in affecting 
factors controlling the maintenance or loss of response. For this reason, it is referred to here as the 
dynamic response model. The direct effect model, the effect compartment model and the dynamic response 
model and their linkages are each illustrated schematically in Figure 1. In subsequent sections these 
models will be explained further. Then by using identical pharmacokinetics, the pharmacodynamics of the 
models will be compared in a variety of physiological ranges. IJhmnacoklnetic I diWCt Model 1Pharmacodynamlc 
, Effect I 1 i I I Pharmaccdynamic Model Pharmacokinetic 1 Linking Effect Functional MwJel Concentration 
II Functional Form I Physiological Dynamic Pharmacokinetic I of Drug Influeace , Model Model I II I 
* I II I II Figure 1: Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Models PHARMACODYNAMIC FORMULATION Consider the 
pharmacodynamics of a one compartment model where the concentration in the blood is representative of 
the concentration in all affected parts of the body. A widely used empirical equation for relating concentrations 
directly to effects, and known by a number of different names, is the Em ax model, E(C) = Eo + Emax*C/(EC50+C) 
where Eo is the baseline, Emax is the maximum difference from baseline, C is the concentration and EC50 
is the level of concentration required to reach Emax/2 from the baseline. The effect depends on the current 
value of the concentration. The equation captures the physiological reality of effects going to a limit. 
That is, the body can only respond up to a certain amount. At higher concentration values, one obtains 
smaller incremental responses. We use this equation in the different model constructs to be studied. 
When multiple compartments are required for representing drug distribution and equilibration, and an 
effect depends on the concentration in a physiological compartment other than the central blood compartment, 
then there IIS a phase difference between the blood concentration profile and the effect profile. When 
such compartments are physiologically definable and they contain a non-negligible portion of the drug, 
then the influence of the additional compartments can be seen in the blood concentration profile. Visual 
inspection of blood concentration data thus provides partial guidance as to the choice of the appropriate 
compartmental model. When data is not available for the other compartments then the solution is frequently 
not unique, a difficulty referred to as the identifiability problem. Let us consider the case where drug 
response lags behind plasma concentration not due to an unequilibrated physiological compartment. If 
one is to subscribe to the notion that the effect is solely and instantaneously related to the drug concentration, 
then a possible explanation is in terms of an effect compartment which does not affect the blood level 
concentration noticeably. Specifically we will look at this model in the context of an intravenous infusion 
which is terminated after a time. Our models are formulated using STELLA (Bogen 1989). The visual programming 
approach simplifies the formulation of complex models (Katzper 1992). Our model illustrations are presented 
using STELLA icons. A rectangle is a quantity or level. A pipe with a circle defines rates of change. 
Circles are for calculations or parameter settings. Arrows link quantities. For clarity of presentation 
some secondary calculations are suppressed in the STELLA model figures. The top of Figure 2 shows a one 
compartment pharmacokinetic model with constant infusion, first order clearance and elimination rate 
Ke. The middle of the figure is the effect compartment model. The line from Concentration to Transfer 
links the effect compartment to the plasma concentration. Keo is the dissipation rate for the effect 
compartment, which controlls the phase of this compartment with respect to the concentration. The Effect 
Concentration drives the Effect circle at the bottom of the figure. The Effect circle at the bottom contains 
the Emax equation. It is shown explicitly attached to it s parameters. 1068 Katzper Concentration Infusion 
Q Q Ke~ Effect Concentration\ I Transfer EC dissipation I EMax Effect EC50 Figure 2: Concentration 
and Effect Compartment Model . . ..足.,, .... . 100 COncentrahOn . . .. ., .  8 \ .+ .. .足 . ...-. . 
足 4 d 0 800 feet 4.00 Plaama Concentrahon 0.00 :.00 50.00 100.00 Figure 3a: Concentration and Effect 
time course 3b: Hysteresis loop. Effect versus Concentration The plasma concentration of drug rises during 
the infusion and subsequently falls as shown for a sample case in Figure 3a together with the associated 
effect. Plotting effect versus plasma concentration, we obtain the hysteresis curve shown in Figure 3b. 
The elimination coefficient of the effect compartment, Keo, due to its controls of the effect compartment 
concentration with respect to the central compartment, controls the shape of the hysteresis curve. When 
experimental data is being fit, by varying Keo, it is possible to collapse the hysteresis loop so that 
effect versus effect compartment concentration is a univalued function. This is achieved by alignment 
of the phase of the effect compartment concentration with the phase of the effect. In this way there 
is a one to one relationship between effect compartment concentration and the effect. In the simulation, 
Keo is specified and the effect compartment concentration drives the simultaneous Emax model. If we consider 
the effect to be influencing a physiological dynamic process, then one way in which it can be modeled 
as an open loop control system. Such a control system can be represented as shown in the upper part of 
Figure 4. We shall refer to this model as the dynamic model as it attempts to represent the dynamics 
of the system. After a perturbation, the system will return to its equilibrium level. Under changed conditions, 
it will reequilibrate to a new level. The lower part of the figure is the drug pharmacokinetics. The 
connecting arrow between the models is a possible effect of the drug. The functional relationship is 
taken as an Emax form dependent on the plasma concentration, C/(C50+C) ,where C50 is the concentration 
to reach half maximal indirect influence on the effect. This equation is incorporated in the Link circle. 
The relationship can be thought of as a receptor response curve. Results similar to those shown in Figure 
3 can be obtained for this model. Plasma Concentration Infusion Elimination D Q c n Ke Kd m Effect dissipation 
Maintenance Figure 4: Dynamic Effect Model Intrinsic Dynamics and Pharmacometric Model Discrimination 
COMPARATIVE DYNAMICS In their study of the dynamic response model, Dayneka et al. carried out a series 
of simulations comparing four variants of the model structure to the effect compartment model (Dayneka 
et al. 1993). Using literature values for the parameters of a selected drug (Methylprednisolone) they 
simulated widely differing dose levels with bolus or infusion delivery. They then investigated how well 
the effect compartment model could fit this data. Reasonable fits could be obtained for any given dose. 
The most telling critique was the observation of the dose dependency of the parameters to achieve the 
best fit. This is biologically implausible. Verotta turned the approach around (Verotta 1995). He showed, 
using simulation and experimental data, good fits with the effect compartment model in cases where the 
dynamic response model gave inferior results. None of this dose respone related work will be replicated 
here. Our conclusion from this dispute is that unbiased guidance is needed to assist in determining the 
appropriate model. The question I thought worthwhile to explore was whether the models have distinctive 
intrinsic behavior which can be compared to experimental data to indicate which model to choose. When 
we look at the data that we collect for pain or fever alleviation, we seek to identify the underlying 
model which is the basis of the results we see. Identifications are strengthened if they match a distinctive 
feature in the time course of the data. To study the issue of intrinsic dynamic behavior, we chose parameters 
to represent distinctive clinical responses. Dosing was set to a constant level infusion for a fixed 
time. For such cases the concentration rises to a maximum and then decays, as shown in figure 3a, allowing 
us to observe the range of responses of the system. If the drug is effective, we expect pain or fever 
alleviation after a time lag, and as the concentration vanishes the pain or fever will resume if underlying 
conditions are unchanged. A number of reasonable models can fit this behavior. We therefore will look 
at our models over a range of parametric values to see if we can determine when the models results can 
be differentiated and when hysteresis representations help in the process of discrimination. All of the 
cases are setup with the same pharmacokinetics. A single compartment model is used. An infusion of 20 
units per time interval is given for 18 intervals. Data is collected for 18 more intervals. Subsequently 
this was extended to a total of 50 intervals to capture late differences between the models. The number 
of intervals affects the parameter estimates and the apparent closeness of the model results. Elimination 
is via first order kinetics and the elimination constant is .2 per unit time. If the infusion were given 
till equilibration the concentration reached would be 100 units. Since both our dynamic response model 
and the effect of the effect compartment model will be driven by Emax formulations the relative value 
of the relevant half maximum concentration (C50 or EC50, see Figure 2 and Figure 4) willl affect the 
time course of the drug effect. So these two parameters should have a large degree of comparability. 
Fc~rconvenience, in both cases we have set the baseline value Eo to zero. For the effect cc)mpartment 
model the dynamics of concentration buildup in the effect compartment and the controller of phase is 
the elimination rate Keo. FOI-increasing values of Keo the plhase of the effect compartment will approach 
that of the central compartment, For the dynamic response model the speed of dissipation of prior influences 
is controlled by KD, the dissipation rate. Larger values of KD will have the effect more closely track 
the concentration. So we expect the effects of Keo and KD to be comparable. Experimentation with the 
models for different parametric values showed that this was the case. We present and discuss a number 
of examples systematically to show the relationship between parametric values and comparative model results. 
Matching of the models was carried out by fixing the parameters of one model and varying those of the 
second model. At first matching was done visually and then with a least squares fit. Our first case is 
set for a large time klg between concentration and effect. As explained, this is achieved by setting 
KD and Keo low. The relationship between concentration and effect is set to be highly nonlinear. This 
is achieved by setting C50 and EC50 low with respect the associated concentrations achieved. The figures 
provide alternate representations comparing model results. Figure 5 shows a direct comparison of effect 
versus time. Effect compartment ,,,,,. . .. . 0 18.75 37.50 56.25 Figure 5: Comparative time course 
of effect  ~atzper Figure 6 is the hysteresis loop comparison. Direct comparison shows an apparent closeness 
in results between the two models, but with systematic differences. The large area enclosed by the hysteresis 
loop indicates a large lag in effect relative to plasma concentration. 8,00 Dynamic Effect _ Effect 
Compartment Effect 4.00- Plasma Concentration 0.00 0,00 50.00 100.00 Figure 6: Comparative hysteresis 
loops An interesting feature is that the dynamic model achieves its maximum fairly late during the decline 
of the concentration. Another feature, which is good from a medical perspective is the maintenance of 
the effect after infusion stops for a steep drop in concentration, Figure 7, a plot of the effects predicted 
by one model versus the other, would give a straight diagonal line for identical models. As such, the 
deviations from fourty five degrees show the deviations of the models from each 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1, u 2.00 
400 6.00 6 OC Figure 7: Comparative effect predictions other. The reclining figure eight in this figure 
indicates the lead , lag, lead, lag, reversals of the two models. Now that we know this, by looking back 
at the other two representations, this pattern of lead and lag is also seen in those plots. Such systematic 
variation over a range of values, if it is sufficiently large, allows one to discriminate between models 
for a given set of data. Figure 8 plots the difference between the models (Ec effect-dynamic effect) 
as a function of time. At this scale, the systematic variation in leading and lagging is very clear. 
The influence of the infusion and subsequent decay noticeable. 03 0.1 -01 -03 -05 Figure 8: Time course 
of model difference The second case was set to retain a large lag by keeping KD and Keo low but was set 
to approximate linearity in the dynamic model link by setting C50 high and in the effect link by setting 
EC50 high. One might think of the modeling process as the application of transformation operators on 
the input variables. An examination of the structure of the two models shows that they can be looked 
upon as two similar transformations taken in different sequence. The operations are non-commutative. 
However, for certain parametric combinations they approach commutativity. In plain English, the models 
approach each other in terms of their results. For this case, we describe the graphic results. There 
is a near superposition of model results in a direct comparison versus time. The size of the effect is 
a little less than half of that in the first case. The hysteresis curve still has a large lag, but the 
linearity of the underlying relationship causes a slower rise in effect and a more rapid decline. This 
is the case for both models which are nearly superimposed. The direct comparison of the effects (not 
shown) maintains the reclining figure eight, but in a squashed form approximating a diagonal line. The 
models difference curve (not shown) retains lead lag variations because the plot scale is an order of 
magnitude smaller than the prior case. This demonstrates that systematic variation between the models 
is maintained. An improved match between the two models can not be expected from further parameter variation. 
This is acceptable for practical purposes as there is no known outcome which would be affected. The third 
case is that of a small lag between blood concentration and effect. This is achieved by setting KD and 
Keo high. In addition the effect is in the linear relationship range for linking effect to concentration. 
Linearity is achieved by setting C50 and EC50 to high values. Intrinsic Dynamics anti Pharmacometric 
Model Discrimination In this case, not only do the time curves of the models coincide but the effect 
curve closely approximates the shape of the infusion plasma concentration curve. At the selected parameter 
settings, both models still retain a lag as seen by the reduced enclosed area in Figure 9. The hysteresis 
curve for each model nearly coincide, though the minor differences are seen when high resolution graphics 
are used. A single example is shown here. . ,,,.. 040-. - - --. - Effect ; ,,. . . Concentration 0.00 
 0.00 50 00 10000 Figure 9: Effect versus concentration with reduced lag and a partially linearized 
link. As KD and Keo are increased, the loop collapse tends to a straight line. The theoretical difference 
between the models is much smaller than measurement noise. This same loop collapse, which results in 
both models, has a completely different interpretation in each model. Here we directly face the issue 
that two very different models can be so dynamically similar as to be indistinguishable. 0.9 * Effect 
 0.8-. 07 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3. . 0.2-~ ol-. Concentration 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 Figure 10: Consequence of 
a nonlinear link and rechtced lag on the hysteresis curve  The final case in our illustrative set is 
also chosen to retain a small lag between blood concentration and effect. As before, the lag is achieved 
by keeping K]> and Keo high. However, here the nonlinear range for linking effect to concentration has 
been chcsen by setting C50 and EC50 lowwith respect to the concentration level achieved by the dosing 
regimen. The two parameters of the respective models can be adjusted so that the model results nearly 
coincide. The hysteresis curve, Figure 10, clearly shows the nonlinearity of the effect. The comparative 
computer graphics of the hysteresis curves (not shown here) demonstrate the retention of the lead-lag 
pattern, but with only a very small gap between the curves. The collapse of the area of the hysteresis 
curve in the limit will lead to a logistic like curve. 6 DISCUSSION All of these studies have been made 
without the random variability whiclh accompanies experimental data. A reason for this investigation 
was to determine whether the structural form of the model formulations was sufficient to create dynamic 
results which could not be made to coincide. Then it might be possible to clifferentiate between models 
based solely on the observed data even when noise N present. Furthermore, different graphical representations 
were used to enhance the difference signal. The rather unexpected result, as has been shown, is that 
for the present dosing regimen, differences are discernible only in the parameter range giving strong 
model effects of large lag and nonlinearity. The limits of differentiation are dependent on the noise 
level. Combining information regarding the intrinsic response with results from multiple dose level fitting 
will enhance model discrimination. Real data also do not allow for the density of observations or the 
length of observation used here. It must be kept in mind that we have purposely dealt with an idealized 
case. In our studies of pain the data are more complex with contributions from placebo effects and gastric 
transit variability forcing us to construct more complex models (Harter and Katzper 1994). In matching 
complex data our guidance has come from having multiple data sources and from physiological considerations 
(Harter and Katzper 1993, Harter and Katzper 1995). Phase relationships between the models require a 
long interval of data for the changing relationships to aid in discerning which model is in better agreement 
with the data. Short interval fits will not do the job. This model study with its limited focus only 
provides general guidance for the real problems we are addressing. Additional sources of information 
must be sought in deciding which model is more appropriate. 1072  7 CONCLUSION To assist in interpreting 
the time course and hysteresis loops of the data we have seen, a series of simulation experiments have 
been carried out for competing models. A selected summary of these runs has been presented. These are 
used to compare results from matched alternate models. The simulations have shown under what conditions 
model results are most easily differentiated. Under single dose conditions, maximum separation will occur 
for the greatest lag between concentration and effect and for highly nonlinear links between the pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic model components. A finding which is important to note is that in spite of disparate 
conceptual formulations, the intrinsic model dynamics is such that it is frequently difficult to discriminate 
between models. Parametric values of interest are physiologically determined. Current experimental approaches 
are not intentionally designed to affect these physiological values directly. Discrimination may be achieved 
by observation of many individuals with their naturally occurring physiological variability. This is 
especially so for drugs in which model effects are strong. On the other hand, with only limited noisy 
data, one might be misled by the model fit obtained. When both models are approximately equivalent in 
their ability to fit available data one may ask why worry about which model is used? Because the model 
is our conceptual framework for understanding the subject matter. A model corresponding to the underlying 
reality has the possibility of forming the basis for further fruitful investigation and elaboration. 
In the converse situation, we have a well fitted dead end. REFERENCES Bogen, D. K. 1989. Simulation Software 
for the Macintosh. Science 246:138-142. Dayneka, N. L., Garg, V., and W. J. Jusko 1993. Comparison of 
Four Basic Models of Indirect Pharmacodynamic Responses. Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Biopharmaceutics. 
21:457-4 78. Harter, J. G. and M. Katzper, 1993. Therapeutic Implications of Effecter Response Alternatives. 
In Proceedings of the SCS Mulliconference on Simulation in the Health Sciences and Services, 66-70. Society 
for Computer Simulation, San Diego, California. Harter, J. G. and M. Katzper. 1994. Refinements in Modeling 
Pain and Its Response to Analgesics. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 55:123. Katzper Harter, 
J. G. and M. Katzper. 1995. Components of Pain Alleviation. Western Simulation Multiconference: Health 
Sciences, Physiological and Pharmacological Simulation Studies, 159-164. Society for Computer Simulation, 
Las Vegas, Nevada. Katzper, M. and N. H. G. Holford. 1990. Alternate Pharmacodynamic Models for Fever 
Reduction by Ibuprofen. Third Symposium: Frontiers of Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. Baltimore, 
Maryland. Katzper, M. 1992a The Use of Visual Programming for Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynarnic Simulation. 
Proceedings of the SCS Multiconference on Simulation in Health Care and Social Services, 65-69. Society 
for Computer Simulation, Newport Beach, California. Katzper, M. 1992b Control System Underpinning of 
Hysteresis Loops. Second Jerusalem Conference on Pharmaceutical Sciences and Clinical Pharmacology. Jerusalem, 
Israel. Roland, M. and Tozer, T. N. 1995. Clinical Pharmacokinetics: Concepts and Applications. 3rd edition. 
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins. Segre, G. 1968. Kinetics of Interactions Between Drugs and Biological 
Systems. 11Farmaco, 23:907-918 Verotta, D. and L. B. Sheiner. 1991. Semiparametric Anal ysk of Non-Steady-State 
Pharrnacodynamic Data. J. Pharmacokinetics and Biophannaceutics, 19:691-712. Verotta, D. 1995. Semiparametric 
Direct and Indirect Action Models for Pharmacokinetic/Pharmaco足dynamic Data. Western Simulation Multiconference: 
Health Sciences, Physiological and Pharmacological Simulation Studies. 177-182. Society for Computer 
Simulation, Las Vegas, Nevada. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY MEYER KATZPER is a research analyst at the Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). He carries out modeling and analytic studies to assist in the drug 
review process. He teaches introductory and advanced modeling courses in the CDER Staff College.  
			