
 Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain INTRODUCTION TO WORK FLOW Don Lazzari Systems Modeling Corporation 504 Beaver Street 
Sewickley, Pennsylvania 15143, U.S.A. ABSTRACT This paper highlights the features and functions of BPSimulator 
, a simulation analysis tool focused on work flow and business processes. Based on Systems Modeling Corporation 
s general-purpose simulation system, Arena , BPSimulator leverages all of the power and flexibility of 
Arena while providing the business analyst with an intuitive interface and a short learning curve. Like 
Arena, it is a comprehensive system that addresses all phases of a simulation project from input data 
analysis to the analysis of simulation output data. 1 INTRODUCTION Recent advances in simulation technology 
have created a greater awareness and use of simulation as a decision support tool. Many top-level decision 
makers are now more aware of the potential benefits of simulation. However, even with the many important 
advances that have been made over the past several years, there are still many cases where business processes 
are being designed and implemented without the benefit of simu­lation. A very small percentage of systems 
that could benefit from simulation are actually simulated; the pri­mary reason for this is the high level 
of effort required to employ simulation technology successfully. The key to making simulation technology 
more widely used is to make the tools significantly easier to learn and use with­out sacrificing modeling 
power and flexibility. BPSimulator is focused on bringing the use of simulation to broad a new classes 
of users; users who may find much decision support benefit in simulation tools but who may not have the 
background or, perhaps more importantly, the time to master a comprehensive, general-purpose simulation 
tool. Its application focus addresses the needs of the business process analyst activity-based costing, 
data inputioutput from Micro­soft Excel , and the ability to import from process mapping tools like BPWin@ 
from Logic Works and MODELING WITH BPSIMULATOR@ Dr. Robert Crosslin Technology Economics International 
11212 Stephalee Lane Rockville, Maryland 20852, U.S.A. Vision from Visio Corporation modeling constructs 
for worker efficiency and rework. The key idea behind BPSimulator is to present the user with an easy-to-master 
tool set that still provides all of the robust simulation capability necessary to model work flow and 
business processes successfully and accurately. For advanced users who requir~ an extra level of modeling 
sophistication, BPSimulator can run with Systems Modeling s general-purpose simulation system, Arena, 
thus allowing the advanced user access to Arena and SIMAN modeling constructs as well as C and FORTRAN 
subroutines.  2 OVERVIBW BPSimulator provides an integrated thrnework for building business process 
simulation models. Tools for input data analysis, model building, interactive execu­tion, animation, 
model verification, and output analysis are all contained within the bounds of BPSimulator. 2.1 Model 
Window The model window is where new models are created, existing models are modified, animations are 
developed and models are executed. Since it is a native 32-bit Windows application, BPSimulator takes 
full advantage of the easy-to-use Microsoftm Windowsm operating system interface by including such components 
as 3-D controls, toolbars, status bars, tool tips, a context­sensitive help system, True-Type fonts, 
document windows, and common dialogs. Like any Windows application, model windows can be moved, resized, 
enlarged to full screen, or minimized to an icon. You can also have multiple model windows open in the 
work area at the same time. When a model window is first open, all of the toolbars are automatically 
displayed. The modeler can essentially design his c)r her own workspace by moving the toolbars around 
or turning them off based on his or her own preference. 429 Lazzari and Crosslin The model window is 
where models and their associ­ated animations are developed. This is done by: select­ing modules from 
the BPSimulator tool set, placing them in the model window, responding to prompts in a dialog that appears 
when the user double-clicks on the module s handle and connecting modules to form a logical flow, When 
most modules are placed, basic ani­mation constructs (e.g., queues, stations and resource icons) are 
placed simultaneously. 3 THE BPSIMULATOR TOOL SET The BPSimulator contains 10 modules used for model 
development. Each module represents one or more modeling constructs used to depict a component of a system. 
The crux of the BPSimulator tool set is the Activity module. Within the Activity module (see Figure 1), 
a user can define the activity itself, which resources are needed to perform the activity, the processing 
time, inbound and outbound decision logic and various cost and rework parameters all by pointing and 
clicking with the mouse. The Activity module also makes it easy to model a system in a hierarchical fashion 
by allowing the user to specify whether an activity is a parent or child of a parent activity. When placed, 
the Activity module also brings with it entry and exit animation stations and icons to represent the 
processing state of the Activity and its associated queue. Real-time animation for any of the default 
statistics collected at each Activity can also be displayed simply by flipping switches. .,r,-~w.~, , 
.. :/: .t-,&#38;&#38;&#38;&#38;&#38; . ,::: -?:; ~~ { ~;: :;,  ,: .: r E&#38;kXi!xi ,., :;, p:, .,:. 
:, .. ..-.. ... i Figure 1: Activity Module Main Dialog 4 INTEGRATION WITH EXCEL@, BPWI@ AND VISIO@ Since 
a majority of business analysis data resides within spreadsheets, BPSimulator provides several ways to 
leverage work performed in other products. For input data, BPSimulator provides OLE func­tionality allowing 
the user to embed an Excel spread­sheet directly into the model window. This not only provides easy access 
to Excel for editing input datw it also gives the user a single repository to view all input data at 
a glance. If the modeler has setup critical model­ing values as variable names instead of hard coding 
specific values in the menu prompts, data for a simula­tion run can be read directly into the model through 
BPSimulator s Variables module, thus giving the modeler an added layer of flexibility in the model he 
or she constructs. After collecting statistics from a simulation run, the user has the option of displaying 
the summary report directly in Excel and with the help of a utility included with BPSimulator, the entire 
report parses correctly into Excel s familiar cell format. Once in Excel, the user can take advantage 
of the graphical representation and data manipulation that Excel affords. Since a majority of business 
process analysis projects begin with process mapping, BPSimulator can leverage the work already performed 
in some process mapping tools. With BPWin, IDEF modeling tool by Logic Works, information stored in the 
IDEF diagram can be imported directly into BPSimulator, essentially creating a simulation model from 
the IDEF model. Flowcharts created with the BPSimulator stencil in Visio can also be imported into BPSimulator, 
again resulting in a simulation model being built from a static process mapping tool. 5 INPUT ANALYZER 
The graphical, menu-driven Input Analyzer provides users with the capability of fitting process or perform­ance 
data to statistical distributions. Users can evaluate data downloaded from a file and may display the 
input data in the form of a histogram. The data may then be fitted to one of 14 commonly referenced distributions. 
Users unfamiliar with the data characteristics may choose to do a best fit analysis by selecting the 
Fit All option. This will perform statistical tests and choose the distribution that has the minimum 
mean square error. Additionally, the expression required as input to the Arena model will be provided 
and can be copied directly from the Input Analyzer and pasted into your Arena model. Introduction to 
Work Flow Modeling with BPSimulator Other options provided allow the user to modify parameters related 
to the input distribution to identify alternative input scenarios. , ., -,--, ,.-,. ­ -s.-! -,.2, 3 ) 
-1.., 0... ml 1., . r.. -. ., tie-. .. ,.. . * .--. .. ,! ZI.uc . -L CM,-w ,- , . ..,, --------?.­,.. 
.-tile ., ,,., c. 9-. . .... % ,.,%%,, .,,. ,,, , 4/. 4 Figure 2: Curve Fitting with the Input Analyzer 
 6 OUTPUT ANALYZER The graphical, menu-driven Output Analyzer provides users the capability to evaluate 
the statistical reliability of the results generated from their simulation model. Commonly used output 
data testing procedures such as correlograms, t-tests, data filters, moving averages, analysis of variance, 
and confidence intervals are included. These tests allow users to define and evaluate system performance 
or to compare the results from two or more simulation runs that evaluate different scenarios. The Output 
Analyzer is integrated within Arena such that a user can execute a simulation run, then select out­put 
analysis options that will display system perform­ance characteristics. Figure 3: Performance Plot with 
Output Analyzer 7 SUMMARY BPSimulator is an object-based, hierarchical modeling tool that offers the 
business analyst the power of simula­tion analysis without the learning curve and start up costs typically 
associated with simulation. It gives the business process analyst a decision support tool that combines 
the capabilities and power of a simulation language with an easy user interface for model building. BPSimulator 
is a comprehensive analysis tool that spans the scope of a simulation project from input data analysis 
to the analysis and presentation of model results. REFERENCES Hammann, J. and Markovitch, N. (1995) 
Introduction to Arena in Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ. 
Pegden, C. D., D. Davis (1992), Arena: A SIMAN/Cinema-Based Hierarchical Modeling System in Proceedings 
of the 1992 Winter Simula­tion Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ. Technology Economics International and 
Systems Modeling Corporation (1996), BPSimulator User s Guide, Sewickley, PA Systems Modeling Corporation 
(1995), Arena Template Reference Guide, Sewickley, PA. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES DON LAZZARI is responsible 
for Systems Modeling s global work flow business. Don has a Bachelor of Arts and a degree in Writing 
from the University of Pittsburgh. Before joining Systems Modeling, Don held various sales and marketing 
positions with Matthews International. He also spent several years as a freelance writer/producer for 
KDKA-TV and a number of Pittsburgh area hospitals. ROBERT CROSSLIN, Ph.D., is President of Technology 
Economics International, a Business Process Reengineering training and consulting firm based in Rockville, 
MD. He has consulted with companies and governments in both the United States and Europe. Prior to his 
founding TEI, Dr. Ckosslin was a professor of Information Systems at The American University in Washington, 
DC. 
			