
 Introducing a Current-based Interactive Plant Sungjae Hwang1 Graduate School of Culture Technology Korea 
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology Kibeom Lee2 Graduate School of Culture Technology Korea 
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology Woonseung Yeo3 Graduate School of Culture Technology Korea 
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1. INTRODUCTION1 1 E-mail: best@kaist.ac.kr 2 E-mail: kiblee@kaist.ac.kr 
3 E-mail: woon@kaist.ac.kr Until now, there have been several approaches to connect and communicate with 
objects around us. Akousmaflore[1] and Kimapetra[2] are examples of such approaches, in which they provided 
a channel of communication to objects through specific actions. In this paper, we propose a new method 
for interacting with both organisms and objects, using the change in electric current when a user conducts 
a gesture on the target of interaction, ultimately widening the spectrum of the object s reaction based 
on the user s behavior. For our installation, we used a plant as the main target of interaction. I 2. 
CONCEPT2 The plants and trees that exist among the city landscape are already an interior decoration 
for the city rather than a form of life. We try to establish a communication channel with nature through, 
not only vision, but also through the sense of touch. Thus, our aim is to search for the rearrangement 
of perception through a new sympathetic communication method rather than the dichotomous coexistence 
of humans and nature. The attempt to level humans and nature begins with the addition of a new protocol 
to clear their identities, and through this, humans have a new understanding of nature s existence. 
Figure 1. Patterns of the touch 3. METHODOLOGY3 This piece was designed to utilize the conductivity 
property found both in humans and other forms of life. When in contact, a current flows from the person 
to the plant, reaching the sensor placed inside it, giving different values according to the gesture. 
In other words, the change in voltage that results from the user's contact with the plant is recorded 
and graphed by a computer as shown in Figure 1. This graph is then analyzed with a pattern matching 
algorithm and compared with preconfigured gesture patterns. This is possible even though different people 
have different resistance because their potential differences remain the same. When the recorded pattern 
matches a pre-recorded gesture, the computer transmits auditory and visual feedback to the user, creating 
an experience in which the user feels like s/he is communicating with the plant. Here, when the plant 
is stroked, tickled, or hit, the user is given different auditory and visual feedback using butterflies 
to mirror the emotions of the plant, as shown in Figure 2.   Figure 2. Installation of Interactive 
Plant 4. FUTURE DIRECTIONS This artwork presented a plant that showed child reactions to common gestures, 
such as tickling, hitting, and stroking. In the future, we will increase the number of gestures that 
the algorithm can detect. Also, we will create more characters with various plants in order to make the 
artwork more diverse. Finally, we will search for applications of our artwork to be used in areas such 
as education, entertainment, and so on. 5. REFERENCES [1] Akousmaflore http://www.scenocosme.com/akousmaflore_en.htm. 
 [2] Kimapetra http://www.scenocosme.com/kimapetra_en.htm  
			