
 Investigating the Impact of the External Environment on Strategic Information Systems Planning: A Qualitative 
Inquiry Irwin Brown Department of Information Systems University of Cape Town Private Bag, Rondebosch, 
7701 27 (0)21 650 4260 Irwin.Brown@uct.ac.za ABSTRACT Strategic information systems planning (SISP) 
is a key issue to IS managers. The SISP approach employed by organizations is very much dependent on 
the internal and external environment. Recent research points to a gap between the manner in which IS 
researchers and practitioners perceive SISP. In this paper we aim to elucidate this gap by comparing 
the way in which researchers and practitioners view the external environment and its impact on SISP. 
The researcher perspective was established through literature review. For the practitioner view, data 
was gathered through semi-structured interviews with 7 IS professionals who had experience of SISP. The 
interview data was analysed using techniques borrowed from the grounded theory methodology. Through this 
analysis it was found that practitioners, while recognizing the impact of the general external environment 
on SISP, are especially cognisant of the external IT environment and its impact. Academic literature, 
on the other hand, tends to focus on the external business environment, with very little research conducted 
on the external IT environment in the context of SISP. The implications of these and other findings are 
discussed in the paper.  Categories and Subject Descriptors H.1.1 [Systems and Information Theory] 
 General Terms Management, Human Factors, Theory  Keywords Strategic Information Systems Planning; Grounded 
Theory Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. SAICSIT 2008, 6 - 8 October 2008, Wilderness Beach Hotel, Wilderness, South Africa Copyright &#38;#169; 
2008 ACM 978-1-60558-286-3/08/10 $5.00 1.INTRODUCTION Strategic information systems planning (SISP) 
continues to be of concern to IS Managers despite decades of research (Luftman et al., 2005). SISP has 
been defined as the process of identifying a portfolio of applications that support as well as have a 
strategic impact on organizational goals and objectives (Lederer and Sethi, 1992). The process also entails 
identifying the necessary resources (human, financial and technical), change management considerations 
and organizational structures necessary for implementation (Baker, 1995). Volatility and turbulence in 
the external environment have a major impact on how organizations carry out SISP, and as a result there 
have been several studies examining this influence (Grover and Segars, 2005, Salmela et al., 2000; Teo 
and King, 1997). Recent evidence points to a gap between the way in which IS researchers and practitioners 
conceive and problematise SISP (Teubner, 2007). The research question therefore arises as to what differences 
exist between academic research and practice concerning the conceptualization of the external environment 
and its impact on SISP? The objectives of this study are threefold. The first objective is to review 
academic literature on the external environment and its impact on SISP. The second objective is to investigate 
the external environment and its impact on SISP from a practitioner perspective. The final objective 
is to compare the two views and identify where gaps exist. Reasons for any gaps will be proffered. In 
the next section, the review of literature on the external environment and SISP is presented. Following 
that, there is a section explaining the research methodology. The results of the analysis are then presented. 
These results are discussed and implications drawn through comparisons with the literature. Limitations 
and further research follow, after which conclusions are made.  2.LITERATURE REVIEW SISP has been conceptualized 
as an input-process-output model made up of seven major categories, these being Planning Resources, 
Internal Environment, External Environment, Planning Process, Information Plan, Plan Implementation, 
and Alignment respectively (Lederer and Salmela, 1996). The key inputs into the Planning Process are 
the Resources necessary for planning. These resources are employed in order to create an Information 
Plan. Implementation of this plan leads to outcomes such as Alignment of IS with organizational objectives. 
The SISP process is impacted by the environmental context, which can be divided into that which is Internal 
to the organization, and that which is External to it. Lederer and Salmela (1996) hypothesise that A 
more stable external environment produces a more effective and efficient planning process (p. 242). In 
this paper, the SISP process, the external environment and the relationship between the two will be examined 
in a greater level of detail.  2.1SISP Process Research in SISP has gradually shifted away from studies 
focused on prescriptions, methods and methodologies towards more holistic studies that look at characteristics 
and approaches (Baker, 1995; Earl, 1993). Alternative approaches to SISP have been identified, where 
an approach is a more descriptive construct than methods, embodying several dimensions (Earl, 1993). 
Earl (1993), for example, described it as the nature and place of method, the attention to and style 
of process, and the focus on and probability of implementation (p. 7). Segars et al. (1998) distinguished 
between alternative approaches in terms of their level of rationality and adaptation. Characteristics 
that were deemed to constitute rationality were comprehensiveness, flow (top down versus bottom up), 
focus (control versus creativity) and formalisation. Adaptation was described by the participation profile 
for SISP, and frequency of SISP meetings. Doherty et al. (1999) in a replication of the Segars et al. 
(1998) study included additional characteristics locus of ownership for SISP (business or IS), the extent 
to which alignment is explicitly sought, the degree of focus on implementation, and the extent to which 
competitiveness from IT is sought. Other characteristics that are further identified from the literature 
include the level of integration between business planning and IS planning (BP-ISP integration) (Teo 
and King, 1997), and alacrity, which refers to the speed with which SISP is accomplished (Lederer and 
Sethi, 1998). These characteristics and their definitions are displayed in Table 1 below, taken from 
Brown (2004). Table 1: SISP Characteristics (Segars et al. 1998, Doherty et al. 1999) as in Brown (2004) 
 Characteristic Definition Comprehensiveness The extent to which an organisation attempts to be exhaustive 
or inclusive in making and integrating decisions. Flow The locus of authority or devolution of responsibilities 
for strategic planning (top­down, bottom-up, interactive) Focus The balance between creativity and control 
orientations inherent within the strategic planning system. Formalisation The existence of structures, 
techniques, written procedures, and policies that guide the planning process. Frequency The frequency 
of planning activities or cycles, and, relatedly, the frequency of evaluation/revision of strategic choices 
(occasional vs. continuous). Participation The breadth of involvement in strategic planning (narrow vs. 
wide) Ownership The locus of ownership for the planning process (business/IS group/mixed) Alignment The 
degree to which alignment between corporate and IS strategies is explicitly sought. Implementation Focus 
during the planning process on the implications for implementation Competitive focus The range of benefits 
sought (primarily efficiency vs. wider benefits, including competitive advantage) BP-ISP Integration 
The level of integration between business planning and SISP (business-led, IT-led, reciprocal or full 
integration) (Teo and King, 1997) Alacrity The speed of the SISP process (Lederer and Sethi, 1998) Each 
of the characteristics may vary in any given context, giving rise to a plethora of possible alternative 
approaches to SISP, based on patterns of variation along the characteristics. Earl (1993) identified 
through case studies of UK organisations five distinct approaches to SISP business-led, method-driven, 
administrative, technological and organisational, respectively. The organisational approach was found 
to be the most successful (Earl, 1993). Using the characteristics suggested by Segars et al. (1998) to 
assess this approach reveals that it has elements of rationality (medium to high on comprehensiveness; 
interactive with respect to flow, i.e., top-down and bottom-up; medium in terms of formalisation; and 
focused on both control and creativity). It is also adaptive (fairly wide participation, and frequent 
SISP sessions as needed). Segars et al. (1998) in their study of large commercial organisations in the 
USA found an approach that was high on rationality (high comprehensiveness and formalisation, top-down 
in flow and focused on control) and adaptation (broad participation profiles and frequent planning meetings) 
to be the most successful. As with Earl (1993) they referred to this as an organisational approach. Doherty 
et al. (1999) in their UK study came up with similar findings that an approach exhibiting rationality 
and adaptation, and best described as organisational was the most successful. It differed slightly from 
that of Segars et al. (1998) in that it was characterised by a focus on creativity rather than control. 
Salmela et al. (2000) found what they termed a comprehensive approach to be more successful than an incremental 
approach in the context of a turbulent environment. An assessment of this comprehensive approach reveals 
that it has similar characteristics to what Earl (1993), Segars et al. (1998) and Doherty et al. (1999) 
refer to as an organisational approach. 2.2External Environment Despite the importance of the external 
environment to SISP, it has not received much research attention. Brown (2004) found that out of a sample 
of 136 SISP articles published between 1991 and 2002, only 19% addressed in one way or another the external 
environment and its impact on SISP. The only other category to have received less attention was that 
of IS plan implementation (8% of articles). The lack of attention to the external environment may be 
due to the fact that the impacts of the external environment on SISP are primarily indirect, through 
the internal environment. Nevertheless, the study of this category is important as attention shifts to 
planning for inter-organisational systems, where suppliers, customers and partners play a more significant 
role (Finnegan et al., 1999). The hypothesis suggested by Lederer and Salmela (1996) concerning the external 
environment implies that the stability of the external environment should be examined for its impact 
on SISP. Many studies have investigated instability or environmental uncertainty (Sabherwal and King, 
1992; Teo and King, 1997). Environmental uncertainty has been conceptualised as consisting of three major 
dimensions dynamism, heterogeneity, and hostility respectively (Sabherwal and King, 1992; Teo and King, 
1997). Dynamism is defined as the rate and unpredictability of change in the environment; Heterogeneity 
as the number and diversity of external factors in the environment, and Hostility as the threat posed 
by elements of the environment such as tough competition and dwindling markets (Sabherwal and King, 1992). 
  2.3Impact of Environmental Uncertainty on SISP A major problem facing organisations is that environmental 
uncertainty can make even a well-formulated plan obsolete and impractical. SISP at the same time can 
be used to reduce uncertainty, and is increasingly recognised as a necessity for companies to survive 
in an uncertain competitive environment (Teo and King, 1997; Salmela et al. 2000). Environmental conditions 
increase the difficulty of conducting SISP, but at the same time organisations adopt coping mechanisms 
to deal with these difficulties, leading to more sophisticated SISP (Choe, 2003). The negative impacts 
of environmental factors become difficult to isolate as a result (Brown, 2004). Environmental uncertainty 
is associated with greater user participation in SISP (Choe, 2003). Broad participation profiles are 
indicative of adaptation (Segars and Grover, 1999). A comprehensive approach to SISP has been found to 
be more successful than an incremental approach in the context of a turbulent environment (Salmela et 
al., 2000). An assessment of this comprehensive approach reveals that it has high levels of rationality 
evidenced by comprehensiveness (as the name implies), a top-down flow, a control rather than creativity 
focus and high levels of formalisation. At the same time it has characteristics of adaptation due to 
high levels of participation and frequently scheduled planning meetings, as the need arises. It is similar 
to the successful rational-adaptive approach described by Segars and Grover (1999). Salmela and Spil 
(2002) derived a method incorporating both comprehensive and incremental practices to instantiate this 
rational-adaptive approach. The success of rational-adaptation in uncertain environments may be due to 
the fact that in such contexts purely rational approaches suffer from lack of implementation brought 
about by obsolescence and lack of buy-in, while purely incremental, adaptive approaches may result in 
plans insufficiently detailed to allow for implementation (Lederer and Sethi, 1992). Grovers and Segars 
(2005) provide additional support for the findings of Salmela et al. (2000). They demonstrate and note 
succinctly that in a highly uncertain environment, a rational, adaptive, integrative approach to SISP 
is the most successful. Several studies have gone further and investigated the impact of the three dimensions 
of environmental uncertainty on SISP, i.e., dynamism, heterogeneity and hostility respectively. These 
are discussed next. 2.3.1Impact of Environmental Dynamism Environmental dynamism has been found to impact 
negatively on comprehensiveness in SISP (Sabherwal and King, 1992). This may be due to the rapid rate 
of change and unpredictability in the environment, which favour a more rapid, alacritous approach (Lederer 
and Sethi, 1998). Dynamism on the other hand was found by Teo and King (1997) to be associated with greater 
levels of integration between business planning and SISP (BP-ISP Integration). Greater dynamism requires 
higher levels of co­operation and coordination between business and IS, which explains this finding (Grover 
and Segars, 2005). 2.3.2Impact of Environmental Heterogeneity Sabherwal and King (1992) show that environmental 
heterogeneity has a positive impact on comprehensiveness in SISP. In highly diverse heterogeneous environments, 
information must be gathered from a wide variety of sources, and various alternative scenarios need to 
be evaluated. As such, there is greater comprehensiveness (and thus rationality) in SISP. Environmental 
heterogeneity leads also to a more political, rather than rational process in SISP (Sabherwal and King, 
1992). This again can be explained by the wider variety of diverse and competing interests in heterogeneous 
environments, which gives rise to political machinations in organisational tasks such as SISP. Environmental 
heterogeneity is in addition positively associated with business managers participation in SISP, and 
to overall integration between business planning and IS planning (Kearns and Sabherwal, 2007). Heterogeneous 
environments lead to structural and other challenges that require greater integration and communication 
in SISP (Kearns and Sabherwal, 2007). The end result is an overall rational, adaptive and integrative 
approach. 2.3.3Impact of Environmental Hostility Environmental hostility leads to a more political, rather 
than rational process in SISP (Sabherwal and King, 1992). The intense pressures brought about factors 
such as cut-throat competition, scarcity and dwindling markets, bring political processes to the fore. 
In summary these studies show that dynamism may lead to greater levels of BP-ISP integration, but also 
to less comprehensive and hence less rational SISP. Heterogeneity may lead to rationality, adaptation 
and integration, whilst hostility might encourage a more political and hence less rational approach to 
SISP. The overall effect of these three dimensions together is to invoke organizations to respond with 
a combined rational, adaptive, integrative approach to SISP, as confirmed by studies that have examined 
the impact of overall environmental uncertainty (Grover and Segars, 2005; Salmela et al., 2000). Such 
approaches are therefore the most successful in an uncertain environment. 2.4External IT Environment 
Pant and Hsu (1999) note that the external environment can be divided into the external business and 
external IT environment respectively. There have been very few studies that have examined the external 
IT environment, and even fewer examining its effect on SISP. The rapid rate of IT change in the external 
environment leads organisations to adopt various coping mechanisms to deal with it, such as the establishment 
of an emerging technologies group (Benamati and Lederer, 2001). There has been very little research into 
conceptualising and operationalising the external IT environment. In attempting to fill this gap, Ranganathan 
and Sethi (2000) identified three factors that can be used to describe this construct - IT munificence, 
IT dynamism and IT activity intensity respectively. These were defined as follows (Ranganathan and Sethi, 
2000):  IT Munificence: The extent to which the external IT environment provides adequate resources 
to the organisation. It shows the extent of how resourceful, friendly or hostile the IT environment is 
towards the organisation. IT Dynamism: The extent to which the changes in the external IT environment 
are volatile and rapid. IT Activity Intensity: The extent to which a firm s competitors, suppliers, customers 
and other stakeholders use IT. Beyond operationalising the external IT environment and its dimensions, 
there has been little research examining their impact on SISP. Research is needed to investigate the 
effect of these dimensions on SISP.  3.RESEARCH METHODOLOGY The purpose of the study was not to validate 
the findings from literature through empirical data gathering and analysis. Such an approach is normally 
followed in hypothetico-deductive studies. Rather, it was to compare views from practice with the academic 
literature. An inductive approach based on grounded theory methodology was followed for empirical data 
gathering and analysis. The grounded theory methodology provides useful guidelines and procedures for 
inductively deriving theory from data (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The data was gathered as part of a 
wider study that investigated theory in SISP. Semi-structured 1-hour interviews were conducted with IS 
professionals who had experience of SISP in large organisations in South Africa. Interviews were carried 
out in accordance with the grounded theory principle of theoretical sampling (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). 
With this form of sampling, data is collected so as to build theory and continues until some level of 
saturation is achieved, and a theory is well-developed. In this instance 7 interviews were sufficient 
to reach a level of saturation. Diverse industries were represented including financial services, retail, 
education, IT services and government services. This diversity allowed for variation in the external 
environment experienced by the organisations, although within the confines of South Africa. For the purpose 
of this paper, data pertaining to the external environment only was extracted and analysed using grounded 
theory techniques. A grounded theory is defined as a set of well-developed concepts related through statements 
of relationship, which together constitute an integrated framework that can be used to explain or predict 
phenomena (Strauss and Corbin, 1998, p. 15). Its grounded nature is as a result of being derived from 
data gathered through a methodologically sound approach. The key elements of a grounded theory are the 
concepts pertaining to the phenomenon under study, and their relationships. These concepts typically 
have dimensionality, which reflects their variation (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The three key coding 
steps used in developing a grounded theory are open coding, axial coding and selective coding respectively 
(Strauss and Corbin, 1998). In this paper, the open coding and axial coding techniques were employed 
in order to identify from the empirical data key concepts of the external environment, their dimensionality, 
and their relationship to SISP. Open coding involves identifying concepts and their dimensionality (Strauss 
and Corbin, 1998). The process begins by identifying data incidents. Data incidents are compared to each 
other to ascertain their similarity and difference. Through this constant comparative analysis similar 
data incidents are assigned a conceptual label (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). These labels may be in vivo 
, i.e. derived from the actual wording in the data, or may be labelled through comparison to existing 
known concepts from literature (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). In this paper the latter option was chosen, 
so as not to reinvent the wheel concerning concepts that were already well-defined in literature. Only 
where no equivalent conceptual label was available in literature would in vivo labels be invoked. This 
strategy allowed for easy contrast and comparison between literature and concepts derived from field 
data. The constant comparative analysis also allowed for the dimensionality of concepts to be defined. 
The axial coding technique was employed to determine what relationships existed between external environment 
concepts and SISP (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). Relationships were determined by searching for statements 
of relationships in the data. These statements of relationship were analysed to assess which concepts 
were being referred to, and were then restated as propositions concerning the concepts. Although it appears 
that the open coding and axial coding phases were performed in sequence, in reality there was a constant 
iteration between these phases. The final outcomes of both open and axial coding will be presented next. 
 4.DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS Table 2 below shows the key concepts concerning the external environment 
that emerged from the data. The concepts were validated through the constant comparative analysis technique 
of grounded theory methodology, whereby multiple data incidents are compared so as to develop concepts 
(Strauss and Corbin, 1998).The two sub-categories of external business environment and external IT environment 
were apparent, as suggested by Pant and Hsu (1999). Each of the concepts and the relationships implied 
will be discussed in turn. Table 2: External Environment Concepts Sub-Category Concept Dimensionality 
External Business Environment Environmental Dynamism Static Rapid Environmental Hostility Benign Competitive 
External IT Environment IT Dynamism Slow Rapid IT Munificence Low High IT Hype Unsubsta -ntiated Some 
substance 4.1External Business Environment Within the external business environment are two concepts 
dynamism and hostility respectively. The common conceptualisation of the external environment in literature 
includes a third dimension - that of heterogeneity (Teo and King, 1997). In this instance, no concept 
equivalent to external heterogeneity emerged from the data, although internal  organisational heterogeneity 
did emerge as a concept. Its discussion is beyond the scope of this paper. 4.1.1Environmental Dynamism 
Concerning environmental dynamism, it was mentioned by a respondent that when conducting SISP It was 
very difficult to get new issues on to that [SISP] agenda, and that was wrong , because the world is 
changing all the time . The respondent was basically arguing that due to the dynamism in the environment, 
there should have been a more flexible adaptive SISP process in the organisation. Another respondent 
also alluded to this dynamism in stating that Planning is dynamic, because certainly in [our industry], 
our business landscape changes all the time . Yet another noted that dynamism had resulted in a shorter 
SISP horizon being used since there are so many changes, especially in the country now that are happening 
. One respondent on the other hand noted that the environment in which we work is also extremely static 
. These statements reflect the importance of the dynamism concept to SISP, and how it varies from being 
perceived as static in some organisations to dynamic in others. The relationship propositions suggested 
from the statements are as follows: P1: Environmental dynamism leads to a more flexible, adaptive SISP 
process. P2: Environmental dynamism results in shorter SISP horizons. 4.1.2Environmental Hostility Dynamism 
was the predominant concept mentioned concerning the external business environment, but some mention 
was also made of environmental hostility. It was noted by a respondent that competitive advantage through 
IT was very often only short-term, due to high levels of competition (hostility) in the environment. 
As stated: Bear in mind that it [IT] only gives you a very short term [competitive advantage], because 
everybody else catches up with you . The relationship proposition implied is: P3: Environmental hostility 
results in only short-term competitive advantage being attainable through IT. 4.2External IT Environment 
Within the external IT environment sub-category, three concepts emerged, these being IT dynamism, IT 
munificence, and IT hype. The first two have equivalents in the academic literature (Ranganathan and 
Sethi, 2000), but not the third. The concept IT activity intensity has been identified as the third dimension 
of the external IT environment (Ranganathan and Sethi, 2000). This concept did not emerge strongly from 
the field data. 4.2.1IT Dynamism Several statements in the data alluded to the impact of IT dynamism 
on SISP. It was stated, for example, that The more difficult one in planning is to plan for the type 
of equipment you re going to use, because there s such a big change in the development area for equipment... 
. It was stated again by another respondent that due to IT dynamism at the time that we are ready to 
purchase [IT and equipment] we must revisit all our [planning] decisions . Concerning the impact of IT 
dynamism on SISP horizons it was stated: Change in technology is one [reason for shorter SISP horizons] 
. The relationship propositions implied are: P4: IT Dynamism has an impact on the ability to plan for 
specific IT, necessitating more adaptive SISP. P5: IT dynamism leads to more frequent planning reviews 
[Adaptation in SISP]. P6: IT Dynamism leads to shorter SISP horizons. 4.2.2IT Munificence IT munificence 
refers to the resourcefulness of the external IT environment for the organisation (Ranganathan and Sethi, 
2000). Issues such as the number of options for IT products and services, the number of sources (vendors) 
supplying those options and the favourability of IT regulatory frameworks are of concern here (Ranganathan 
and Sethi, 2000). A respondent alluded to this munificence in stating that There s always going to be 
systems, all kinds of vendors, different programming languages, I mean you name it . In his organisation, 
a comprehensive, rational SISP process was used to make sense of the diversity. At the same time a participative, 
adaptive process was employed to accommodate the requirements of diverse stakeholders. It was mentioned 
by another respondent that the impact of IT munificence was a more formalised, rational-adaptive SISP 
process. As stated the kind of one on one type of approach or quick discussion approach doesn t work 
and I think its really just a factor of the growth of the organisation, and the growth of diversity of 
IT options . The relationship proposition implied is that: P7: IT munificence leads to a more rational-adaptive 
SISP process. 4.2.3IT Hype The concept of IT hype had no equivalent in the reviewed academic literature 
concerning the external environment and SISP. It is recognised that in the practitioner press, this is 
a common theme. A respondent noted that what happened at the year 2000, was a big bluff within the IT 
industry, and it hurt a lot of companies. And the whole budgetary process within organisations changed 
totally after the year 2000. Whereby they came back and told IT. Now we will tell you... Not you telling 
us . The example illustrates the negative impact of IT hype, whereby if it is unsubstantiated and leads 
to unnecessary expenditure for organisations, the credibility of IS suffers. In the context of SISP the 
impact was to shift the focus towards budgetary financial control, rather than strategic innovation and 
creativity (Segars and Grover, 1999). The relationship statement implied is that: P8: Unsubstantiated 
IT hype leads to loss of credibility for IS, and an increased focus on budgetary control in SISP [rationality]. 
  5.DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS The set of external environment concepts identified from the practitioners 
bears some similarity to those oft researched by IS academics. However, whereas academic research focuses 
on environmental uncertainty in general, and its impact on SISP, the practitioners view takes cognisance 
also of the external IT environment specifically. There has been a dearth of research conceptualising 
and investigating the external IT environment. An exception has been the work of Ranganathan and Sethi 
(2000). This focus by IT managers on the external IT environment, rather than the external business environment 
in general as espoused by academic literature may point to a gap between research and practice concerning 
the role of IT management. As Teubner (2007) articulates with regards to a case study on SISP conducted 
in a company (referred to as FSC): The academic discussion assumes the CIO to be an initiator of organisational 
innovations and driver of business strategy on the board. In contrast, we found that FSC s CIO basically 
perceives her role as that of a service provider to business (p. 1). This perception of IS as being primarily 
a service provider role may be the reason why practitioners tend to focus more attention on the external 
IT environment. A trend towards greater focus on IT infrastructure planning and tactics in SISP, rather 
than the broader business view has also been noted by Mohdzain and Ward (2007) in subsidiaries of multinationals. 
The danger of this trend is that SISP loses its implied strategic nature, and becomes a tactical endeavour. 
Further research is needed to investigate this negative consequence. Within the external business environment, 
the concept of heterogeneity has recently received some research attention (Kearns and Lederer, 2004; 
Kearns and Sabherwal, 2007). However, no concept around this emerged from the data in this study. Respondents 
discussed heterogeneity with respect to the internal organisational environment, which was outside the 
scope of this paper. The concept of environmental hostility was only mentioned a few times by respondents, 
with most of the discussion being around environmental dynamism. The reason for this emphasis on environmental 
dynamism by practitioners needs further investigation, as literature tends to view all 3 dimensions of 
environmental uncertainty as important. In fact, recent research attention has tended to focus on heterogeneity. 
Within the external IT environment, the concept of IT activity intensity did not receive an explicit 
mention by respondents. Rather the focus was on IT dynamism and IT munificence. IT hype was mentioned 
by respondents, but did not appear as a separate concept in the conceptualisation of external IT environment 
by Ranganathan and Sethi (2000). Its importance cannot be overstated, as much hype is pedalled about 
IT, e.g., Y2K , the dot com boom and the subsequent dot bomb gloom . This hype lead to the negative perceptions 
of IT which followed post-2000. The widespread, albeit misunderstood notion that IT doesn t matter (Carr, 
2003) has influenced business and societal perceptions about IS and IT. 3 of the 8 propositional statements 
derived from the IS planner perspective were concerned with the impact of the external business environment. 
It was affirmed that environmental dynamism leads to greater adaptation in SISP. In addition it was proposed 
that dynamism in the environment leads to shorter SISP horizons, and that hostility results in only short-term 
competitive advantage accruing from IT innovations. The latter proposition resonates with the assertion 
by Carr (2003) that only short-term competitive advantage may accrue from IT. The findings point to the 
external environment (dynamism) as being partly the reason for SISP becoming less strategic and more 
tactical in nature (Mohdzain and Ward, 2007). Shorter SISP horizons in effect make it more difficult 
to adopt a strategic posture. Also, the strategic advantage that IT may provide organisations has become 
more difficult to achieve in competitive, hostile environments. Further research is needed to examine 
these trends, and look at the impacts of the external environment on facets of SISP such as the SISP 
horizon. The literature has tended to focus on the impacts of external environment on rational-adaptation 
(Grover and Segars, 2005; Salmela et al., 2000) and integration (Kearns and Sabherwal, 2007). 5 of the 
8 propositions identified referred to the impact of the external IT environment on SISP. The propositions 
suggest that IT dynamism leads to increased adaptation in SISP and shorter planning horizons. IT munificence 
leads to a balanced rational­adaptive SISP process. There was some validation for the conceptualisation 
of the external IT environment by Ranganathan and Sethi (2000) through the identification of IT dynamism 
and IT munificence as concepts. The absence of IT activity intensity as a concept needs further investigation. 
The propositions identified concerning IT dynamism and munificence have been untested in literature and 
point to an area requiring further research. IT hype was an additional concept that emerged. Unsubstantiated 
IT hype reduces the credibility of IS in organisations with a subsequent SISP focus on close monitoring 
and control of IT expenditure. Research on the concept of IT hype, and its impact on SISP is largely 
lacking in academic literature and is an area requiring more research attention.  6.LIMITATIONS AND 
FUTURE RESEARCH The data used in this paper was gathered as part of a larger study examining theory in 
SISP. As a result, the external environment was not the sole focus during interviews. This may be the 
reason why certain dimensions of the external environment, such as heterogeneity and IT activity intensity 
were not mentioned by respondents. On the other hand, these concepts may not have been perceived as important 
to them. Further research is needed to establish the reasons for their absence and their relative importance 
to practice. The approach to data gathering nevertheless had some advantages. It ensured that any observations 
concerning the external environment emerged inductively from the respondents, and were not as a result 
of prompts or suggestions from the researcher. This independent practitioner perspective could then be 
compared with that presented in literature. Several of the propositions pertaining to the impact of the 
external environment on SISP have not been fully investigated by researchers. Beyond the impact of the 
external environment on rationality, adaptation and integration in SISP, other characteristics such as 
the SISP horizon are suggested for examination. The impact of the external environment on SISP outcomes 
such as the ability to achieve competitive advantage from IT can also be investigated further. The external 
IT environment was fairly prominent in the practitioner view, and in contrast, generally under-researched 
in the literature pertaining to SISP. This finding indicates an area for further research. The work of 
Ranganathan and Sethi (2000) presents a starting point concerning the definition and operationalisation 
of the external IT environment construct. Other dimensions such as IT hype have been identified in this 
study. Further elaboration and understanding of this concept can be developed through future research. 
The propositions identified from practitioners concerning the impact of external IT environment on SISP 
have not been fully researched, and it is suggested that they form the basis for further theory-testing 
studies.  The study drew from experiences of SISP in a wide variety of industries, but all within South 
Africa. Further diversity can be obtained by gathering data from different countries. Other facets of 
the external environment such as national culture and government policies may then also come into play. 
 7.CONCLUSION The impact of the external environment on SISP has not often been researched. Where there 
has been research, environmental uncertainty and its impact on characteristics of SISP such as rationality, 
adaptation and integration have been investigated. Teubner (2007) alludes to a gap between research and 
practice concerning perceptions of SISP. In this study the gap was investigated in the context of the 
external environment. The findings show that practitioners tend to take cognisance of the external IT 
environment and its impact on SISP, whereas research has tended to focus on the general external environment. 
This corresponds with the findings of Teubner (2007), who showed that IS managers may perceive the role 
of IS as being primarily service provision, hence the tendency to focus on the immediate IT environment. 
Researchers on the other hand perceive IS more loftily as a strategic business driver, hence the focus 
on environmental business impacts. The external business and IT environment at the same time seem to 
be pushing SISP towards a more tactical rather than strategic endeavour (Mohdzain and Ward, 2007), which 
may explain the practitioner perspective. Researchers need to investigate these negative impacts of the 
external business and IT environment in order to better understand the problems being faced in practice 
(Teubner, 2007). In this way, guidelines can be devised to assist practitioners in planning strategically 
for IS in a turbulent environment.  8.REFERENCES [1] Baker, B., 1995. The role of feedback in assessing 
information systems planning effectiveness. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 4 (1), 61-80. [2] 
Benamati, J., Lederer, A., 2001. Rapid information technology change, coping mechanisms and the emerging 
technologies group. Journal of Management Information Systems 17 (4), 183-202. [3] Brown, I., 2004. Testing 
and extending theory in strategic information systems planning through literature analysis. Information 
Resources Management Journal 17 (4), 20 48. [4] Carr, N., 2003. IT doesn t matter. Harvard Business 
Review 81 (5), 41 49. [5] Choe, J., 2003. The effect of environmental uncertainty and strategic applications 
of IS on a firm s performance, Information &#38; Management 40, 257 268. [6] Doherty, N., Marples, C., 
Suhaimi, A., 1999. The relative success of alternative approaches to strategic information systems planning: 
An empirical analysis. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 8, 263-283. [7] Earl, M., 1993. Experiences 
in strategic information systems planning. MIS Quarterly 17 (1), 1-21. [8] Finnegan, P., Galliers, R., 
Powell, P., 1999. Inter­organisational systems planning: Learning from current practices. International 
Journal of Technology Management, 17 (1), 129-144. [9] Grover, V., Segars, A., 2005. An empirical evaluation 
of stages of strategic information systems planning: Patterns of process design and effectiveness, Information 
&#38; Management 42, 761-779. [10] Kearns, G., Sabherwal, R., 2007. Antecedents and consequences of information 
systems planning integration. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 54 (4), 628­ 643. [11] Lederer, 
A., Salmela, H., 1996. Toward a theory of strategic information systems planning. Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems 5, 237-253. [12] Lederer, A., Sethi, V., 1992. Root causes of strategic information 
systems planning problems. Journal of Management Information Systems, 9 (1), 25-45. [13] Lederer, A., 
Sethi, V., 1998. Seven guidelines for strategic information systems planning. Information Strategy: The 
Executive's Journal 15 (1), 23-29. [14] Luftman, J., Kempaiah, R., Nash, E., 2005. Key issues for IT 
executives 2005. MIS Quarterly Executive 5 (2), 27-45. [15] Mohdzain, M.B., Ward, J.M., 2007. A study 
of subsidiaries views of information systems strategic planning in multinational organisations. Journal 
of Strategic Information Systems (In Press). [16] Pant, S., Hsu, C., 1999. An integrated framework for 
strategic information systems planning and development. Information Resources Management Journal 12 (1), 
15-25. [17] Ranganathan, C., Sethi, V., 2000. External IT environment: Dimensionality and measurement. 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Information Systems, Brisbane, Australia, 594 - 600. 
[18] Sabherwal, R., King, W., 1992. Decision processes for developing strategic applications of information 
systems: A contingency approach. Decision Sciences 23 (4), 917-943. [19] Salmela, H., Lederer, A. Reponen, 
T., 2000. Information systems planning in a turbulent environment. European Journal of Information Systems 
9 (1), 3-15. [20] Salmela, H., Spil, T., 2002. Dynamic and emergent information systems strategy formulation 
and implementation. International Journal of Information Management 22, 441-460. [21] Segars, A., Grover, 
V., Teng, J., 1998. Strategic information systems planning: Planning system dimensions, internal co alignment, 
and implications for planning effectiveness. Decision Sciences 29 (2), 303-344.  [22] Segars, A., Grover, 
V., 1999. Profiles of strategic information systems planning. Information Systems Research 10 (3), 199-232. 
[23] Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. The Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory (2nd Ed.) Sage, London. [24] Teo, T., King, W., 1997. Integration between 
business planning and information systems planning: An evolutionary-contingency perspective. Journal 
of Management Information Systems 14 (1), 185-214. [25] Teubner, R., 2007. Strategic information systems 
planning: A case study from the financial services industry. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 
16, 105-125.  
			