
 INVESTING IN IT S HUMAN RESOURCE: THE IMPACT ON PERFORMANCE OF THE FIRM James A. Senn Georgia State 
University Atlanta, Georgia 30302-4015 (404) 651-3880 Fax: (404) 651-2804 e-mail: cisjas@gsusgi2. gsu.edu 
Jungwoo Lee Georgia State University Atlanta, Georgia 30302-4015 (404) 651-3888 Fax: (404) 651-3842 e-mail: 
cisjwlx@gsusgi2 .gsu.edu As the use of information technology continues to grow in business, coupled 
with ever-escalating expenditures, IT professionals are under increasing scrutiny to demonstrate an impact 
on business performance. However, due to the fact that information technology components are widely available, 
it is unlikely they are the basis for competitive edge in business. It is more likely benefits come from 
the manner in which IT is deployed, which in turn stem from the capabilities of the staff members of 
the IT group. Thus, firms who invest effectively in the development of information technology s human 
resource should enjoy better performance than not. To gain greater insight into this issue, an analysis 
was performed to examine the three-year IT spending of a sample of Fortune 500/Service 500 firms. Companies 
selected for inclusion in the study have all been identified as leaders in their industries for the use 
of information technology. All have undergone caret%l scrutiny by professional and academic experts and 
have been publicly recognized for their IT leadership. Each firm s recognition has been a result of its 
achievements in aligning IT strategy with business strategy and for effective management of the accumulated 
information technology investment, including hardware, software, data, infiastructnre, and human resources. 
Forty-two firms, 17 of whom are from service industries, are included in the analysis presented in this 
paper. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
of Computing Machinew. To COPYotherwfse, or to republish, reqtares a fee andlor sp-~ific periniasion. 
SIGCPR 95, Nashville, TN, USA o 1995 ACM 0-89791 -712-x/95/0004...$505O Additionally it was surmised 
that any relation between performance and IT spending should be visible at the revenue level. We chose 
to avoid a classical inputioutput analysis and focused instead on top-line revenue. Likewise, because 
of the broad variety and timing of adjustments that can be made to revenue after it is created, to determine 
profit, we chose not to use profitability as an indicator of IT spending impact. The results of the study 
show there is a highly significant positive relation between spending for development of the IT staiY 
and performance of the firm, measured by corporate revenue. These findings raise a series of questions 
meriting additional research. For high performing firms who invest in information technology s human 
resource, there is a clear and significant relationship between IT spending on statl development and 
the revenue generated by the firm. At the same time, no significant year-to-year impact was detected. 
This finding suggests that human resource investments must be made over a period of time, i.e., that 
the benefits build up as a result of accumulated investment practices. 240
			