
 Issues in Undergraduate Education High Performance Thomas L. Marchioro II Division of Applied Mathematical 
Sciences Ames Lab Ames, Iowa 50011 Abstract The ever increasing need for mathematical and computational 
literacy within our society and among members of the work force has generated enormous pressure to revise 
and improve the teaching of related subjects throughout the curriculum, particularly at the undergraduate 
level. The Calculus Reform move­ment is perhaps the best known example of an orga­nized initiative in 
thk regard. The UCES (Undergraduate Computational Engi­neering and Science) project, an effort funded 
by the Department of Energy and administered through the Ames Laboratory, is sponsoring an informal and 
open dkcussion of the saEent issues confronting efforts to improve and expand the teaching of computational 
sci­ence as a problem oriented, interdisciplinary approach to scientific investigation. Although the 
format will be open, we hope to con­sider pertinent questions such as: 1. How can faculty and research 
scientists obtain the recognition necessary to further excellence in teat.hhg the mathematical and computational 
sciences? 2. What sort of educational resources both hard­ware and software are needed to teach compu­tational 
science at the undergraduate level? Are traditional procedural languages sufficient? Are PCs enough? 
Are massively parallel platforms needed? 3. How can electronic educational materials be dis­tributed 
in an efficient way? Can they be made interactive in nature? How should such materials be tied to the 
World JWde Web and the growing Information Superhighway ?  in Computational Science and Computing. 
David Martin Dept. of Materials Science Iowa State University and Ames Laboratory Ames, Iowa 50011 4. 
Can these teaching materials be adapted for use by teachers colleges? Can they also be incorpo­rated 
by industry for (restraining of staff? 5. How should efforts to improve undergraduate education be integrated 
with current programs aimed at the high school level? Specifically, what new kinds of preparation might 
be needed from K-12, freshman math, etc., to improve mathemat­ical and computational education throughout 
the undergraduate curriculum? 6. What is the role of the national laboratories and high performance 
computing centers in education at the undergraduate level? Can they play an ac­tive part in this process? 
Similarly, what further actions can be taken by government, whether at the federal, state, or local level, 
to promote the goal of a mathematical literacy within our society.  Panel Members: Kris Stewart, San 
Diego State University; Chris Johnson, University of Utah; Manav Mlsra, Colorado School of Mines; and 
others to be named later. 3 1063-9535/94 $4.0001994 IEEE 
			