
 Java in the C.S. Curriculum Fintan Culwin South Bank University School of Computing information Systems 
&#38; Mathematics London SE1 OAA U.K. fintan@sbu.ac.uk The Java language, in less than a year, has 
caused an explosion of interest in the commercial and academic communities. Many universities have already 
introduced Java into their undergraduate curriculum and many more are planning to do so, or are considering 
the possibility. The rate at which this has happened is virtually unprecedented and the underlying reasons 
have not been clearly expounded. This seminar will draw on the attendees experience and knowledge in 
order to attempt to clarity the reasons for the academic (and commercial) interest in Java and subsequently 
to explore its suitability for various areas of the C.S. Curriculum. PossibIe reasons for this interest 
might include: 0 a reflection of the interest from commerce. the use of Java for the production of Web 
applets. the cross-platform capabilities of Java. a (partial) solution to some of the pedagogic problems 
of existing teaching languages: 0 a pure 00 language. avoiding (some of) the syntactic and semantic weaknesses 
of C++. more popular than Ada. 0 more up to date than Pascal. The first part of the seminar will attempt 
to collect from the attendees the reasons for their interest in Java and subsequently evahrate them. 
It will then proceed to consider the potential for the use of Java in various areas of the C.S. curriculum, 
including: as a first, or base, language. for data structures. for concurrency. for distributed applications. 
for graphics and mutimedia. for practical HCI. The second partof the seminar will consider each of these 
areas, plus any others suggested by the attendees, and try to determine the features of Java which make 
it suitable, or unsuitable, foe each. The final part of the seminar will consider the resources which 
are available for supporting Java in the curriculum, including: development environments. 0 text books. 
Web base tutorials and other resources. A report upon the discussions and considerations will be subsequently 
collated by the seminar coordinator and made avaiIabIe. _I 392 
			