
 Short Paper: Low-Cost Medium-Range Optical Underwater Modem Feng Lu, Sammy Lee, Jeffrey Mounzer, Curt 
Schurgers Electrical and Computer Engineering Department University of California, San Diego {f1lu, sjl006, 
jmounzer}@ucsd.edu, curts@ece.ucsd.edu ABSTRACT Enhancing underwater instruments with networking capa­bilities 
is opening up exciting new opportunities for remote ocean exploration. Underwater communication is essential 
in enabling networking, and in this work, we focus specif­ically on those applications that require a 
communication range of 5 to 10 meters. We will show that optical wireless technology is an excellent 
candidate when cost-e.cient de­sign is paramount and data rate requirements are modest. Our optical modem 
uses inexpensive components, and com­pensates by employing sophisticated detection algorithms. Our design 
is validated experimentally, establishing it as a viable cost-e.ective communication technology for low 
range underwater applications. Categories and Subject Descriptors B.4.1 [Hardware]: Data communication 
devices  General Terms Design, Experimentation  Keywords Underwater sensor networks, gold codes, noise 
estimation, optical modem 1. INTRODUCTION Underwater networking is a growing .eld with a diverse set 
of potential applications ranging from oceanography and environmental monitoring, to o.shore exploration 
and port security. To enable submerged devices to be networked to­gether, their ability to wirelessly 
communicate underwater is key. Often, such communication is achieved using acoustics, since sound propagates 
well underwater and therefore can support a relatively long communication range (up to many kilometers). 
For some applications, however, optical com­munication in the visible band has been proposed as an al­ternative 
technology [2, 4] (the least attenuated portion of Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or 
part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made 
or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. WUWNet 09, November 3, 2009, Berkeley, CA, USA. Copyright 2009 
ACM 978-1-60558-821-6 ...$10.00. the electromagnetic spectrum in water is found at blue-green wavelengths 
[5, 7]). While acoustics has been the predomi­nant technology of choice for underwater systems, optics 
is considered mainly for two speci.c scenarios where it o.ers distinct advantages. First, optical communication 
can sup­port high data rate links over ultra-short distances (less than a meter). Second, for medium-short 
distances (up to 10 me­ters), it can o.er a lower cost alternative to acoustics. The latter is the application 
domain we focus on in this work. Such medium-short range communications are important in dense underwater 
sensor networks. In these systems, each node is small and relatively inexpensive and overall cost is 
an important factor [6]. In that respect, existing acoustic modems su.er from a major disadvantage: they 
are often expensive, with a cost on the order of $1, 000 to $10, 000 [15, 16]. The main reason for this 
cost is the acoustic trans­ducer. Optical based modems may provide a much more cost-e.ective alternative 
for applications where the required communication range is modest (below 10 meters) [2, 3, 9]. Furthermore, 
medium-short range communications also .nd applicability in testbed-scenarios. In our project, we are 
cre­ating a networked swarm of subsurface drifters [6]. Here, an important element is the ability to 
control the devices, both individually and collaboratively, and it is crucial to be able to test these 
algorithms in a controlled setting with many devices while keeping costs down [6]. Even though we envi­sion 
our .nal system to be equipped with acoustic modems, for our testbed, the key is to simply have the ability 
to com­municate wirelessly (irrespective of the actual technology) such that devices can collaborate. 
It is impractical to test out our algorithms with a large number of nodes equipped with acoustic modems 
due to cost considerations, which have prompted us to develop the optical modem we will describe in this 
paper, for our testbed. The design goals were to de­velop a low-cost low-power (around 100 mW) optical 
tech­nology as an alternative to acoustics for medium-short range communications, i.e., with a range 
of up to about 10 meters and a data rate comparable to that of most acoustic modems (a few hundreds bits 
per second [17]). Similar goals have been pursued by other researchers as well. However, the optical 
modem described by Schill et all achieves a range of only 2 meters, even when using .ve simultaneously 
transmitting expensive LEDs that consume 2W [3]. The system built by Tivey et al. yielded a range of 
3.7 meters, using an array of 22 red LEDs and a power con­sumption of 100 mW [9]. Both are based on existing 
IrDA physical layer protocols, the key distinction with our work is that we will custom design our physical 
layer hardware and communication algorithms speci.cally for underwater opti­cal scenarios. This will 
allow us to extend the transmission range to the desired 10m, while using much cheaper hard­ware components 
and low power consumption. Moreover, there is also some existing work on optical underwater sys­tems 
that achieved a similar range, but by using more expen­sive and power hungry components. For example, 
Vasilescu et al. reported a range of 7m in clear fresh water using ex­pensive, high power (6W) LEDs [5]. 
With even higher cost and power consumption, a 1Mbps LED-based communica­tion system is achievable as 
reported in Simpson s work [8]. Finally, there have also been some e.orts to create cheap acoustic modems, 
by leveraging regular audio speakers and microphones [1, 5, 18]. However, they either have a signi.­cantly 
lower data rate (a few tens of bits per second), or a signi.cant higher cost than our system. 2. SYSTEM 
OVERVIEW In order to meet our design constraint of low cost, we are necessarily restricted to choosing 
inexpensive hardware com­ponents to build our system. The initial hardware choices are dictated by the 
particular communication channel under consideration. Optical propagation in an underwater envi­ronment 
experiences both scattering and absorption, and potentially can be severely attenuated. Additionally, 
di.er­ent spectrum bands of visible light have di.erent attenuation factors, among which green light 
is found to have the small­est attenuation factor [5, 7, 10]. Therefore, we choose to transmit using 
green light in our design. We shall consider the following two types of optical trans­mission and detection. 
For transmitters, we compare light emitting diodes (LEDs) and lasers. Even though lasers carry longer 
optical range underwater, they are impractical for many applications because of their relatively high 
costs and stringent requirements on the level of directionality. To pos­sess omnidirectional communication 
capability, a large num­ber of lasers would be required. This not only increases the cost tremendously, 
but also complicates the transmitter and receiver circuit design. On the other hand, LEDs provide a much 
wider beam width, in conjunction with small cost per­unit, leading to a much more cost-e.ective design. 
Similar design considerations are taken into account while choosing the photoreceiver component, i.e., 
low-cost, wide sensing re­gion, maximum sensitivity at wavelengths centered around 500nm, and narrow 
sensitivity spectral band. On top of the abovementioned requirements, these components must also be power-e.cient 
to be applicable in underwater sensor networks. Identifying the selection criteria helps us to narrow 
down the search scope for the transmitter and receiver compo­nents. For the optical transmitter, we use 
a RL5-G13008 Super-Green LED, which emits green light of wavelength 520nm and operates at a maximum power 
of 120mW. The Silonex SLD-BG2A [11] is chosen as a practical choice for our photoreceiver with maximum 
sensitivity at a wavelength of 550nm and a sensitivity spectral range from 400nm to 700nm. In addition, 
this photodiode incorporates a BG .lter that rejects infrared wavelengths automatically. Al­though avalanche 
photodiodes provide high internal current gain and narrower spectral sensitivity band, their unit prices 
are generally over ten-fold higher. Please note that both the transmitter and the receiver enjoy a wide 
spatial range of op­eration, e.g., half angle of 45., 60. . Although in this work (a) Transmitter Circuitry 
(b) Receiver Circuitry Figure 1: Optical Communication System Schematic Diagram we focus on an individual 
transmitter-receiver pair, a com­plete design will therefore consist of 3-4 such pairs to achieve omni-directionality. 
For the non-optical parts of our system, cost again is our primary consideration. O.-the-shelf com­ponents 
are selected to design all the circuitry employed, and low-cost DSP chips are used for the implementation 
of the communication scheme. An end-to-end schematic dia­gram of our system is shown in Figure 1. In 
addition, Table 1 summarizes the components used in our system and their costs (below $15). Table 1: 
Summary of Hardware Components Used Component Name Unit Price ($) Units Cost RL5-G13008 Super-Green LED 
0.99 1 0.99 Silonex SLD-70 BG2A Photodiode 2.00 1 2.00 Freescale 56F8037 DSP Chipset 4.00 2 8.00 LM741 
Op Amp 0.2 7 1.40 Resistors &#38; Capacitors - - < 1.00 Electrical Wires - - 0 Total Cost 13.39   3. 
PACKET DETECTION &#38; DATA TRANS-MISSION A typical data packet consists of two parts: the preamble and 
the data portion. The preamble serves the purpose of packet detection and synchronization of the transmitter 
and receiver bit streams. When the receiver starts to operate, it will continuously sample the channel 
and try to receive the transmitted data packet if any. The incoming data stream is correlated with the 
known preamble, and the algorithm looks for a peak in the correlation output. A peak is de­tected when 
the correlation result rises above a threshold. A quali.ed preamble sequence should possess excellent 
peri­odic and aperiodic auto(cross)-correlation functions [12]. In our work, the bi-polar version of 
32 chip Gold codes are used to produce clear in-phase correlation peak. The threshold value used in our 
system is established by .rst setting the desired probability of false alarm, PFA, which is the probability 
that the detector decides that the signal is present while it is not. Mathematically, the proba­bility 
of false alarm PFA is given by the following equation: 31 L PFA = Pr( nici > T hreshold) (1) i=0 where 
ni represents the noise value at the correlator input when no signal is present and Cx =(c0,c1,...,c31) 
is the gold code sequence. The noise is assumed to be Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN), and the threshold 
is set based on the standard deviation of the correlated noise. Let 31 i=0 variable. Furthermore, suppose 
sn is the standard devia­tion of Nx, and we let the threshold be ksn, where k is a multiplicative constant. 
We can rewrite (1) as: Nx PFA = Pr( >k) (2) sn Once we know the noise standard deviation sn, it becomes 
straightforward to determine k for a chosen value of PFA (k = Q-1(PFA), where Q-1(.) is the inverse of 
the q-function for standard normal distribution). It is important to note that the value of PFA is independent 
of the SNR at the receiver. By making the threshold proportional to the stan­dard deviation of the noise, 
we essentially are able to .x the PFA. In our application, we set PFA to .00003, which requires the threshold 
value to be 4sn (again for ease of im­plementation on DSP board). Clearly, the correlated noise standard 
deviation sn is the parameter that needs to be es­timated in order to implement the thresholding algorithm 
described above. We need to make sure, however, that our noise estimation is not too sensitive to data 
being present in the channel. To address this issue, we .rst correlate the incoming stream with a sequence 
Vx, which is orthogonal to Cx. Therefore, when the channel is idle, the correla­ 3 denote Nx Nx is also 
a random Gaussian us = nici, tion result Mx = 31 3 i=0 nivi, has a distribution identical to (a) (b) 
 Figure 2: The Optical Model Prototype and the Exper­iment Testing Environment. phase auto-correlation 
property of the Gold codes we used, we may utilize the peak value of the correlation result to establish 
synchronization between the transmitter and re­ceiver bit stream. We .rst locate the bit-stream where 
the correlation result exceeds the threshold value. Then, out of these correlation values, we choose 
the largest one to .nd the synchronization point. The crystal oscillator available on the cheap DSP board 
has a large clock drift, which ne­cessitates constant clock synchronization in place to keep the transmitter 
and receiver bit stream aligned. We apply a linear least square method [13] to estimate the clock drift. 
4. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND DISCUS-SION We validated our entire design experimentally. For this experiment, 
we use the hardware setup as described in Sec­tion 2. In addition, the receiver processor board implements 
the signal detection and clock synchronization algorithms described in Section 3, and the data bits coming 
out of the processor board are fed into a laptop for performance analy­ that of Nx. On the other hand, 
when signal is present, 31 3 i=0 sis, i.e., probability of detection and bit error rate. In our Mx nivi 
+ CxVx, since the cross correlation CxVx is = experiments, the transmitter and receiver circuits were 
im­plemented on separate protoboards for portability. The LED and photoreceiver were placed in cylindrical 
glass containers which were partially submerged in water. To reduce noise caused by electromagnetic coupling 
with the environment, we used shielded cables to connect the LED to the trans­mitter circuitry, and the 
photodiode to the receiver circuitry (see Figure 2(a)). The actual tests took place in an outdoor community 
pool at night. We note that any inexpensive optical system will have to operate in conditions where ex­ 
 small and approximately zero-mean, the estimation of sn based on Mx is still reasonable. Suppose X is 
a zero-mean gaussian random variable, where 2~XN(0,s). ByapplyingtheLeibnizintegralrule,itcan (( be 
easily veri.ed that E{|X|} = / 2 s, which is a linear re­ p lationship between the standard deviation 
and a .rst order p statistical measure on the data. By setting s = AE{|X|}, 2 a .rst order statistical 
estimator is found. Let us denote sn(i) as the estimated result of sn sn(i + 1) at the next time instance, 
the following formula is used: at time ti, to estimate posure to direct sunlight is avoided, as was 
also observed by others [5]. Otherwise, the photodetector circuitry will saturate, and no amount of hardware 
optimization or signal processing can compensate for this. Therefore, these sys­s n(i +1) = w(1.25 |Mx(i 
+ 1)|) + (1 - w) sn(i) (3) tems are typically targeted towards non-shallow ocean sce­ p Please note that 
A 1.25 and w is the moving average 2 .lter weight coe.cient, with 0 = w = 1. In our design, 1/w is chosen 
to be power of 2 so as to make the multiplication easily implementable as bit-shift operation. Once the 
packet is detected, the next task is to synchro­nize the transmitter and receiver at the bit-level and 
prepare to receive the information bits. Because of the low out-of­narios or controlled testbeds [5]. 
The optical noise sources in the vicinity are primarily arti.cial in nature, with a number of lamps illuminating 
the pool area (see Figure 2(b)). We focus on two performance measures: probability of packet detection 
and the conditional bit error rate given that a packet is detected. The transmitter and receiver are 
held at the same depth to ensure line-of-sight, and a (a) (b) Figure 3: (a) Probability of Detection 
versus Distance. (b) Probability of Conditional Bit Error Rate versus Dis­tance. total number of 10 experiment 
rounds are conducted with transmitter-receiver-distance from 1 meter up to 10 meters. In each experiment 
round, 500 data packets are transmit­ted to measure the probability of packet detection. While for the 
bit error rate, in each round, the transmitter keeps sending data packets until 6 packets have been successfully 
detected and received by the receiver. Each data packet is made up of a preamble and 200 information 
bits, and data packets are separated by a silence period. Figure 3(a) plots the probability of detection, 
i.e., the probability that a packet is detected when there is indeed a packet on the channel. The adaptive 
threshold technique employed in the system proved to be robust, providing reli­able data detection in 
spite of signi.cant .uctuations in the noise variance. We attain almost 100% detection probability for 
a distance up to 7 meters. Even for the most challenging case, i.e., at the maximal distance of 10 meters, 
we can still detect 80% of the packets. Figure 3(b) shows the results of probability of bit error. It 
can be seen that we have bit error rates of < 5% for distances up to 5 meters and good per­formance till 
7 meters or more. In practice, channel coding can be introduced to further reduce the probability of 
bit error. Theoretically we can trade o. data rate with distance by changing the length of the spreading 
codes. Obviously, the code length can not be too short to achieve good or­thogonality and introducing 
a long spreading code is only e.ective for gaussian type noise. Unfortunately, noise in a real system 
is never entirely gaussian. This leads to simi­lar communication performance observed for 32 chip and 
64 chip Gold codes. Table 2: Summary of System Power Consumption Communication Mode Power Consumption 
(mW) Transmitter Power Active 240 Transmitter Power Idle 115 Receiver Power Active 109 Receiver Power 
Idle 109 There are several factors other than the channel band­width that limit the maximal data rate 
available in a com­munication system: (1) switching time, (2) ADC conversion time, (3) digital processor 
speed and etc. The achievable data rate for our system is limited by the computational ca­pability of 
the low-cost processor board. In our setting, we can only employ a maximum chip rate of 10khz, which 
cor­responds to a bit rate of approximately 310bps. In practice, a faster processor board can be used 
to achieve a higher data rate, though it might be more expensive. Finally, the sys­tem power consumption 
under various modes was measured and is summarized in Table 2. Comparing with previous works [3, 5, 8, 
9], our system stands out as the most cost­e.ective solution (cost < $15), while maintaing a moderate 
communication range and acceptable data rate. 5. CONCLUSION In this paper, we presented a underwater 
optical modem prototype, which is speci.cally designed to suit applications where cost-e.ective design 
is the primary objective. We .rst identi.ed the various system challenges arising from using inexpensive 
hardware components. To compensate, sophisticated signal detection and clock synchronization al­gorithms 
were developed. Meanwhile, these algorithms were thoroughly analyzed and carefully designed for our system, 
which has very limited computation capability. Finally, our design was tested and shown to be able to 
achieve a signal detection range up to 10 meters. With channel coding, we believe reliable data reception 
is also possible up to these distances, given our measured raw bit error rate. The low overall cost together 
with moderate communication range and data rate make our system a good candidate for low­cost medium-range 
underwater systems. 6. REFERENCES [1] R Jurdak, P Aguiar, P Baldi, CV Lopes, Software modems for underwater 
sensor networks, in The IEEE OCEANS -Europe, pp. 1-6, 2007. [2] JW Giles, IN Bankman, Underwater optical 
communications systems. Part 2: basic design considerations, in The IEEE MILCOMM, pp. 1700-1705, 2005. 
[3] F Schill, UR Zimmer, J Trumpf, Visible spectrum optical communication and distance sensing for underwater 
applications, in The Australasian Conference Robotics and Automation ACRA, 2004. [4] JW Bales, C Chrissostomidis, 
High bandwidth, low-power,shortrange optical communication underwater, in The 9th Internationa Symposium 
on Unmanned Untethered Submersible Technology, 1995. [5] I Vasilescu, K Kotay, D Rus, M Dunbabin, P Corke, 
Data collection, storage, and retrieval with an underwater sensor network, in The 3rd ACM Sensys, pp. 
154-165, 2005. [6] J Ja.e, C Schurgers, Sensor networks of freely drifting autonomous underwater explorers, 
in The 1st ACM WUWNET, pp. 93-96, 2006. [7] N Farr, A Chave, L Freitag, J Preisig, S White, D Yoerger, 
F Sonnichsen, Optical modem technology for sea.oor observatories, in The MTS/IEEE OCEANS, pp. 1-6, 2006. 
 [8] JA Simpson, A 1 Mbps underwater communication system using LEDs and photodiodes with signal processing 
capability, Master s Thesis, North Carolina State University, 2007. [9] M Tivey, P Fucile, E Sichel, 
A low power, low cost, underwater optical communication system, Ridge 2000 Events, Vol. 2, no.1, pp. 
27-29, 2004. [10] CD Mobley, Light and water: radiative transfer in natural waters, Academic Press, 
San Diego, 1994. [11] Silonex SLD-70BG2 Planar Photodiode Datasheet, http://www.farnell.com/datasheets/16350.pdf. 
[12] JG Proakis, Digital communications , Mc-GrawHill International Editions, New York, 2001. [13] CL 
Lawson, RJ Hanson, Solving least squares problems, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1974. [14] S Karp, R Gagliardi, 
SE Moran, LB Stotts, Optical channels, , New York, Plenum Press, 1988. [15] Teledyne Benthos, http://www.benthos.com/. 
[16] DSPCOMM, http://www.dspcomm.com/. [17] WHOI Acoustics Comm Group, WHOI µ-modem, http://acomms.whoi.edu/umodem/documentation.html. 
[18] J Wills, W Ye, J Heidemann, Low-Power Acoustic Modem for Dense Underwater Networks, in The 1st ACM 
WUWNET, pp. 79-85, 2006.  
			