
 M-Health adoption and sustainability prognosis from a Care givers and patients perspective Boroto Hwabamungu 
Meraka Institute/CSIR PO BOX 395 Pretoria 0001 +27 12 841 2073 bhwabamungu@csir.co.za  Quentin Williams 
Meraka Institute/CSIR PO BOX 395 Pretoria 0001 +27 12 841 3181 qwilliams@csir.co.za  ABSTRACT The penetration 
of mobile phones and mobile technologies in developing countries has led to innovative developments of 
various m-Health applications. These applications have proven the potential of mobile technologies for 
improving the quality of health care service in general and the fight against HIV/AIDS in particular. 
However, to achieve greater impact on the ground level (e.g. in an antiretroviral (ARV) treatment clinic) 
in a developing country s context, these applications have to be adopted and their utilization sustained. 
A study was undertaken to investigate sustainability and scalability challenges of mobile phone-based 
applications/projects for HIV/AIDS care in developing countries and the adoption and sustainability prospects 
of such m-Health applications in an ARV clinic in Pretoria. The findings presented here, are that from 
a care givers and patients perspective, adoption and sustainability of these applications is not merely 
dependent on the proposed technology s capabilities to enhance service delivery. Adoption and sustainability 
is however, mostly dependant on: (1) the care givers and patients willingness and capability to incur 
any technological adoption and continuous use costs and, (2) their pre-conceived notions of government 
or sponsor-supported service provision. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.1.1 Systems and Information 
Theory General Terms Management, Theory Keywords M-Health, Developing countries, HIV/AIDS, Care givers 
and patients, m-Health adoption, m-Health sustainability 1. INTRODUCTION  The advent of mobile technologies 
has led to a new era of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) enabled healthcare service provision, 
termed m-Health [31]. These technologies have the potential to improve access to health care services 
[43] particularly in developing countries where mobile phones are more prevalent than ICTs such as landlines, 
telephones and the internet [21-39]. In these regions the healthcare system constantly faces challenges 
such as infrastructural deficit, resources shortages, tropical diseases and the burden of widespread 
diseases such as the HIV/AIDS epidemic [43]. The magnitude of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in developing countries 
combined with the contextual healthcare provision factors in many ARV clinics has raised the need to 
develop innovative ways to tackle the complexity that involves the provision of adequate health care 
in such circumstances. The exploration of the potential of mobile phones in the fight against HIV/AIDS 
has led to the establishment of mobile phone-based projects for HIV/AIDS care and the development of 
mobile phone-based applications for health care in developing countries such as South Africa, India, 
Rwanda, Peru, Uganda, etc [39]. These applications fall in the following utilisation areas: Education 
and Awareness, Remote Data Collection, Remote Monitoring, Communication and Training for healthcare workers, 
Disease and Epidemic Outbreak Tracking, and Diagnostic and treatment support [39]. White [42] and Fynn 
et al [11] note that these applications take advantage of the mobility and flexibility that mobile phones 
provide, in combination with other ICT technologies such as the internet and database technologies, the 
potential to overcome many of the barriers of distance and cost facing developing countries. Although 
these applications have proven the potential role that mobile technologies can play in strengthening 
the response to and the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic, it is necessary to ensure that these applications 
are widely adopted in as many care centres as possible and that their use is sustained over long periods 
of time. This will eventually lead to a greater impact and envisaged improvement in the healthcare sector 
in these countries. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. SAICSIT 10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, South Africa. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 
$10.00.  Wide adoption and long term use of these applications have been reported as being a big challenge 
for achieving the sought healthcare service improvement goals [39-42]. Hence this study has been undertaken 
to explore the plausibility of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care adoption and long term 
use from a care givers and patients perspective. This has contributed towards knowledge development about 
the care givers and patients contextual realities; their perception about the technology; their expectations 
about the technology adoption and long term use cost; and the implication of these factors if adoption 
and sustainability of mobile phones for HIV/AIDS care are envisaged and have to be achieved. The findings 
from this study suggest that from a care givers and patients perspective, adoption and sustainability 
of these applications are not merely dependent on the proposed technology s capabilities to enhance service 
delivery. Adoption and sustainability are mostly dependent on the care givers and patients willingness 
and capability to incur any technological adoption and continuous use costs and also on their pre-conceived 
notions of government or sponsor-supported service provision. These findings have been derived based 
on an analysis of the case study using the following extended versions of the Technology Adoption Model 
(TAM) [8]: The Task Technology Fit (TTF) model, the Fit between Individuals, Tasks and Technology (FITT) 
framework and the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) model. These models were 
used to investigate the fit between the technologies response to a particular need, and the expectations 
of the users when it comes to the continuous use of the technology. It is arguably inevitable to identify 
other technology adoption factors in contexts different from the typical management-driven organizational 
ICT adoption (where management foresees, plans and budgets for any ICT adoption costs) context in which 
most technology adoption models were developed. Unlike typical organizational ICT adoption, a mobile 
phone-based application for HIV/AIDS care adoption is envisaged in an environment where the bearer of 
the adoption costs is not well determined. This brings to fore the question of who must support, manage 
and maintain the continuous use of technology and what is the financial model behind the scalability 
and sustainability of eventual technology adoption. The rest of this paper is structured as follow: the 
next section provides a short background description of mobile phones, mobile technologies, m-Health 
emergence and issues around mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care deployment. This description 
is followed by the presentation of the research methodology that was used in the study. The case study 
and the findings are presented next, followed by the discussion of the study results. Lastly, an overview 
of m-Healthcare and mobile phone-based application for HIV/AIDS adoption and sustainability suggestions 
and future research direction is presented in the concluding section. 2. BACKGROUND:  This section 
provides an overview of how mobile technologies have revolutionized different aspects of our lives (including 
health care), how the m-Health concept has emerged, the impact of m-Health in the quest for improved 
HIV/AIDS care in developing countries, some of the challenges and issues in the adoption of these innovative 
solutions, and the issues around existing ICT utilization models (and theories) and the study of ICT 
use and diffusion. 2.1 Mobile phones, Mobile Technologies and m-Health Emergence  Mobile technologies 
have revolutionized different industries and the health care is no exception. The use of mobile phones 
and mobile technologies is well documented in fields such as the banking sector [3-22], distance learning 
and mobile learning [35-36], the marketing sector [3-4], and in the health care sector [31]. The use 
of mobile technologies in health has led to the development of m-Health [31-37]. M-Health is shortly 
defined by Istepanian and Zhang [16] as mobile computing, medical sensor, and communication technologies 
for healthcare . Apart from the inherit technology capabilities of mobile phones (e.g. 2G, 2G+, and 3G 
[36]; SMS, MMS, Voice applications [19-39]), m-Health includes sensor technologies that allow the creation 
of a body area network (BAN) of sensors that can wirelessly transmit physiological parameters to a remote 
monitoring device [32]. There are other potential mobile technologies such as the fourth generation (4G) 
network and Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) that are considered to be the future 
of wireless communication and that will be of relevance in the health sector [31]. Thus m-Health systems 
could generally be categorised in 5 groups according to the following dimensions proposed by Olla and 
Tan [31]: Communication Infrastructure, Device type, Data display, Application purpose and Application 
domain. In the case of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care, the categorisation can be made 
according to the following applications areas proposed by Vital Wave Consulting [39]: education and awareness, 
remote data collection, remote monitoring, communication and training for healthcare workers, disease 
and epidemic outbreak tracking, and diagnostic and treatment support. M-Health applications are particularly 
becoming enabling technologies that are most frequently used in difficult and remote locations in developing 
countries [14]. In developing countries, m-Health is having a positive impact in terms of increased access 
to healthcare and health-related information in remote areas, improved ability to diagnose and track 
diseases, timelier health information and expanded access to ongoing medical education and training for 
health workers through innovative use of mobile phones [39]. In the treatment of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS 
for example where adherence to treatment is of key importance, mobile technologies have been used to 
improve adherence to treatment through the use of reminder messages [11-19]. Messages particularly have 
a great potential and according to Bønes et al [7] they are effective and suitable for instant notification 
because messages are delivered immediately and have become a valuable communication media very familiar 
to users in developing countries. However there are also limitations such as the following proposed by 
Kaplan [19] that could hinder the use of mobile phones for improved healthcare service: cost issues, 
information carrying capacity, language and illiteracy. In spite of these limitations, mobile phones 
have been identified as the appropriate technology to improve healthcare services in developing countries 
[39]. Despite the hype around m-Health, its future and the future of health care service provision, there 
are various further challenges that m-Health solutions face as suggested by Yu et al [45]. The following 
have been identified as being major obstacles to m-Health adoption [17]: (#1). Objective obstacles: deficiencies 
and limitations of the current technology, specifically interoperability, compliance to widely accepted 
standards and security  (#2). Subjective obstacles: Reluctance of healthcare professionals to abandon 
traditional mostly paper and voice based workflows to new practices based on highly technological appliances 
.  (#3). The need to comply with usually very restrictive regulations .  (#4). Technical aspects and 
existing constraints such as screen size, resolution, and battery life .  (#5). Security issues regarding 
authentication of the user as well as encryption of transmitted data .  It is difficult to effectively 
classify these challenges. Yu et al [45] propose seven categories of challenges: Table 1. Challenges 
for m-Health solutions (adapted from Yu et al [45]) Major challenge category Sub-category 1. People 
Clinician s work habits and the kind of mobile devices that best match their needs Convenience of patients 
 2. Process Challenges for building a compelling business case and measuring ROI for m-Health. Integration 
into clinician s workflow. Managing cultural change associated with technology adoption. Managing change 
faced by hospital IT department The application development process 3. Technology Coverage of networks 
including Wifi, Bluetooth and cellular network Applications Web-based, portal technology One vendor software 
product or best-of bread solution RFID and bar code technology 4. Mobile phone currently available on 
the market PDAs Table PC Mobile clinical cart Podcast on iPod Battery life 5. Computing standards for 
m-Health 6. Security and Privacy consideration 7. Electromagnetic compatibility   These challenges 
need to be addressed [17] before sustainability is achieved. Any of these challenges (and other possible 
challenges not listed in this table) should be carefully considered for the effectiveness of m-Health 
solutions. Specific measures to address these challenges should be planned for and/or put in place when 
considering the deployment of m-Health solutions. It should be noted that despite these challenges, there 
have been successful m-Health deployment and/or use cases worldwide. In the following section, the innovative 
use of mobile phones and mobile phone-based applications in the fight against HIV/AIDS in developing 
countries is described as one example of an m-Health solution in developing countries. 2.2 Mobile Phone-based 
Application for HIV/AIDS care: a m-Health Solution in Developing Countries  There are various HIV/AIDS 
treatment and care provision challenges that affect both care givers and patients in a resource-limited 
setting [34]. These include but are not limited to high volume of patients, shortage of care givers, 
infrastructural deficit, lack of appropriate skills, ARV distribution and logistical problems, patients 
follow up, cases of resistive viral infection, etc. The existing examples of mobile phone-based applications 
for HIV/AIDS could assist in addressing some of these challenges if they were implemented, adopted and 
maintained. Mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care could therefore be said to be a good example 
of a m-Health solution in developing countries. A good illustration of the potential of mobile phones 
for health and HIV/AIDS in developing countries is provided by the Vital Wave Consulting s [39] study 
of 51 mobile phone-for-health projects in developing countries. Table 2 below illustrates examples of 
mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care described in the study. Table 2. Example of mobile 
phone-based application for HIV/AIDS (adapted from vital wave consulting [39] Application area Mobile 
phone-based applications (Country, project and HIV/AIDS focus)  Education and awareness South Africa, 
project Masikule: Promotion of testing and treatment via SMSs Uganda (Text-To Change (TTC) project: HIV/AIDS 
awareness through an SMS-based quiz Georgia, HIV/AIDS awareness video distribution on mobile phone India, 
Freedom HIV/AIDS project: HIV/AIDS awareness enhancement through mobile phone-based HIV/AIDS games  
Remote data collection Rwanda, TRACnet project: Patients HIV/AIDS information management, ARV distribution 
monitoring South Africa, Dokoza project: Patients HIV/AIDS data, treatment and adherence  Remote monitoring 
India, Mobile Care, Support and Treatment Manager (MCST): Patients HIV/AIDS Lab results access and medical 
history report; Nutritional planning and medication reminder Peru, Colecta-PALM: ART adherence information 
and patient s behavioral actions that is potential to wide spread of HIV/AIDS South Africa, Cell-Life 
s AfterCare : monitoring of patients medical status, medication adherence and other factors. Communication 
and training for health care Uganda, Mobile HIV/AIDS Support: Provide training regarding clinical care, 
research and prevention of HIV/AIDS Disease and epidemic outbreak tracking NO RECORDED PROJECT in this 
category. However TRACnet provides capabilities to track the HIV/AIDS pandemic Diagnosis and Treatment 
tracking South Africa, Dokoza project: HIV/AIDS Lab results access South Africa, HIV mobile Decision 
Support: Patients screening and medical needs determination using mobile phones and/or mobile devices 
  From table 2 above, it is evident that different developing countries in different regions of the 
world, including Asia, Africa and South America, have experienced the use of mobile phone-based applications 
in the fight against HIV/AIDS. However, it should be noted that most of the described cases are pilot 
or research projects that have not been widely deployed and or adopted. In the following section, the 
barriers to wide deployment mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care in developing countries 
are explored. 2.3 Mobile phone-based Application for HIV/AIDS care s Adoption and Sustainabilty Challenges 
  Although ICTs have generally being identified as critical for achieving development, ICT investment 
and adoption is still very low in most developing countries [29]. In the health care sector, Gordon and 
Hinson [13] note that there are several factors that affect the adoption and sustainability of ICT-based 
health information systems in developing countries. They highlight the implications of the following 
factors in sustaining HIS in developing countries: poor infrastructure, approach to systems development, 
inappropriate donor policies and strategies, uncoordinated donor efforts and human resource capacity. 
In a study of HIS in Mozambique and Tanzania, Kimaro and Nhampossa [20] found that the lack of alignment 
of the interests, roles and responsibilities among stakeholders was a major sustainability challenge. 
Most of these issues have implications for the adoption and sustainability of m-Health and mobile phone-based 
applications for HIV/AIDS care in developing countries. It has been generally observed that despite the 
potential use of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AID care, there are major issues in sustaining 
and scaling up the use of these applications [39]. These two issues are common in the deployment of ICT 
in developing countries and should be addressed in conjunction [41]. Scalability on the one hand is concerned 
with the replication of the output of a pilot study (or project) over a wide area and the expansion or 
extension of the outcomes of the pilot to more beneficiaries. Sustainability on the other hand is concerned 
with the likelihood that the benefits from an intervention will be maintained at an appropriate level 
for a reasonably long period of time after the withdrawal of donor/project support [15]. Apart from the 
above mentioned issues, there are various other challenges that hinder the wide deployment of these applications 
in developing countries. For example there are some generic challenges in the use of mobile phone-based 
applications for health [32]. These challenges would implicitly affect mobile phone-based applications 
for HIV/AIDS care. Two major barriers as described by Patrick et al [32] are those of security and confidentiality 
seen that mobile phones can be easily lost, shared or misplaced which could result in big confidentiality 
and data security threats. In the case of HIV/AIDS this would be a major problem because of the sensitivity 
of HIV/AIDS related patients data and the social implications of unauthorized access to and diffusion 
of a patient s data. One major societal impact of HIV/AIDS is stigmatization [18] which can have ramifications 
to discrimination, exclusion and psychological traumatism [24]. Mobile phone-based application deployment 
would therefore be affected by the patient s perception of whether data security and confidentiality 
would be jeopardized or not by the use of mobile phone-based applications. One other issue is that of 
interoperability with existing Health Information Systems (HIS) [17]. This is a critical aspect in the 
integration of mobile phone-based application for HIV/AIDS care into existing HIS within hospitals. There 
are possibly many more issues that are not described here and that should be taken into account. This 
study aimed particularly at analyzing the adoption and sustainability prospects of mobile phone-based 
applications for HIV/AIDS care among patients and care givers in a developing country s context. This 
has provided an understanding of the factors that would possibly dictate the adoption and long term use 
of these applications, particularly from the point of view of the ultimate users of the technology. In 
the following section, a short account on adoption and innovation diffusion models and their applicability 
in the context of developing countries is provided. 2.4 Adoption Models and the Study of the Complexity 
of ICT Utilization  The field of Information Systems has seen various theories and models developed 
in the study of different aspects of ICT utilization. These models and theories include but are not limited 
to Roger s Innovation Diffusion Model [33], DeLone and McLean model of Information Systems Success (ISS) 
[9], Davis Technology Adoption Model [8], TAM derivative models such as Technology Transfer Model (TTM) 
[5], and the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) [38]; and models such as the 
Task Technology Fit (TTF) model, the Fit between Individuals, Tasks and Technology (FITT) framework [1]. 
A broad review of ICT utilization models is provided by Venkatesh et al [38] These theories and models 
have been used in various IS studies. However, there have also been some critics regarding the appropriateness 
of these models in exploring the complexity of ICT utilization. Existing adoption and diffusion model 
have, for example, been criticized for: lacking in theoretical generalisability [10-23], focusing on 
one utilization aspect [6] and failing to consider other influential factors [25] such as the context 
within which adoption takes place [10]. There have been different studies that have tried to address 
some of these critics. Looking at existing models limitations, Goodhue and Thompson [12] for example 
noted that the Task-Technology fit concept was not taken into consideration in previous models. They 
consequently developed the Task-Technology-Fit model which has also been extended to take into account 
the individual users characteristics [1]. Lucas Jr et al [23] also noted in their examination of the 
TAM model that the model has limited many IS researchers focus on the perceived usefulness and Perceived 
ease of use constructs at the expense of other possible aspects of technology use and diffusion. This 
has resulted in the modification and development of much more inclusive models such as the UTAUT model 
which was developed to account for factors such as performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social 
influence and facilitating condition [38]; and the FITT model which advocates the fit between the attributes 
of individuals, task and technology [1]. Musa et al [26] for example have proposed a revised version 
of Davis TAM model for developing countries. Their proposed model accounts for inadequate accessibility 
and exposure to technology and captures individuals perception of the negative and positive impact factors 
. The study of the complexity of ICT utilization necessitates careful consideration of a theory development 
context and innovation adoption at study s context [10-23]. It is therefore critical that a theory or 
model s constructs and assumptions are appropriate to a particular context of study. Fichman [10] suggests 
that there is a need to develop middle range theories tailored to specific classes of technologies and/or 
particular adoption contexts . We therefore aim to contribute to the development of a sub-theory regarding 
the adoption and sustainability of m-Health in developing countries context. Constructs from the following 
extended TAM models: TTF, FITT, and UTAUT have been referred to in the context of this study. The TTF 
model advocates the fit between task and technology [12]; the FITT framework emphasizes the need for 
a fit between the attributes of individuals, the attributes of task, and the attributes of technology 
[1]; while the UTAUT model emphasizes the following factors: performance expectancy, effort expectancy, 
social influence, and facilitating conditions [38]. Roger s IDM , Davis TAM model, and Delone and McLean 
ISS model were overlooked as their constructs wouldn t provide good lenses for exploring the complexity 
of adopting and sustaining mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care in an ARV clinic in a developing 
countries context. The following section provides an elaboration of the research methodology that was 
used in this study. 3. METHODOLOGY  This has been an interpretive qualitative study following a case 
study approach to generate data and using interviews - an important data collection technique in interpretive 
studies [27-40] - to collect the data. Interpretive studies in Information Systems have now become well 
established [40]; they entail developing an understanding of social phenomena within a socio-cultural 
context through individual and inter-subjective interpretation [28]. An ARV clinic had to be selected 
based on the following: being established in a developing country, possibility of having permission to 
conduct a research study at the ARV clinic granted, provision of all aspects of HIV/AIDS treatment services 
(HIV/AIDS awareness, counseling, testing, ARV treatment, ARV distribution, patients follow up, treatment 
adherence enforcement), receiving a minimum of 100 patients per day, and the possibility of being explored 
cost effectively. Given these requirements an ARV clinic in Pretoria was selected and permission to conduct 
a study at the clinic was requested. The criticality and the sensitivity of conducting a study at an 
ARV clinic and dealing with patients required that ethical approval be granted before the study could 
begin and that participants consent and voluntary participation be obtained. Structured interviews were 
conducted with 42 patients and 13 Staff members or caregivers at the ARV clinic with the aim of assessing 
whether the adoption and sustainability of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care can be envisaged 
from a patients and caregivers perspective. Two interview questionnaires (one for the patients and one 
for the care givers) were compiled in English and administered at the clinic. The questions principally 
explored care givers and patients contextual realities, mobile phone possession and potential for use 
as an enabling technology and mobile phone-based applications adoption costs and sustainability implications. 
The interviews were mostly conducted in English. However for the participants who could not speak English, 
a volunteer staff member assisted with the translation (from English to the appropriate local South African 
language) and explanation. The analysis of the findings from these interviews was informed by an inductive 
thematic analysis. This approach entails categorizing observations from the collected data by using theme 
analysis and theme development [30]. In the following section a description of the ARV clinic and the 
interview findings is provided. 4. CASE STUDY AND FINDINGS  This study is part of a bigger study that 
has been conducted in three different developing countries to assess sustainability and scalability of 
mobile phone-based application for HIV/AIDS care in developing countries. The findings presented here 
are based on structured interviews that were conducted at an ARV clinic in Pretoria/South Africa to analyze 
m-Health adoption and sustainability future from a patients and care givers perspective. In this section, 
a short description of the ARV clinic settings where interviews were conducted is provided; an elaboration 
of the interviews findings is also provided. 4.1 ARV Clinic Dynamics  Located in Pretoria/South Africa, 
the clinic receives around 180-220 patients per day and it is operated by 5 doctors, 6 nurses, 1 pharmacist, 
11 counsellors, and 14 administrative personnel. It provides the following HIV/AIDS service: HIV/AIDS 
awareness, HIV/AIDS counseling, HIV/AIDS testing, ARV treatment, ARV distribution, patients follow up 
and treatment adherence enforcement. The clinic has the following existing infrastructure that can be 
advantageous to the deployment of ICTs for improved service delivery: Electricity, fixed telephones, 
few computers and an internet connection. However the internet connection is limited and mostly not functional. 
All the patients get HIV/AIDS related information, test results, treatment recommendation, etc. at the 
clinic. For awareness raising and information purposes, there are posters at the clinic as well as few 
free HIV/AIDS magazines. 4.2 Findings  In this sub-section, the outcome of the interviews is described 
with a focus on the following main aspects: the potential users contextual challenges and the potential 
for mobile phones use as a service improvement enabling tool, the potential for mobile phone-based applications 
for HIV/AIDS care use at the clinic, and the prospects (readiness and willingness to bear any adoption 
costs) for adoption and sustainability of these applications among patients and caregivers. 4.2.1 Care 
givers and Patients Context and Challenges  In the assessment of care givers and patients contextual 
realities the interviews revealed that there are various service provision and access challenges that 
exist. All patients travel to the clinic to get any HIV/AIDS service. Some patients come from as far 
as 200 km or more from the clinic but most patients reside between 5km to 50 km away from the clinic. 
They travel mostly by taxi (33/42). Other transport means include buses (4/42), walking (3/42) or using 
their own transport (2/42). These patients are mostly unemployed (19/42 employed and 23/42 unemployed); 
have mostly qualification levels that is below matric level (1/42: degree, National diploma: 2/42, Matric: 
13/42, between Grade 11 and grade 4: 26/42) and have mostly a high school education level (Primary school: 
8/42, High school: 31/42, Tertiary: 3/42). Patients in general (34/42) are happy with the service that 
the clinic provides but some of them (8/42) suggested that waiting in long queues can be inconvenient 
sometimes. The Care givers interviewed included: Medical officers (3/13), Nurses (3/13), one counsellor 
(1/13) and Administrative clerks (6/13). They have the following education level: University (5/13) and 
High school (8/13). Their qualification levels are: Masters (1/13), Degree (4/13), National diploma (1/13) 
and Matric (7/13). Some of the challenges encountered by staff members included: high volume of patients, 
lost files, difficulties in tracing lab results, difficulty in reading colleagues hand writings difficulty 
in providing feedback to patients, patients providing incorrect contact details or changing contact detail 
without informing the clinic, communication problems with unstable or very weak or deaf or mute patients. 
4.2.2 Mobile Phones as a Potential Tool for Service Provision Improvement  In exploring the potential 
of mobile phone usage, it emerged that mobile phone possession among all participants is very high (51/55) 
and that most of them would use their mobile phones as a tool to improve service provision / access (46/55) 
(see table 4). However, mobile phones were not the preferred service improvement proposition. From the 
staff members perspective, the following could be done to improve the quality of service: provide more 
training (7/22 proposed improvement measures), hire more staff (5/22), use appropriate technology (3/22), 
get more financial support (3/22), involve community members (3/22), and volunteering (1/22). Table 3 
below provides an overview of the proposed way of improving service delivery. Table 3. Service provision 
improvement suggestions by staff members (There were 22 suggestions collected from the 13 staff members) 
Service improvement possibilities (Total suggestions: 22) Observation Percentage Provide more training 
7/22 31.8 % Use of Appropriate technology 3/22 13.6 % Hire more staff 3/22 13.6 % More financial support 
3/22 13.6 % Involve community members 3/22 13.6 % Volunteering 1/22 4.5 %   Despite the great potential 
for mobile phone use as a tool for service improvement, there are also some issues that need to be taken 
into consideration. Issues of privacy, mobile phone data storage capacities and mobile phone loss cannot 
be ignored Following are some of the interviewees concerns regarding the use of mobile phones. Interviewee 
A: I don t want to use my mobile phone because I personally think that someone might steal my phone and 
this person is going to get that message containing my information  Interviewee B: I don t want to use 
my mobile phone. What if my phone is lost or stolen, or doesn t work, if I don t always have the mobile 
phone with me? And I can t use SMSs, I only make calls or receive calls Interviewee C: My phone is for 
personal use, health information, lab results, medication reminders can be accessed at the clinic, moreover 
the mobile phone memory capacity cannot accommodate all the patient s information 4.2.3 The Potential 
of Mobile Phone-based Applications for HIV/AIDS Care  From the conducted interviews, it emerged that 
most patients and care givers are aware of the existence of innovative mobile phone-based applications 
for HIV/AIDS care and that they would consider using these applications as a tool to improve the quality 
of healthcare service. However there were a few care givers and patients who were not aware of the existence 
of these technologies. Table 4 below summarizes the potential use of mobile phones and mobile phone-based 
applications for HIV/AIDS care from a patients and care givers angle. Table 4. Potential for mobile 
phone and mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care Potential for mobile phone-based applications 
use at the ARC clinic Observation Percentage Mobile phone in possession Yes 51/55 92.7 % No 4/55 7.3 
% Knowledge about existence of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care Yes 31/55 56.4% No 
24/55 43.6% Consideration to use mobile phone and/or mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care 
Yes 46/55 83.6 % No 9/55 16.4 % Willingness to provide financial contribution for use of service Yes 
21/55 38.2 % No 34/55 61.8 % Believe technology can improve service Yes 49/55 89 % No 6/55 11 %  
 4.2.4 Adoption and Sustainability Prospects  Some of the interviewed individuals (21/55) are prepared 
to contribute financially for the use of mobile phone-based applications but some of them (34/55) are 
not prepared to contribute financially. Some of the individuals interviewed believe that such a service 
would either be free (18/43 suggestions), supported by the government (18/43), supported by the donors 
(6/43), or supported by the clinic management (1/43) as shown in table 5 bellow.   Table 5: Proposed 
source of financial support for project Nature of service and service Support (Total opinions :43) Observation 
Percentage Government 18/43 41.7 % Sponsor 6/43 13.9 % Free 18/43 4.7 % Clinic management 1/43 2,3 
%   As summarized in table 5, Healthcare service is expected to be free and financial support expected 
to be made by government or possible sponsoring organizations even though the possibility those users 
can contribute towards financial sustainability of the projects cannot be excluded. It is evident that 
mobile phones and mobile phone-based applications can play an enabling role at this clinic. However, 
it is important to consider how the technology could be adopted and sustained and who should incur the 
cost of usage. From the patients and care givers perspective, the following observations have been made 
from these findings regarding prospects of adoption and sustaining mobile phone-based applications for 
HIV/AIDS care: (#1). There is a great potential for mobile phone and mobile phone-based applications 
use to enhance healthcare service delivery processes and to improve access to healthcare services  (#2). 
There is a great enthusiasm about the proposed mobile phone-based application even though knowledge about 
these applications is not proportionate. However the proposed technology is not the only service improvement 
possibility.  (#3). It is possible that few users would be prepared to incur some minimum costs. But 
the perception is that government should bear the cost of adoption and prolonged use  5. RESULTS DISCUSION 
  It has emerged that mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care could be adopted by both patients 
and care givers for the following reasons: these applications would support different service provisions 
tasks; most patients and care givers are in possession of mobile phones (on which these applications 
could be loaded); a good portion of patients and care givers are aware of the existence of these applications 
and they are willing to use their mobile phones; they perceive these applications as service delivery 
enhancement tools, and most mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care are easy to use. There 
is therefore a fit between the technology, the tasks and the users. This fit is regarded as key to technology 
adoption in a clinical environment where the interdependence between attributes of the intended users, 
the characteristics of the technology and the attributes of the process and tasks to be supported have 
to be well understood and managed in envisaging a technological adoption [1]. It should be noted that 
the notion of fit can be enhanced at all three level (Users, Tasks, and Technology) by influencing the 
attributes of users, tasks and technology as suggested by Ammenwerth et al [1]. There could be instances 
where this fit is not that high and where this could be of a great risk. For example, it was noted that 
few patients are concerned with the fact that mobile phone-based applications security and confidentiality 
can not guarantee. This confirms what Patrick et al [32] noted regarding the use of mobile phones use 
health care. It was also noted that some staff members regarded mobile phones as not having the appropriate 
memory (storage) capability. This could be a major challenge for m-Health future adoption in the sense 
that there would be no fit between the technology characteristics and the users attributes. Although 
the notion of fit has been observed regarding the potential adoption of mobile phone-based applications 
for HIV/AIDS, this does not guarantee that the users will be prepared to undertake any technological 
adoption and sustainability cost. This is in part related to the fact that the existing technology adoption 
and innovation models don t take into consideration other adoption influential factors [25] such as the 
context within which the technology has to be adopted [10]. In the specific context of this study, it 
was identified that although mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care are relevant, both care 
givers and patients have a different perception on how mobile phone-based applications should be deployed. 
It emerged that potential users have the perception that government and sponsors should mainly bear all 
the cost of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care adoption and sustainability, and that the 
service should be freely provided. Most of them perceived that government and sponsors should be responsible 
for the cost of adoption and sustainability of these systems. The following five points have been noted 
as critical in the potential adoption and sustainability of mobile phone-based application for HIV/AIDS 
care from a patients and care givers perspective: (#1). The chosen technology should be appropriate: 
Mobile phones possession for example is high; and in comparison to other available infrastructures such 
as the internet, mobile phones are used by patients as well as staff members.  (#2). Even though technology 
can improve service delivery, it is not always the best solution. Users perception about the importance 
of the technology can impact whether the technology is accepted or not.  (#3). Patients and care givers 
willingness to use the technology does not imply that they are prepared to incur any adoption or sustainability 
costs. It is therefore important to define beforehand whether users contribution should be accounted 
for in the deployment of these applications.  (#4). Government and donor support is critical to ensure 
free service (use of mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS) delivery. This is linked to the fact 
that people expect health care services to be free or to be provided at a low cost with the support of 
government and donor funds.  (#5). A financial sustainability model for usage beyond pilot level must 
be investigated before project initiation to understand who will eventually support, maintain and manage 
the use of the technology.   6. CONCLUSION  As m-Health becomes more and more being seen as the mandatory 
technology that will contribute tremendously to the improvement of healthcare service delivery in developing 
countries, particularly regarding mobile phone-based applications for HIV/AIDS care, it is necessary 
to understand its influential adoption and sustainability factors. These factors are critical as the 
adoption and sustainability of these applications is envisaged for a greater health care improvement 
impact. From a care givers and patients perspective in a public ARV clinic in a developing country context, 
even though mobile phone and mobile phone-based applications match the needs of patients and care givers, 
adoption and sustainability of these applications will be dependent on how the adoption costs can be 
managed. The question of financial support, management and maintenance must be investigated prior to 
project launch. With the high perception of free or government-supported health care service delivery 
among patients and care givers, it is unrealistic to expect successful m-Health deployment (adopted and 
sustained) unless an appropriate m-Health business model is developed and adhered to. This study has 
contributed to the body of knowledge on innovation diffusion and technology adoption. There is still 
a lack of a general theory on innovation [7] and even a small assemblage of sub-theories that complement 
each other [18]. As such, undertaking to develop a business model for the adoption and sustainability 
of m-Health initiatives in developing countries should be an interesting future research endeavor. 7. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This study couldn t be possible without Dr Theresa Rossouw s good heart for and commitment 
to the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and Dr Elaine Byrne s invaluable academic support and guidance: 
your contributions are highly appreciated. Our gratitude is expressed towards all the staff members of 
the ARV clinic and all the patients who sacrificed a great deal of time to take part in this study. We 
are very grateful to the hospital management and the University of Pretoria s medical school ethic committee 
for allowing us to carry this study. We are very thankful for all the support from the MERAKA Institute 
of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for the commitment to research and development. 
Last but not least, we would like to express our gratitude to Mr Boroto Ntakobajira for his continuous 
moral and emotional support and for the constant review of the work-in-progress. 8. REFERENCES  [1] 
Ammenwerth, E., Iller, C., Mahler, C. 2006. IT adoption and the interaction of task, technology and individuals: 
A fit framework and a case study. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 6:3.  [2] Barnes, S.J., Corbitt, B. 2003. 
Mobile banking: concept and potential. International journal of Mobile Communications 1: 273-288.  [3] 
Barnes, S.J., Scornavacca, E. 2004. Mobile markeing: the role of permission and acceptance. International 
journal of mobile communication 2: 128-139.  [4] Bauer, H.H., Barnes, S.J., Reichardt, T. 2005. Driving 
consumer acceptance of mobile marketing: a theoretical framework and empirical study. Journal of electronic 
commerce Research 5:181-192.  [5] Briggs, R.O., Adkins, M., Mittleman, D., Kruse, J., Miller, S., Nunamaker 
Jr, J.F. 1999. A technology Transition Model derived from Field Investigartion of GSS use abroad the 
U.S.S. CORONADO. Journal of management information systems 15: 151-195.  [6] Benbasat, I., Barki, H. 
2007. Quo vadis, TAM? Journal of the association for Information systems 8: 211-218.  [7] Bønes, E., 
Hasvold, P., Henriksen, E., Stranden s, T. 2007. Risk analysis of Information security in a mobile instant 
messaging and presence system for healthcare. International journal of medical informatics 76: 677-687. 
 [8] Davis, F.D., Bagozzi, R.P., Warshaw, P.R. 1989. User Acceptance of Computer Technology: a comparison 
of two theoretical models. Management Science 35: 982-1003  [9] Delone, W.H., McLean, E.R. 2003. The 
Delone and McLean Model of information systems Success: a Ten Year update. Journal of management Information 
systems 19: 9-30.  [10] Fichman, R.G. 2000. The diffusion and assimilation of Information technology 
innovations. In Robert Zmud (ed): Framing the domains of IT management: projecting the future through 
the past. Pinnaflex Publishing.  [11] Fynn, R.W., de Jager, D., Wood. R., Riviett, U. 2005. Remote HIV/AIDS 
patient monitoring tool using 3G/GPRS packet-switched mobile technology. In: Institution of Engineering 
and Technology. 4th Institution of Engineering and Technology seminar on Appropriate Healthcare Technologies 
for Developing Countries. London: Institution Engineering and Technology: 129 38  [12] Goodhue, D.L., 
Thompson, R.L. 1995. Task-Technology Fit and Individual performance. MIS Quarterly 19: 213-236.  [13] 
Gordon, A.N., Hinson, R.E. 2007. Towards a sustainable framework for computer based helath information 
systems (CHIS) in least developed countries (LDSs). International journal of health care quality assurance 
20: 532-544.  [14] Haux, R. 2006. Health Information systems-past, present, future. Internation journal 
of medical informatics 75: 268-281  [15] InfoDev. 2006. Improving Health, connecting people: The role 
of ICTs in the health sector in developing countries (2006 Working paper 7). Available from http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.84.html 
(Accessed on 13 November 2008).  [16] Istepanian, R.S.H., Zhang, Y.T. 2004. Guest editorial introduction 
to the special section on m-Health: beyond seamless mobility and global wireless health-care connectivity. 
IEEE Transactions on Infromatioin Technology in Biomedicine 8(4).  [17] Jones, V., Incardona, F., Tristram, 
C., Virtuoso, S., Lymberis, A. 2006. Future challenges and recommendations in M-Health Emerging Mobile 
Health Systems. Istepanian, R.S.H., LAxminarayan, S., and Pattichis, C.S., Eds. Springer: 267-270  [18] 
Kalichman S.C: Positive prevention: HIV Transmission Risk Reduction interventions for people living with 
HIV/AIDS. The South African Journal of HIV Medicine 2007: 40-45.  [19] Kaplan, W.A. 2006. Can the ubiquitous 
power of mobile phones be used to improve health outcomes in developing countries? Globalisation and 
health 2:9.  [20] Kimaro, H.C., Nhampossa, J.L. 2007. The challenges of sustainability of health information 
systems in developing countries: comparative case studies of Mozambique and Tanzania. Journal of health 
informatics in developing countires 1: 1-10.  [21] Kinkade, S. and Verclas, K. 2008. Wireless technology 
for social change. Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-Vodafoe Group Foundation Partnership. 
 [22] Laukkanen, T., Lauronen, J. 2005. Consumer value creation in mobile banking services. International 
journal of mobile communications 3: 325-338.  [23] Lucas Jr, H.C., Swanson, E.B., Zmud, R.W. 2007. Implementation, 
innovation and related themes over the years in Information Systems Research. Journal of the Association 
for Information Systems 8: 206 - 210.  [24] Mahendra, V.S., Gilboron, L., Bharat, S., Mudoi, R., Gupta, 
I., George, B., Samson, L., Daly, C., Pulerwitz, J. 2007. Understanding and Measuring AIDS-related stigma 
in health care setting: A developing country perspective. Journal of social aspect of HIV/AIDS 4: 616 
- 625.  [25] Moon, J.W., Kim, Y.G. 2001. Extending the TAM for a World-Wide-Web context. Information 
and Management 38: 217-230  [26] Musa, P.F., Meso, P., Mbarika, V.W. 2005. Towards sustainable adoption 
of Technologies for human development in sub-saharan Africa: precursors, diagnostics, and prescriptions. 
Communication of the Association for Information Systems 15, 592-608.  [27] Myers, M.D., Newman, M. 
2006. The qualitative interview in IS research: examining the craft. Information and organisation 17: 
2-26.  [28] Nandhakumar, J., Jones, M. 1997. Too close to comfort? Distance and engagement in interpretive 
Information systems research. Info systems journal 7: 109-131.  [29] Ngwenyama, O., Morawczynski, O. 
2009. Factors affecting ICT expansion in emerging economies: an analysis of ICT infrastructure expansion 
in five Latin American countries. Information technology for development 15: 237-258.  [30] Oates, B.J. 
2006. Researching Information Systems and computing. London, Sage Publications.  [31] Olla, P., and 
Tan, J. 2006. The m-Health Reference Model: And Organising Framework for Conceptualizing Mobile Health 
Systems. International Journal of Healthcare Information Systems and Informatics 1: 1-19  [32] Patrick, 
K., Griswold, W.G., Raab, F., Intille, S.S. 2008. Health and the mobile phone. Am J Prev Med 35: 177-181 
 [33] Rogers, E. 1983. Diffusion of Innovation. New York: Free press.  [34] Rossouw, T. 2006. Ethical 
dilemmas in an antiretroviral clinic a narrative. CME, 24: 16-18.  [35] Seppala, P., Alamaiki, H. 2003. 
Mobile learning in teacher training. Journal of computer assisted learning 19: 330-335.  [36] Sharples, 
M., Corlett, D., Westmancott, O. 2002. The design and implementation of mobile learning resources. Personal 
and ubiquitous computing 6: 220 - 234.  [37] Tachakra, S., Wang, X.H., Istepanian, R.S.H., Song, Y.H. 
2003. Mobile e-health: the unwired evolution of telemedicine. Telemedicine journal and e-Health 9: 247-257 
 [38] Venkatesh, V., Morris, M., Davis, G.D., Davis, F.D. 2003. User acceptance of Information Technoogy: 
Towards a unified view. MIS Quarterly 27: 425 - 478.  [39] Vital Wave Consulting. 2009. Mhealth for 
development: Opportunity of mobile technology for healthcare in the developing world. Washignton D.C. 
and Bershire, UK: UN Foundation Vodafone foundation partnership.  [40] Walsham, G. 2006. Doing interpretive 
research. European Journal of Information Systems, 15: 320-330  [41] Walsham, G., Sahay, S. 2006. Research 
on Information Systems in developing countries: Current Landscape and Future Prospects. Information Technology 
for Development 12: 7-24.  [42] White, G. 2005. Demonstrating the power of mobile technology in enhancing 
service delivery. A case study of the Dokoza project.  [43] WHO: Toward Universal Access: Scaling Up 
priority HIV/AIDS interventions in the health sector: 2008 Progress Report. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/towards_universal_access_report_2008.pdf 
 [44] Wu, J.H., Wang, S.C., Lin, L.M. 2007. Mobile computing acceptance factors in the healthcare industry: 
A structural equation model. Journal of medical informatics 76: 66-77.  [45] Yu, P., Wu, M.X., Yu, H., 
Xiao G.Q. 2006. The challenges for the adoption of m-Health. IEEE International conference on service 
operation and logistics and informatics. Shanghai, china. June 21-23 2006: 181-186    
			