
 MAINTENANCE OF STUDENT COMPUTER ACCOUNTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH Peter Donovan Manager of Academic 
Sustems Development Computing and Information Services University of Pittsburgh 40150 Hara Street Pittsburgh, 
PA 15260 ppd+@pitt.edu Voice: (412) 624-9179 INTRODUCTION At the time I got the request for proposals 
for this conference, my group and I had just finished a project that dramatically simplifies the lives 
of new student users of computing services at the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt). I wanted to share 
the success of the project, so I submitted an abstract. By the time I was notified of the acceptance 
of my proposed paper, my initial pride had abated into the simple knowledge that my group had implemented 
a significant improvement in procedures. It occurs to me, as I write this paper, that the interest of 
the wider academic community will likely be focused more on the entire milieu that has been built up 
at Pitt to provide computing services to students than it will be on the project I will describe. Therefore, 
I will attempt to sketch, as I go, a picture of the environment that gave rise to this project. For my 
own purposes, I hope that this paper will reach people involved in similar pursuits at other colleges 
and universities. I would like to broaden the circle for sharing ideas so that we can improve the academic 
and research-oriented computing services at our respective institutions.  BACKGROUND The project that 
motivated this paper involved streamlining the computer systems and procedures used to generate computing 
accounts for Pitt students. The former process was cumbersome and required students to ingest many computing 
concepts in a short period of time. The streamlining removed the most fi-ustrating parts of the ordeal. 
I intend to explain this in detail, but, first, let me broadly introduce the environment in which Pitt 
students do their computing. Centrally-Managed Computing Services Most institutions of higher education, 
like most corporations, take advantage of the economies of scale associated with centrally-managed computing 
services. At Pitt, the department of Computing and Information Services (CIS) performs this function, 
CIS operates both administrative computing systems and academic/research computing systems. Although 
administrative systems such as Housing, Registration, and Accounts Receivable intimately touch our students, 
this paper is concerned with the academic computing services offered by the university to its students. 
Examples of the services are: electronic mail and bulletin boards  word processing, database, and spreadsheet 
software  instructional software on-line library card catalogs on-line encyclopedias, dictionaries, 
and thesauruses c Internet access  computer programming languages  electronic news services  data 
storage and archive  laser printing  computer animation, simulation, and advanced graphics systems 
 The operating environments used to provide these services include: Unix timesharing  VMS timesharing 
 DOS serving (via Novell NetWare) in CIS computing labs  Macintosh serving (via Columbia AppleTalk 
Protocol) in CIS computing labs  Unix workstations in CIS computing labs  Not surprisingly, it costs 
Pitt a lot of money to provide these computing services. Therefore, the university wants to be intelligent 
in the way it makes Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that 
the copies are not made or distributed Iv direct commercial adua ntage, the ACM copyright notice and 
the title of the p ubliea tion and its date appear, and notice k given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, eqlLires a fee and/or 
specific perr?lission. Copyright 1992 ACM 0-89791-546-1/ 92/0011/ 0081... $1.50 stepping into the future 
    ACM SICXJCCS XX 1992 81 them available to its constituents. An accounting system was built to 
track computer usage. (This system is described in detail below.) There are three broad classes of users 
of the academic computing services. The motivation for tracking their resource consumption is a bit different 
for each. The groups are: researchers funded by government and other sources  faculty and staff involved 
in instruction and  internally-funded research e students Grant-related research is tracked for the 
purpose of recovering computing costs from the fimding organizations. Awhile back, research institutions 
were able to charge the government on an indirect basis for computing done in the course of research. 
That is, computing was treated as overhead. But in the early part of the last decade, the government 
issued Circular A-2 1. This regulation insists that research computing be charged to the government on 
a direct basis. That is, an accounting had to be made of the computing costs incurred by the researchers; 
and the government was to be billed only for services used. There is no desire at Pitt to charge dollars 
for computing done by faculty and staff. But we track their computing nonetheless. Each fiscal year, 
departments request a computing allocation. This funny money allocation acts like a checking account 
balance. A department can compute throughout the year until it exhausts its allocation. This system serves 
to dole out the computing resources in an orderly (1 avoid the term fair ) manner. It is also valuable 
for planning purposes. CIS can observe the overall usage and plan for growth. And it forces the departments 
to plan their usage, both as they prepare their requests and as they budget their use of the services. 
Students also receive a computing allocation. In the past, student computing was paid for by the department 
of a student s academic major. Each department administered its computing budget differently. This resulted 
in a disparity between students in majors that traditionally used computers (e.g., Computer Science, 
Physics, and Engineering) and those that did not (e.g., English, History, and Theater Arts). A few years 
ago, the Provost agreed to fund student computing so that all students would have access to computing 
services. Now, each student receives a computing allocation for each term for which they are enrolled 
for classes. More accurately, each student who requests a computer account receives an allocation each 
term in which they are enrolled. All students are entitled to a student computer account. It is the process 
of obtaining student accounts that was streamlined for the fall term of 1992. We ll get to that shortly. 
 820 ACM SIGUCCS~ 199200 000 OOCOOOO The Computer Accounts Program (CAP) The accounting system at Pitt 
that tracks the use of computing services by students, faculty, staff, and researchers is called the 
Computer Accounts Program. It is fondly called CAP. It runs on a VMS-based timesharing computer. CAP 
has some interactive and some batch components. CAP has knowledge of computing allocations at the departmental 
and individual user level. In each department an administrator, called a CAP Project Leader, is assigned 
to subdivide the departmental allocation among the users in the department. Departmental allocations 
are set at the beginning of the fiscal year; but a Project Leader can use an interactive feature of CAP 
to change user allocations at any time throughout the year. Computer accounts are requested through another 
interactive facet of CAP. First, a Project Leader informs CAP that a user is entitled to a share of the 
department s computing allocation. Then the user interacts with CAP to request accounts. CAP accumulates 
all requests throughout the day. In the evening, it sends them to several CIS-managed services which 
require accounts. The services include VMS timesharing, Unix timesharing, DOS application and print servers, 
Macintosh application and print servers, and Unix workstations. Uniformity is achieved by assigning to 
the user the same username (i.e., user-id, account name, log-code, etc. ) on all services. For example, 
if a user interacts with CAP to obtain accounts with the username WOLFIE , then CAP will instruct each 
of the services just listed to generate an account for the user with that username. You may or may not 
have noticed, in this discussion of account creation, an apparent Catch-22. I said that users run software 
(namely CAP) on a VMS timesharing machine before they have their computing accounts. Actually, in order 
for new users to get to the CAP software on VMS, they have to log into VMS using a general-purpose account. 
Fittingly, the account s name is CAP . The CAP account is set up to require no password; and it automatically 
runs the CAP software as soon as a user logs in. So that CAP can distinguish one user from another, CAP 
has its own concept of user identification. When a CAP Project Leader informs CAP about a new user, CAP 
assigns the new user a unique CAP identifier -­and an accompanying password. The Project Leader conveys 
the CAP identifier and password to the user. The actual sequence of events is this: a CAP Project Leader 
informs CAP about a new user  CAP assigns the new user a CAP identifier and password  the Project Leader 
conveys the CAP identifier and password to the new user  the new user logs into VMS timesharing with 
the  000 ijmkrning from Hp pad, username CAP  the login procedure for the CAP account starts up the 
CAP system  the new user requests computing accounts (with a username and password)  CAP batches requests 
and sends a day s worth to the CIS computing services  each service generates an account (with the 
same username) for the new user  the new user can begin using CIS computing services  CAP is responsible 
for tracking computing usage. Every night, data files are sent to the CAP system from the CIS-managed 
services. The files indicate, by username, which resources were used. Typical resources are CPU time, 
laser printing (paper), disk space, and magnetic tape storage. The data indicates how many units (CPU 
minutes, sheets of paper, disk blocks, etc. ) of a resource were used. CAP then uses a rate table to 
translate these units into dollar amounts. The dollar amounts are posted to the user s account in CAP 
s internal database. At the end of each month, CAP passes the accumulated dollar usage to the university 
financial system. This system effects the general ledger, causing real dollars (in the case of funded 
research) or funny money to move around. After the daily posting of charges for computing usage, CAP 
compares each user s usage to her allocation. If the usage exceeds the allocation, CAP causes computing 
to be suspended for the user s account, The account can be unsuspended if the CAP Project Leader is willing 
to give her more of the department s computing allocation. THE PROJECT TO STREAMLINE STUDENT ACCOUNT 
CREATION When I explained the CAP account-creation process just above, I said that, in one step, the 
CAP Project Leader informs CAP that a given user has the right to request an account; in the next step, 
the user goes to CAP to request the account. This theme is varied a bit for student accounts. The reason 
is scale. In the English department, for instance, the CAP Project Leader may have to deal with a couple 
dozen users. She makes them known to CAP; then she adjusts their computing allocation as needed over 
time. But one CAP Project Leader would not be able to handle 45,000 potential student users. So, although 
the Provost pays for student computing, CIS administers it. 1 11explain the former procedure for students, 
Then I ll discuss what we did to make it better. The Former Account-Creation Process Rather than go to 
a single CAP Project Leader, as departmental users do, students were instructed to go to one often CIS 
public computing labs. The employees in the labs were empowered to act as a Project Leader for the purpose 
of making a student user known to CAP. The lab employee passed along to the student the CAP identifier 
and password that would allow the student to make use of CAP. The student also received a 35-page document 
that was both a CAP user s manual and a guide to CIS computing policies as they affected students. It 
was then the responsibility of the student to sit at a Macintosh or DOS PC in a computing lab, use terminal 
emulation software to get to the VMS timesharing system, log in using the username CAP , identify himself 
to CAP using the CAP identifier and password he received from the lab employee, navigate through the 
CAP menus -­ referring as needed to the 35-page manual --and request access to the CIS computing services. 
Requesting access to CIS computing services was done in an ala carte fashion. And each service was referred 
to as an account. The choices were: c Unix Timesharing account (included access to Unix workstations 
in the labs) VMS Timesharing account  DOS Server account (for access to DOS servers in the labs)  
 Macintosh Server account (for access to Mac servers in the labs)  It should be obvious that the procedure 
just outlined was hardly optimal. It demanded that new students quickly become conversant in the use 
of a Mac or DOS PC, terminal emulation software, VMS, and CAP. And, ideally, they would understand the 
service choices offered to them. Often this procedure was thrust upon people who were also struggling 
to familiarize themselves with the miles of other red tape that go along with university life. I will 
take a moment to give some rationale for this seemingly sadistic procedure. When it was developed, the 
only options available in CAP were VMS and Unix timesharing. VTIOO terminals were prevalent, as PC s 
were only just being introduced to the campus. Therefore, knowledge of Mac, DOS, and terminal emulation 
were not needed. VMS was the system of choice for the majority of students, so they would need to become 
familiar with it anyway. And it seemed reasonable for students to follow the decentralized account-creation 
model that worked for the rest of the university. The a la carte style of service selection was chosen 
because the DOS Server account was actually a Novell NetWare account. The version of NetWare in use at 
the time the service was introduced only allowed 10,000 users per server. We felt that, if we required 
the students to make an explicit choice, those who didn t plan to use the service might not request the 
DOS Server account. The design was not flawed at birth; it became flawed as computing services evolved. 
The New-and-Improved Account-Creation Process As you might guess, the new procedure for students stepping 
into the Iuture    00000 ACM SIGUCCS XX 1992 83 to get a computing account is intended to eliminate 
the problems that existed with the old procedure. As before, students are directed to any of the CIS-run 
computing labs. The lab employees still act as CAP Project Leaders. They inform CAP that a new student 
wishes to use CIS computing services. But the interaction between the lab employee and CAP no longer 
ends there. During the same interactive session, CAP proceeds to generate account requests for the user 
on all current CIS services. The student user, who is standing next to the lab employee, is asked to 
type in a password. This password becomes the initial password to all the services for which accounts 
are created. We were able to eliminate the a la carte service selection because the current version of 
NetWare does not limit the number of accounts on each NetWare server. Since students now get automatic 
access to all services, we have begun to take a new approach to explaining computer accounts to students. 
Under the old system, we spoke to them of the several accounts that they could get. We explained that 
all their accounts had the same username. Today we speak of the username as the account. We describe 
the one account that gives them access to all CIS computing services. This may sound like a trivial distinction, 
but I believe it simplifies the concepts for the novice user. It allows them to defer the understanding 
of a given service until they are ready to use it. Rather than getting one 35-page document, the student 
gets a folder containing brief help sheets. These helpsheets explain the CIS computing services available 
through a student account, how to change their password, computer ethics, and where they can go for more 
help.  SUMMARY We want students to use our services. We know that computers will be helpful to them 
throughout their academic years. We know that knowledge of computing will be important to them in their 
professional lives. There is also a self-preservation component: We want the services offered by our 
department to be viewed favorably. As things had been going, the introduction of students to computing 
at Pitt was often a negative experience. Some were so frustrated by the experience that they turned away 
from computers. believe that the changes we have implemented are making the introductory experience at 
least a neutral one. The positive feelings come when the student discovers the power of computing. 
			