
 Maintaining Balance: Mile-High Expectations vs. Technostress Kathy Pribbenow The University of Kansas 
208 Computer Center Sunnyside and Illinois 785-864-0431 Pribb@ukans.edu ABSTRACT Are computers, those 
ubiquitous and strategic machines we have come to rely on, turning us into robots? Do you become upset 
when you can t find an ATM for quick cash? Do you have difficulty writing without sitting in front of 
your computer? Computers are changing the very way we interact with our environment and each other. Living 
in the 21st century will require a level of technological expertise greater than ever before. We are 
constantly faced with increasing expectations that force us to rely more and more on technology based 
solutions. The bottom line is, the more we work with machines, the more our minds try to think and act 
like machines in other words, we are adapting to computers rather than having computers adapt to us. 
This unnatural adaptation creates stress, a sign that we are fighting to keep our emotional and creative 
selves intact. This condition, called technostress , can afflict anyone who interfaces with computers 
and/or machines on a regular basis. Technostress was defined by Craig Brod in 1984 as A modern disease 
caused by an inability to cope with new computer technologies in a healthy manner. It manifests itself 
in two distinct and related ways: in the struggle to accept computer technology and in the more specialized 
form of over-identification with computer technology. We set expectations for information technology 
that are not always realistic. We have become used to the nearly instant gratification computers can 
provide, and then become impatient when we don t get immediate responses. Often times we project the 
relationship we have with computers out to our co-workers, family, and friends. Furthermore, we are disappointed 
when their ideas and actions are far more disorganized than those of our computers are. We count on our 
machines to do so much that when something goes wrong with our technology we simply don t know what to 
do. Computers were supposed to free us from drudgery and make our jobs easier, but often they just give 
us more time to do more work. We feel we can t function successfully without technology. Unlike the machines 
we use, humans need some time to Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 99, Denver, Colorado ª1999 ACM 1-58113-144-5/99/0011..$5.00 
recuperate, sort out the day s events, and relax. Otherwise, we risk a personal system crash. Technostress 
causes frustration, job inefficiency, and feelings of being overwhelmed and out of control. Although 
we may not be able to eliminate technostress, there are ways of reducing and preventing it. The key to 
dealing with technostress is to identify causes of it and implement strategies to reduce it. This presentation 
will provide participants with an overview of the causes of technostress and some techniques on how to 
deal with it.  Keywords Technostress, computerphobia, cyberstress, computer anxiety, technology aversion, 
technophobic, computer stress, technology. 1. INTRODUCTION Do you do any of the following? Set your 
e-mail program so it beeps when you have new mail, encouraging yourself to be interrupted.  Take your 
laptop, cell phone, or pager, with you when you go on vacation and call in for voice-mail messages daily 
as well as check e-mail whenever you can.  Go to bed later, or sleep less, so you can spend more time 
on-line.  When was the last time you heard these statements? My computer just froze up again!! That 
s the third time today!  I hate email messages that have attachments!  That software was just installed. 
There can t be an upgrade out already!  Statements like these have been said by just about everyone 
who uses a computer. If you said Yes to any of these statements, you could be exhibiting signs of technostress. 
What is technostress? Technostress is the psychological pressure on humans caused by technology. Two 
manifestations of technostress are: (1) the struggle to accept technology and (2) over identification 
with technology. Who does technostress affect? Secretaries and office personnel  Librarians  Professionals 
 Executives  Bankers   Store Clerks  Home computer users  Students  Adolescents  Technostress 
affects everyone to some extent because of the electronic devices present in our daily lives: televisions, 
ATMs, cellular phones, computers, microwaves, VCRs. Unfortunately for many people the speed of life is 
killing them. Demands at work, home or school can sap our energy and create high levels of tension both 
in blood vessels and muscles. Ironically the computer technology designed to make life easier is often 
itself a major contributor to stress. Internet users are especially susceptible because of the stress 
evoked by their high expectations of technology, their dependence on it, pride in their computer gear 
and know-how, and all the waiting they do for connections to go through, e-mail programs to load and 
Web sites to download. Technostress has nothing to do with your level of technological savvy. Signs of 
technostress can be as subtle as losing your train of thought in a conversation, or as obvious as insomnia 
or lost productivity at work. We forget that while we can do more than one thing at a time, computers 
are much better at multitasking, so we begin to expect the same from ourselves -- with harmful results. 
Take, for example, someone who's waiting for a Web page to download, checking e-mail and talking on the 
phone at the same time. When you have that many things going on in your brain it s like setting off fireworks. 
Your brain is built to function as a protective mechanism, cycling through all of those areas. As you 
get more areas going, you find yourself not being able to spend enough constant time working on any one 
of them. You spend a minute here, a couple seconds there. People can pull this off for a while, but (eventually) 
it will diminish their performance. You may wake up in the middle of the night and your brain is still 
trying to process all those areas. With people spending more time online, the problems associated with 
technostress -- including on-line addiction -- could get much worse. It's too small to track now, but 
technology addiction will grow. Anyone who uses a computer regularly knows how valuable these 20th century 
machines can be. And anyone who has ever waited for their on-line service to respond, received a "mailbox 
full" message, had their hard disk crash, been flamed on the internet, upgraded software, or tried to 
set up their own home-based computer network knows that there is also a dark side to this modern wonder 
of technology. Dealing with technostress is really no different than dealing with any other type of stress 
in life. The more you understand and focus upon the underlying causes of technostress, the better you 
will fare in trying to cope with it. Let s discuss 10 common causes of technostress. This in no way represents 
a complete list, but it provides a good account of the technostress most people frequently experience. 
What causes technostress? Inadequate and insufficient training on new technology. Little if any consideration 
is given to support, training, networking, software, or other ongoing costs. The individual just purchases 
information technology like another calculator or typewriter. Seek out learning opportunities, including 
computer and business magazines, seminars, on-screen tutorials or good books on the subject. Pressure 
of staying current on new technology.  Inadequate or outdated computer software/hardware. Sometimes 
we invite disasters by trying to do things cheap. That less expensive modem or graphics board you could 
pick up at a computer show may save you a hundred dollars or more, but are the potential headaches worth 
the risk? Sure you can save some money if you don't upgrade to a Pentium processor, but are the savings 
really worth all the frustration and anger you may experience when your slower CPU can't keep up with 
the latest software? Or how about building a system on your own. If you're not really experienced, it's 
probably better (and less stressful) to pay a little more and get a system assembled by a pro. Hardware 
and software purchases are often justified on the basis of the lowest possible up front cost rather than 
performance needs.  Inadequate or lack of computer staff. These days it is difficult to find people 
to man a Help Center who have the technology background.  Pace of change.  Poor ergonomics. Many offices 
these days, are put together with left-over, used, and old furniture. No thought goes into the effects 
that inadequate furniture and lighting can have on a person. Adjustability in the work station allows 
the user to change positions while working, thus reducing repetitive motion injuries. Poor lighting increases 
eye strain.  Long hours spent on a task.  Incorrect software/hardware configurations. Software may 
be copied illegally from other machines or even worse, brought in from less well known and potentially 
pirated sources. People try to install hardware/software themselves. When a problem arises while doing 
this, they simply proceed because they don't know any better. That leads to incorrect configurations. 
 Failing to anticipate problems. Many stressful problems computer users experience can be prevented. 
Theft, damage from children, natural disasters, viruses, and hard disk failures may not always be avoidable. 
But adopting a regular backup schedule and keeping a recent backup in a second location can make such 
losses easier to bear. Software bugs are common in many types of programs, so you may want to hold off 
on purchasing new releases of software. There are many potential computer-related nightmares, but they 
can be anticipated and steps taken to either prevent a disaster or at the very least to significantly 
soften its blow.   2. THE EFFECTS OF TECHNOLOGY Numerous physiological problems may arise resulting 
from excessive computer usage. "Those who put in a full work day in front of computer video display terminals 
have reported a range of complaints, including eye fatigue, muscle and skeletal strain, and emotional 
stress." (Dowling, 1980) Additionally, excessive, pathological use of computers can lead to a syndrome 
known as Video Operator Distress Syndrome (VODS). The symptoms of VODS include headaches, eye strain, 
and a heightened state of nervous tension. The computer has become the most important piece of office 
equipment over the past decade. The potential adverse physiological effects of extended computer use 
are substantial and continually increasing. When humans interact with computers there may be several 
potentially negative outcomes. Besides the term technostress there are various other terms to describe 
these outcomes: computer stress, computer anxiety, negative computer attitudes, computerphobia, cyberphobia, 
and technology aversion. In fact, technophobia and technostress are prevalent enough in our society that 
a group of these people have come together to form a group called the Luddites. They are a group of people 
who are fighting back against technology. Computerphobia is an extreme behavior related to a general 
fear of change. People's fears resulting from computers and new technologies generally fall into one 
of two categories. First, there is a general fear that technological improvements will result in the 
loss of one's job. Second, there is a fear among many individuals, especially older workers, of an inability 
to learn the new technology, called "cyberphobia". Cyberphobia is mostly a result of inexperience and 
apprehension about computers and the Internet, some people are genuinely scared to learn how to use a 
computer. Cyberphobia may result in severely adverse reactions to the technology. Computerphilia, or 
computer addiction, is in stark contrast to the previously mentioned computerphobia. Rather than having 
unfounded fear of the technology, individuals experience microcomputer mania, with symptoms including: 
cruising computer stores, using computer terms in non-computer conversations, social withdrawal in favor 
of terminal time, sleep disturbance, lack of exercise, spousal problems resulting from excessive terminal 
time, overspending on computers, and high states of anxiety when separated from their computers. Most 
people have experienced mild forms of technostress but for those who experience extreme levels of technostress 
there may be some dire negative effects. Extreme stress may result in health related problems, like cardiac 
problems, hypertension, migraine headaches, etc. A possible negative outcome is job burnout . Job burnout 
has been defined as a syndrome of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and reduced personal accomplishment 
that can occur among individuals who do people work of some kind . The Internet is probably becoming 
the number one technostressor . The Internet is a massively available off-site source of information. 
A concern with the Internet is how to find the information; since there is a proliferation of Web search 
tools and graphic browsers to use. The Internet seems to add hundreds of new sites daily with no standard 
to how they are designed, maintained, and updated. Dealing with the information overload is a real problem. 
While computer-related stressors are an important factor in today's workplace, they are not the only 
factor meriting consideration and evaluation. Before blaming technostress for organizational or individual 
problems, management should analyze other factors including work overload, overtime, inner-office interpersonal 
relationships, and extra-work related problems. Managers need to avoid the common mistake of blaming 
the currently popular malady when stress becomes an organizational problem. Technological experts admit 
that the mastery of the equipment is no sure defense against technostress. People adept at using computers 
often feel they are drowning in a sea of e-mail, and their solution isn't to expand their use of technology, 
but to back away from it. People who feel frustrated that they can't use computers shouldn't feel stupid. 
The real fault lies with manufacturers who sell incomplete technology all the time. One reason that computers 
tend to befuddle many people while delighting others is that, unlike other machines, they are widely 
adaptable to do many different things. The original idea of a machine is that it does one thing, and 
that's why you buy it. Computers aren't like that. It's like getting a machine that will let you move 
on land, water or through the air depending on how you push its buttons. Most people would rather get 
a car to drive on land, a boat for the water and a plane for the air. Given the nearly infinite ways 
to configure a computer, technology designers tend to see the customer as being like themselves: someone 
who gets a kick out of playing with as many different ways of using the equipment as they can dream up. 
But most customers would rather mostly ignore the machine itself and just make it do what they want done. 
While mastering equipment may help people avoid some frustrations and embarrassment, it won't assure 
that technology will make life easier instead of more stressful.  3. REDUCING TECHNOSTRESS Although 
we may not be able to completely prevent technostress, there are ways to reduce it. Common sense management 
techniques such as planning, communication, and training can be adapted in the technology world. So how 
can an individual break the technostress cycle? A person should deal with his or her own issues first. 
Once that person has identified what the specifics of the stress are, then decide what factors can change 
and what can be lived with. Try to rank what elements one will work on. Come up with a strategic plan. 
If one determines that a person or group of people are experiencing a high level of technostress, the 
next step would be to determine how to cope with the technostress. Coping is the process of managing 
external and internal demands that are perceived as taxing or exceeding a person s resources. Coping 
strategies may consist of behavior or cognitive responses that are designed to reduce, overcome, or tolerate 
the demands placed on the individual. When coping doesn t work, you become stressed out people may judge 
for themselves that they cannot cope and are stressed out . This could be indicative of feeling helpless 
in the face of stressors or they might report high levels of somatic complaints (body/physical) and anxiety. 
These typical stress reactions would indicate the person is stressed out . The person is unable to cope 
with the technostressors of life. The person may feel they are unable to change the way they perceive 
and manage their interactions with the immediate environment. At this stage of dealing with technostress 
a person might need to employ one of several stress management techniques. Ten Ways to Overcome Technostress 
1. Maintain realistic expectations. The Internet is a microcosm of the real world and things will occasionally 
fail and breakdown. Also, don't equate your self-worth with how much your computer costs or how fast 
your Internet connection is. You shouldn't compare yourself to anyone else by virtue of their technology. 
You should feel proud of whatever technology you have and feel fine about leaving the rest alone. 2. 
Wean yourself of the need to be available all the time. Let people know the single best way to contact 
you email, phone, fax. 3. Remember how to do things the old-fashioned way. It s important to have a 
techno-crash emergency plan, but also know how to operate without technology in case you are challenged. 
 4. Don't be too hard on yourself when you make a mistake. Give yourself permission to experiment and 
make mistakes. We are all on a steep learning curve with this emerging technology. Relish in the fact 
that even the experts don t know it all. 5. Educate yourself to new developments. Part of the educating 
process is accepting the fact that computer technology will always be changing, with some periods of 
slower change than others. 6. Interact with other humans. See if others have a solution to a particular 
problem. Seek information from many sources. Network with people who understand the technology and seek 
their guidance. 7. Put the computer in perspective. It is a tool. It s OK if it takes you five seconds 
longer to dial up to your Internet server. What s the big deal about five seconds? Don t let it become 
the equivalent of a wasted day. 8. Take frequent breaks away from your computer screen during the day. 
Do something physical like swinging a bat (not at the PC) or going for a walk. This will keep you ergonomically 
fit. Spend less time working on computer­based assignments and attend to other duties on a consistent 
basis. 9. Decide reasonable limits or boundaries for what can be handled in what time frame. Negotiate 
those boundaries with your administration if possible. 10. Take time out. Set periods of time each week 
when you will NOT be online. Living in the real world can be spectacular fun so make sure you take time 
out to do other things that don't involve a PC or online surfing.   4. CONCLUSION New technology tends 
to favor some groups of people and harms other groups. School teachers, for example, will, in the long 
run, probably be made obsolete by television, as blacksmiths were made obsolete by the automobile, as 
balladeers were made obsolete by the printing press. Technological change, in other words, always results 
in winners and losers. In the case of computer technology, there can be no disputing that the computer 
has increased the power of large-scale organizations like military establishments or airline companies 
or banks or tax collecting agencies. And it is equally clear that the computer is now indispensable to 
high-level researchers in physics and other natural sciences. But to what extent has computer technology 
been an advantage to the masses of people? To steel workers, vegetable store owners, teachers, automobile 
mechanics, musicians, bakers, brick layers, dentists and most of the rest into whose lives the computer 
now intrudes? These people have had their private matters made more accessible to powerful institutions. 
They are more easily tracked and controlled; they are subjected to more examinations, and are increasingly 
mystified by the decisions made about them. They are more often reduced to mere numerical objects. They 
are being buried by junk mail. They are easy targets for advertising agencies and political organizations. 
The schools teach their children to operate computerized systems instead of teaching things that are 
more valuable to children. In a word, almost nothing happens to the losers that they need, which is why 
they are losers. It is to be expected that the winners - for example, most of the speakers at this conference 
- will encourage the losers to be enthusiastic about computer technology. That is the way of winners, 
and so they sometimes tell the losers that with personal computers the average person can balance a checkbook 
more neatly, keep better track of recipes, and make more logical shopping lists. They also tell them 
that they can vote at home, shop at home, get all the information they wish at home, and thus make community 
life unnecessary. They tell them that their lives will be conducted more efficiently, discreetly neglecting 
to say from whose point of view or what might be the costs of such efficiency. There was a time when 
information was a resource that helped human beings to solve specific and urgent problems of their environment. 
In the Middle Ages, there was a scarcity of information but its very scarcity made it both important 
and usable. This began to change in the late 15th century when a goldsmith named Gutenberg, from Mainz, 
converted an old wine press into a printing machine, and in so doing, created what we now call an information 
explosion. Forty years after the invention of the press, there were printing machines in 110 cities in 
six different countries; 50 years after, more than eight million books had been printed, almost all of 
them filled with information that had previously not been available to the average person. Nothing could 
be more misleading than the idea that computer technology introduced the age of information. The printing 
press began that age, and we have not been free of it since. Everything from telegraphy and photography 
in the 19th century to the silicon chip in the twentieth has expanded technology beyond our forefathers 
imagination. The day has come when it is virtually impossible to avoid using technology. 4.1 Technostress 
and the Future I found this poem on the Internet while searching for material to support this paper. 
It presents a gloomy picture of technostress . Technostress Overload Syndrome, even in my sleep I moan. 
Like a rising tide, a drowning man lying in the foam. Information piling up around me in my home, the 
network news an endless drone. Technostress Overload Syndrome, I looked around my room. All of the headlines 
were preaching gloom and doom. All of the stations were spreading fear of whom, might unleash the next 
disaster, boom. Technostress Overload Syndrome, I even get it on the phone. It comes in bits and bytes, 
over the dial tone, a flood of information till I just zone, have to hang it up and be alone. Byronandonandondandon 
&#38;#169; Copyright 1995 Byron Holmes Shafer All Writes Reserved There is one final question and that 
is whether technostress is a passing problem or a continuous future concern. Will future generations 
of librarians and others experience less technostress because they have grown up during the computer 
and information age? In one way there will be less technostress because technologies will be increasingly 
available and there will be amply opportunities for providers and users to become familiar with them. 
In another way there will always be the problem of information overload with increasing availability 
of information sources and ways to access the source, as well as continuous and ever swifter upgrades, 
enhancements, and totally new hardware and software. How to limit one s search of the information will 
become the primary source of future technostress . Computer technology will become a more significant 
part of all workplace environments. To achieve satisfying and rewarding careers, employees must learn 
to cope with the stress created by the high-technology environment, and management must provide the employees 
the resources to achieve this goal. After all, anyone who has studied the history of technology knows 
that technological change is always a Faustian bargain: Technology giveth and technology taketh away, 
and not always in equal measure. A new technology sometimes creates more than it destroys. Sometimes, 
it destroys more than it creates. But it is never one-sided. Henry David Thoreau told us: All our inventions 
are but improved means to an unimproved end. There is no escaping from ourselves. We have met the enemy, 
Pogo said, and he is us.  5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My thanks to my husband, Glenn, and son, Matthew, for 
putting up with my version of technostress during the preparation of this paper. I had more on my plate 
than I could handle at one time and I truly appreciate your support.  6. REFERENCES [1] McPartlin, J. 
P., "The Terrors of Technostress," InformationWeek, July 30, 1990. [2] Cusato, G., and Kokoski, K., Technostress 
Bytes!, http://members.aol.com/cusatog/index.html. [3] Kupersmith, J., 1992. "Technostress and the Reference 
Librarian [Online]." Original article appeared in Reference Services Review Summer (1992) [4] Bland, 
R. L., Diagnosis: "Technostress Strategies to reducing and preventing technostress", http://www.med.usf.edu/~rbland/stress.html. 
[5] Shafer, B. H., http://www.intac.com/~bshafer/technostress.html. [6] Baker, R., Paper on Technostress, 
http://www.cas.usf.edu/lis/lis5937/baker.html.  
			