
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. MOBILE ROBOT SIMULATION OF CLINICAL LABORATORY DELIVERIES Manuel D. Rossetti, Ph.D. 
Amit Kumar Robin A. Felder, Ph.D. Department of Systems Engineering Department of Systems Engineering 
Medical Automation Research Center University of Virginia University of Virginia The University of Virginia 
Thornton Hall Thornton Hall Pathology-Box 168, Charlottesville, VA 22903 U.S.A. Charlottesville, VA 22903 
U.S.A. Charlottesville, VA 22908 U.S.A. ABSTRACT Flexible automation in the form of mobile robots holds 
the potential for decreasing operating costs while improving delivery performance in mid-size hospital 
delivery systems. This paper discusses the use of simulation modeling to analyze the costs, benefits, 
and performance tradeoffs related to the installation and use of a fleet of mobile robots within mid-size 
hospital facilities. The results of this study enable a better understanding of the delivery and transportation 
requirements of mid-sized hospitals and how a fleet of mobile robots can meet those requirements. We 
show that for clinical laboratory deliveries a fleet of 6 mobile robots can achieve significant performance 
gains over the current system of 3 human couriers while still remaining cost effective. The 6-robot alternative 
reduces the annual cost by approximately 56% and improves turn-around time performance by 33%. INTRODUCTION 
In this study, the University of Virginia s clinical laboratory and pharmacy delivery processes are used 
to examine the use of mobile robots within a mid-sized hospital facility. Mid-size hospitals use many 
different transportation modalities to deliver supplies to and from the service units within a hospital. 
The University of Virginia Hospital employs human couriers, point-to-point pneumatic tubes, tack-mounted 
carts, and mobile robotics. This multifaceted transportation system provides a variety of delivery options 
for the medical staff; however, the current system s over reliance on human couriers for deliveries has 
inherent disadvantages in terms of cost and delivery reliability. Helpmate Robotics has developed a robotic 
courier for applications within a hospital environment. The robot is designed to meet a variety of delivery 
missions in a fully autonomous fashion. The robot is able to make round trip deliveries, one way trips, 
one-way trips with stops, and rounds with multiple stops. The robot uses a hierarchical control mechanism 
with a topological map of the hospital embedded into its knowledge base for navigation. Autonomous operation 
is enabled through the use of multiple sensing modes for including odometer based navigation, sonar, 
infrared and vision sensors. Additional navigational assistance is also available through the use of 
specialized reflective tape mounted to the ceiling. A supervisory computer with radio links to the robots 
is used in multiple robot applications to prevent deadlock around elevators and in hallways. The robots 
use specialized algorithms in order to navigate and avoid obstacles within crowded hallways. To allow 
full access to the hospital, elevator and door actuators must be installed. Typical applications include 
delivering late meal trays, sterile supplies, medications, specimens and medical records. For more information 
concerning the capabilities of the robot, we refer the interested reader to references Evans (1994) and 
Evans et al. (1992). Automatic guided vehicles (AGV) transport material between pre-specified locations 
in a facility. They may be used as transporters or as a part fixture capable of holding the parts during 
the processing operation. Fundamentally, an AGV system is specified by: 1. the location of pickup and 
drop-off points, 2. the path between pickup and drop-off points, 3. the number of vehicles, and 4. 
the routing and scheduling of vehicles between pickup and drop-off points.  These objectives compete 
to trade-off cost and system performance in complex ways. Methods that have been used to design and analyze 
AGV systems include optimization methods (Gaskin and Tanchoco (1987)), heuristic methods (Park, Raman, 
and Shaw (1989)), simulation methods, and artificial intelligence methods (Thesen and Lei (1986)). Some 
authors have considered procedures by which the number of AGVs can be determined. Egbelu, (1987) proposed 
four analytical techniques that can be used to determine the number of AGVs required in a particular 
setting. For example, the CAN-Q method recommended by Tanchoco, Egbelu, and Tagaboni (1987) helps in 
determining the starting points for the number of vehicles to be used in a simulation experiment. We 
refer the interested reader to the references for more information on these topics. Simulation modeling 
for automated guided vehicles for industries has been covered to a very large extent within various literatures. 
Ülgen, and Kedia (1990) use simulation to design a cellular assembly plant employing AGVs. Prasad and 
Rangaswami (1988) use simulation to analyze the control systems associated with an AGV system in an integrated 
circuit board manufacturing application. Newton (1985) discusses the use of simulation to determine the 
appropriate number of AGVs in a manufacturing setting. This paper first presents an overview of the hospital 
delivery system under study. We then present a description of the simulation models used to analyze the 
system. Next, we present the alternatives under consideration, the experimentation process, and the results 
of the analysis. Finally, we conclude with recommendations and future extensions for this work.  HOSPITAL 
DELIVERY SYSTEM The University of Virginia is a 683-bed facility. Each floor of the hospital is connected 
to each other and to the basement by two banks of elevators and two stairwells. One elevator bank is 
located on the West Side of the hospital while the other is located on the East Side. Each bank of elevators 
consists of two rows of three elevators each. For each elevator bank, one row of three is reserved for 
visitors and the other row is reserved for hospital personnel. Figure 1 illustrates the typical layout 
of a floor within the hospital. Figure 1: Generic Floor Plan for the 3rd-8th Floors The clinical laboratory 
process collects specimens that are placed on floors 3 to 8 from the 29 medical units of the hospital. 
The clinical laboratory delivery service is divided into STAT and routine deliveries. An activity cycle 
diagram of this process is presented in Figure 2. For routine pick-ups and deliveries, the courier follows 
a predefined route. Each courier is assigned two floors: one person for the 3rd and 4th floors, a second 
person for the 5th and the 6th floors, and a third person for the 7th and 8th floors. Figure 2: Example 
Activity Diagram Couriers wait in the personnel lounge until it is time to start the shift. At the beginning 
of the shift, couriers make their way to the top floor of their route and visit each unit assigned to 
their route on their way to the clinical laboratory. If they have picked up items during the route, they 
deliver the items to the clinical laboratory; otherwise, they repeat their route. During the operation 
of a shift there are three breaks that are scheduled for couriers. There are 2 breaks of 15 minutes each 
and 1 break of 30 minutes. If the break occurs, when the courier has items to deliver, the items are 
first delivered before the break commences. When a specimen requires STAT delivery, the courier picks 
up the specimen and then takes the best direct route to the clinical laboratory for delivery. Any items 
that have already been picked up along the route are also dropped off at the laboratory. The courier 
then travels back to the unit that was next on the route before they responded to the STAT delivery. 
The determination of whether or not a specimen is STAT is dependent on the nurses or the doctors and 
their determination of the patients medical needs. No specific STAT delivery time requirement has been 
specified by Distribution Services although the response should be as immediate as possible and typically 
less than 15 minutes. 3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT The major objective of the simulation models was to develop 
an understanding of the trade-off between cost and system performance, including utilization of vehicles, 
amount of work in process, system throughput, delivery turn around time, and delivery variability. This 
was accomplished by modeling the use of fleets of mobile robots in performing delivery services under 
realistic hospital demand situations. To analyze the clinical laboratory delivery process, we developed 
two models. The first model describes the system as it currently operates using three couriers. The second 
model describes the operation of the system with mobile robots serving as the primary delivery mechanism. 
The mobile robot model acts essentially the same as the courier model except for minor changes to accommodate 
the speed of the robots, their dwell at the hospital units, and elevator interactions. Within the model, 
entities are used to represent: . delivery items for clinical laboratory and pharmacy . control logic 
for the couriers and mobile robots, and . logical entities for initializing the model and generating 
specific arrival processes We used automated guided vehicle (AGV) movement systems to model the transportation 
processes associated with both human couriers and mobile robots. For simplicity, let us refer to the 
transportation device, either human or robot, as a transporter. We create an entity to control the movement 
of the transporter. This controller entity follows a process that describes the routes used by couriers 
or robots within the hospital. Within the movement system, we define the possible paths for the delivery 
mechanisms between each of the hospital units. These paths include movement between units on the various 
floors and movement between floors using the elevator. A processing station is associated with each hospital 
unit. A network of links and intersections describe the paths available to the transporters between the 
stations. A link describes the path between two intersections. Links can be unidirectional, bi-directional, 
or spur. Spurs enable the modeling of dead-end links. Intersections are associated with each hospital 
station and with hallways where multiple links intersect. The elevator travel between floors was modeled 
with additional links and intersections associated with beginning and ending of an elevator trip. At 
the beginning of the simulation, we create a controller entity for each transporter and send the controller 
entity to the appropriate movement system. A transporter within the movement system picks up the controller 
entity and then follows the defined route for that transporter. We generate entities representing clinical 
laboratory delivery items according to a non-stationary Poisson process and send them to the appropriate 
units for pick-up. Figure 3 illustrates the non-stationary arrival pattern. Figure 4 presents the probability 
of a demand across the units. Notice that the probability is higher for the intensive care units. The 
items that arrive to a hospital unit for pick­up then wait in a queue associated with the current hospital 
unit until a transporter (courier or robot) arrives for transport. When the entity controlling the transporter 
arrives to a hospital unit, it picks up any waiting items from the hospital unit s queue and delays for 
any material handling required for the items. A robot arriving to a station will announce itself and 
request that any items be loaded into its cargo hold. If the robot does not get a response, the robot 
will dwell at the unit for a pre-specified period of time. Although the dwell can be caused by the lack 
of a nurse to load the robot, the dwell can also be triggered by the lack of items for delivery. Since 
nurses are assigned to the pick-up/drop-off stations, we assume some nurse will always be available to 
load the robot and that the dwell is only invoked if no items are needed.  Figure 4: Hospital Unit Probability 
of Demand The controller entity then checks to see if any of the picked up items are STAT deliveries. 
If no STAT deliveries are required, the controller entity continues to the next unit on its route. If 
any STAT deliveries are present, the controller entity takes the best path to the clinical laboratory 
for delivery. Based on the demand data supplied by Distribution Services, the probability of a STAT 
delivery was approximately 25%. At the clinical laboratory, the controller entity delivers the items 
and then returns via the best path to the next hospital unit on its route. The controlling entity repeats 
this process at each hospital unit on its route. The elevators were modeled as resources in the model. 
Associated with elevator access points on each floor are two stations. An elevator begin-station represents 
a location where the transporter may seize the elevator before travelling to the next floor. The begin-station 
also represents a place where the transporter can be positioned to prevent deadlock if another transporter 
is travelling to the same floor. A courier will experience a delay for the elevator to approximate the 
resource contention associated with other uses of the elevator. Based on observations of the time until 
the arrival of an elevator after requesting service, we modeled the elevator delay with a Gamma Distribution 
with parameters f = 0.575 and a= 2.47 based on a statistical best fit of the data. Before traveling to 
the elevator, the robot will call ahead to the elevator to ensure that no people are using the elevator 
during its time in the elevator. Because the robot has the ability to call ahead, we assumed that any 
delay due to other contention for the elevator would be included in the robots travel time to the elevator. 
An elevator end­station represents the destination of a transporter traveling to a floor via the elevator. 
This station allows an exit point for the transporter to prevent deadlock and provides a place where 
the elevator can be released for any other waiting transporters. When traveling within the hospital, 
couriers do not block each other s paths. To model this situation using AGV constructs, the couriers 
were modeled as zero length transporters. This allows passing on the links and mitigates any need for 
deadlock avoidance or zone control. When travelling, the mobile robots contend for space within the hallways. 
Two robots should not be permitted to travel down a bi-directional hallway, and a distance of approximately 
2 meters should be maintained between the robots. This situation is handled via the use of zone control, 
properly directed links, and the allocation of waiting zones (such as the elevator begin and end stations). 
In the mobile robot model, because routes are defined to cover a number of floors, no two robots will 
ever be on a floor associated with a route at the same time; however, when visiting the clinical laboratory 
multiple robots may be on the second floor at the same time. Figure 5 illustrates the paths on the second 
floor to avoid deadlock. Figure 5: Clinical Laboratory Floor Layout  4 MODEL VERIFICATION &#38; VALIDATION 
Verification is concerned with building the model right. It is used in the comparison of the conceptual 
model to the computer representation. The input parameters and logical structure of the model have to 
be correctly represented. The verification procedure for our model followed a questions/answer format. 
1. Has someone other than the developers checked the computerized representation of the model? Yes, Distribution 
Services checked the computerized representation. 2. Has a flow chart of each logical possible action 
a system can take when an event occurs been made? Yes, activity flow diagrams for the services were prepared 
and were verified by a supervisor in Distribution Services. 3. Verify the animation of the computerized 
model? Yes, the model was shown to a supervisor in the Distribution Services and has been verified. 
4. Has the output parameters of the model been verified by someone other than the model developers? Yes, 
a supervisor in Distribution Services verified the outputs.  For example, we validated the cycle times 
generated from the model by discussing the outputs with a supervisor in Distribution Services. Cycle 
time is the time required to complete one round that starts from the first unit and ends at the first 
unit. Cycle time includes the time taken to drop-off items at the central laboratory. The staff of Distribution 
Services estimates the cycle time for the clinical laboratory routes to be between 20 and 30 minutes. 
To confirm this estimate, we ran our simulation model of the current system under varying demand conditions 
and estimated the average cycle time for the routes. Table 1: Average Cycle Time model Naylor and Finger 
(1967) proposed performing Low Demand 15.01 Medium Demand 18.32 High Demand 20.91  The results from 
the Table 1 indicate that the cycle time is dependent upon the demand rate, but that the values roughly 
confirm the intuitive analysis of the staff. We also walked the route to confirm the times estimated 
from the model. The difference can be attributed to the fact that our model does not account for unscheduled 
breaks taken by the courier. Validation is concerned with building the right model. It is utilized to 
determine that a model is an accurate representation of the real system. Validation is usually achieved 
through an iterative process and by determining the discrepancies and the insight gained to improve the 
model. Validation is the overall process of comparing the model and its behavior to the real system. 
For the validation procedure, we are using a widely followed approach formulated by Naylor and Finger 
(1967). The technique has the following three steps: 1) Build a model which has high face validity: This 
involves being in constant touch with the model users and others who are knowledgeable about the system. 
To this end we have been in constant touch with supervisors in Distribution Services who have found the 
model to be reasonable. We have been in touch with the representatives of Helpmate Inc. to gather more 
information about their robot and its behavior so as to incorporate that functionality into our model. 
2) Validation of Model Assumptions: Modeling assumptions fall into two general classes. a) Structural 
Assumptions: Structural assumptions consist of how the system operates and some simplification and abstraction. 
An example of this is the waiting time for elevators. We modeled the elevator as a resource rather than 
model the complicated control logic associated with the timing and movement of elevators between floors. 
b) Data Assumptions: Data assumptions should be based on the collection of reliable data and correct 
statistical analysis. Data such as the time of collection of specimens were collected by the personnel 
of the Distribution Services; therefore, we have assumed that the source of the data is reliable. The 
statistical tests that were performed on the data have been carried out in the input analyzer of Arena. 
3) Validating Input-Output transformations: For validating the Input-Output transformations of the sensitivity 
analysis on the model. To analyze the sensitivity of the input parameters we performed a 2k factorial 
experimental analysis on the courier and robot models. We investigated the effect of varying the arrival 
generation rate, the elevator delay distribution, the STAT/regular specimen distribution and the dwell 
time of the robots at the hospital units. The factors were varied by +/- 20% from the nominal values. 
The response variables examined were the turn-around time, the delivery variability, the cycle time, 
and the utilization. The change in response variables behaved as expected for the selected range of inputs. 
This indicates that the model is well behaved over the range of these factors and that subsequent analysis 
can be performed using the nominal levels of the factors. We refer the interested reader to Kumar (1998) 
for a complete description and analysis of the experiments. 5 TRADE-OFF ANALYSIS Trade-off analysis 
involves determining multiple criteria for decision making and the formation of a decision function that 
yields an objective value for the best alternative. In this study, we made a comparison between the existing 
system with three couriers and mobile robot alternatives using 2, 3, and 6 robots. We developed an objective 
function to incorporate a metric for each of the competing objectives. The performance metrics of interest 
were: 1. Cost: Cost is defined as the equivalent annualized cost of the alternatives over a 5 year planning 
horizon using a 6% discount rate. The alternative with lower cost is considered better. 2. Turn-Around-Time 
(TAT): Turn around time is defined as the time lapsed between the generation of the specimen and its 
subsequent delivery to the Clinical Laboratories. Lower turn around time is better. 3. Delivery Variability 
(DV): Delivery variability is defined as the standard deviation of the turn around time. Delivery variability 
gives an indication of the consistency of the delivery process. 4. Cycle Time (CT): Cycle time is the 
time taken by the courier or the robot to complete one round of the assigned route. Cycle time takes 
into account the time that is spent delivering both STAT and regular specimens. Lower cycle times are 
better.  5. Utilization (UTIL): Utilization is defined as the ratio of the total time spent by a courier 
or a robot carrying specimens to the total available time for delivery. Higher utilization is better. 
The objective function is an equation, which incorporates each of the Indices of Performances. Each Index 
of Performance is weighted by the decision-maker, to 3) Cost of Robot a) Cost of Equipment $301,800 b) 
Cost of Installation $ 37,100 c) Annual Service Contract $24,114 d) Cost of Courier Service $407,613 
Table 2: Summary of Performance Measures describe the importance the decision-maker gives to the objective. 
After evaluating the objective function for each of our alternatives we can then decide which alternative 
is better. The objective function is defined as follows: 5 IP i 1 . = =  w IP ii where IPi is the 
Index of Performance for the ith objective and wi is the corresponding weight that the decision-maker 
attaches to each index of performance. The weights must sum to 1. Since the indices of performance in 
the objective function have different units of measure, a linear scaling method was used to convert the 
observed average values Two Robots Three Robots Six Robots Courier COST $81,11 0 $107,605 $178,027 $407,614 
TAT 47.28 min (1.97) 33.54 min (1.07) 18.9 min. (0.44) 28.08 min. (2.16) DV 24.77 min. (1.87) 16.67 min. 
(0.82) 8.63 min. (0.04) 20.72 min. (2.83) CT 67.03 min. (2.01) 42.25 min. (0.87) 20.72 min. (0.33) 26.3 
min. (1.57) UTIL 92.50% (0.44) 91.90% (0.63) 81.70% (1.52) 88.33% (0.68) The cost of the courier system 
is based on a loaded hourly into comparable units of measure. The linear scaling rate of $10.26/hr for 
24 hours/day and 365 days/year. Inmethod scales the individual observed values to a scale of 0-100, where 
100 is mapped to a high value and 0 corresponds to a low value. Table 2 summarizes the comparison obtained 
for the alternative delivery mechanism in the hospital. The table presents the values obtained from the 
simulation model for each of the robot and courier models averaged across 50 replications under the nominal 
parameter settings. The standard deviations for those performance measures estimated from the simulation 
are given in parenthesis. The salaries paid to the couriers are the primary factor in the courier system. 
To analyze the costs associated with the deployment of robots, we used the same structure/methodology 
used by the staff of HelpMate, Inc. For example, the following is a summary of the information obtained 
for the 3 robot cost analysis. 1) Robot Support Equipment Requirement: a) Annunciators 17 b) Door Sensors 
1 c) Door Sensors and actuators 1 2) Robot Requirement: a) Number of Robots 3 b) Number of Backpacks 
3 c) Number of Radios 2 order to obtain full yearly coverage over sick days, vacations, etc. 1 person 
is considered equivalent to 1.4 FTE. To perform sensitivity analysis on the objective function, the weights 
associated with each IP must be varied over a range of values. Since cost and turn around time tend to 
be the most important performance measures, we varied the weights on these responses and fixed the weights 
for the other performance measures. This also allows for a simpler analysis. Table 3 presents the three 
weighting schemas used in our analysis. Table 4 presents the average objective function value under the 
three weighting schemas. Figure 6 presents the trade-off graphs plotting the objective function values 
for the 4 alternatives under the three weighting schemas. Under weighting schemas 1 and 2 the robot alternatives 
clearly dominate the 3-courier system. Weighting schema 1 places the highest importance on cost and low 
importance on turn around time. Weighting schema 2 places equal weighting between cost and turn around 
time. In this case, the 6-robot system is the clear winner. As more weight is placed on turn around time 
the 3-courier system becomes competitive against the 2 and 3 robot alternatives. This is because the 
2 and 3 robot alternatives have more difficulty meeting the performance requirements of the system. The 
indifference weights for the 3-courier system versus the 2 and 3 robot alternatives are: Table 3: Weighting 
Schemas Cost w1 TAT w2 DV w3 CT w4 UTIL w5 . w1 0.65 0.05 0.10 0.10 0.10 . w2 0.35 0.35 0.10 0.10 0.10 
. w3 0.05 0.65 0.10 0.10 0.10 Table 4: Average Objective Function Values 2 Robots 3 Robots 6 Robots 
3 Couriers . w1 30.69 (0.83) 27.72 (0.36) 31.61 (0.13) 65.73 (1.10) . w2 49.46 (1.78) 38.04 (0.86) 30.39 
(0.3) 55.46 (2.16) . w3 68.24 (2.76) 48.35 (1.39) 29.18 (0.51) 45.19 (3.24) Table 5: Indifference Weights 
 Cost w1 TAT w2 DV w3 CT w4 UTIL w5 2 Robot 0.2825 0.4175 0.10 0.10 0.10 3 Robot 0.0925 0.6075 0.10 0.10 
0.10 Trade-Off Graph Objective Function 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 2 Robots 3 Robots 6 Robots 3 Couriers 
 Figure 6 Trade-off Analysis Graph Thus, cost can be weighed as low as 0.28 before the courier model 
becomes competitive with the 2-robot alternative. In addition, cost can be weighed as low as 0.09 before 
the courier system becomes competitive with the 3-robot case. 6 SUMMARY Simulation modeling enabled the 
entire hospital clinical laboratory delivery system to be realistically modeled so that system performance 
could be predicted under the alternatives of 2, 3 and 6 robots. From Table 2, it is clear that even though 
the 2-robot alternative has lower cost it has difficulty matching the performance of the 3-courier model. 
A one for one replacement of the couriers with robots reduces the cost by roughly 74% with only an approximate 
20% increase in turn-around time. The 6­robot alternative dominates the other alternatives by maintaining 
low cost and significantly improving the turn­around time and the delivery variability. Through simulation, 
this study was able to clearly demonstrate that fleets of mobile robots can meet the delivery requirements 
of mid-sized hospitals.  REFERENCES Egbelu Pius J., 1987. The use of non-simulation approaches in estimating 
vehicle requirements in an automated guided vehicle based transportation system, Elsevier Science Publishers 
B. V., Amsterdam, pp. 17-32 Evans, J. 1994. Helpmate: An Autonomous Mobile Robot Courier for Hospitals 
, Proceedings IROS. Evans, J. Krishnamurthy, B., Barrows, B., Skewis, T., Lumelsky, V. 1992. Handling 
Real-World Motion Planning: A Hospital Transport Robot , IEEE Control Systems, 12, (1), Feb., 15-20. 
Gaskins, R. J. and J. M. A. Tanchoco, 1987. Flow Path Design for Automated Guided Vehicle Systems, International 
Journal for Production Research, 25,5, 667-676. Kumar, A. 1998. Comparing Delivery Mechanisms in Mid-Sized 
Hospitals, M. S. Thesis, Department of Systems Engineering, University of Virginia. Law, A. M., and W. 
D. Kelton 1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York. Naylor, T. H., 
and J. M. Finger 1967. Verification of Computer Simulation Model, Management Science, 2, B92-B101 Newton, 
D. 1985. Simulation Model Helps Determine How Many Automatic Guided Vehicles Are Needed, Industrial 
Engineering, 17, 2, 68-79. Park, S. C., Raman, N., and Shaw, M. J., 1989. Heuristic Learning for Pattern 
Directed Scheduling in a Flexible Manufacturing System, In the Proceedings of the Third ORSA/TIMS Conference 
on Flexible Manufacturing Systems: Operations Models and Applications, edited by K.E. Stecke and R. Suri, 
Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., Amsterdam, 369­ 376. Prasad, K. and M. Rangaswami, 1988. Analysis 
of Different AGV Control Systems in an Integrated IC Manufacturing Facility Using Computer Simulation, 
In the Proceedings of the 1988 Winter Simulation Conference, 568-574. Tanchoco J.M.A., Egbelu P.J. and 
Taghaboni, F, 1987. Determination of the total number of vehicles in an AGV-based material transportation 
system, Material Flow, Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., Amsterdam, 33-51 Thesen, A. and L. Lei, 1986. 
An Expert System for Scheduling Robots in a Flexible Electroplating System with Dynamically Changing 
Workloads," In the Proceedings of the Second ORSA/TIMS Conference on Flexible Manufacturing Systems: 
Operations Models and Applications, edited by K.E. Stecke and R. Suri, Elsevier Science Publishers B. 
V., Amsterdam, 555­ 566. Ülgen, O. M., and P. Kedia, 1990. Using Simulation in Design of a Cellular 
Assembly Plant with Automatic Guided Vehicles, in the Proceedings of the 1990 Winter Simulation Conference, 
O. Balci, R. P. Sadowski, R. E. Nance (eds.), 683-691.  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MANUEL D. ROSSETTI is an 
Assistant Professor in the Systems Engineering Department at the University of Virginia. He received 
his Ph.D. in Industrial and Systems Engineering from The Ohio State University. His research interests 
include the design, analysis, and optimization of manufacturing, health care, and transportation systems 
using stochastic modeling, computer simulation, and artificial intelligence techniques. Dr. Rossetti 
is an Associate Member of the Institute of Industrial Engineers and a member of the IIE OR Division. 
Dr. Rossetti is also a member of INFORMS and SCS. AMIT KUMAR is completing his M.S. graduate studies 
in the Department of Systems Engineering at the University of Virginia. He will be working as an Associate 
Consultant at Cooper s &#38; Lybrand LLP starting August 1998. ROBIN A. FELDER, Ph.D. is Professor of 
Pathology at the University of Virginia Health Sciences Center and Associate Director of Clinical Chemistry 
and Toxicology. He serves as the Director of the Medical Automation Research Center at the University 
of Virginia. Dr. Felder received a B.S. degree in chemistry from the College of William and Mary and 
a Ph.D. in biochemistry from Georgetown University.  
			