
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. MODELING AND SIMULATION OF PUBLIC HOUSING CONSTRUCTION IN HONG KONG Jonathan Jingsheng 
Shi S. X. Zeng C.M. Tam Department of Building and Construction City University of Hong Kong 83 Tat Chee 
Ave., Kowloon, HONG KONG  ABSTRACT Hong Kong possesses one of the world s largest public housing stocks 
which provide accommodation for 3.1 million people. To meet the growing need for public housing, the 
government has committed to produce 50,000 public flat units (plus 35,000 units from private developers) 
a year as its long term housing policy. To meet this production target, contractors are facing with the 
challenge to further speed up the construction process. Currently, it takes 6 days to construct one floor, 
and some contractors can achieve one floor in 4 days. Studies are undertaking to explore the possibility 
of achieving one floor in two days. This paper focuses on the application of simulation technique for 
modeling and simulating public housing construction in Hong Kong with the intention to conclude the appropriate 
floor cycle construction time and necessary resource combination. INTRODUCTION Hong Kong has the most 
dynamic construction industry in the world. The remarkable speed of construction has developed a reputation, 
and is claimed to have only been achieved in Hong Kong. Public housing represents a very important aspect 
of the society. Public housing construction has already achieved a very impressive high speed. A public 
housing project with 40 stories takes less than two years to complete. The government has committed an 
ambitious annual production target of 50,000 public flat units to meet the growing need of its citizens. 
Contractors in Hong Kong are facing with the challenge to further speed up their public housing construction 
process. Computer simulation can model a construction process on the operational level by considering 
the random nature, resource-driven characteristics and dynamic interactions during operation (Shi and 
AbouRizk 1997). It has been proven to be a very effective tool for planning and improving the performance 
of the real world construction operations (Halpin 1977 and Paulson et al 1987). Since the development 
of CYCLONE by Halpin (1977, 1990), construction simulation has been advancing with the computer technology. 
Various construction simulation languages have been developed. Research endeavor has also attempted to 
enhance construction modeling and simulation capacities such as DISCO (Huang et. al. 1994) and McCahill 
&#38; Bernold (1993), HSM (Sawhney and AbouRizk 1995), RBM (Shi and AbouRizk 1997). Successful applications 
of simulation in construction have been documented in Lansley (1986), Paulson et. al. (1987), Touran 
(1987), Vanegas (1993), Chau (1995), Dawood (1995), Smith et al (1995), and Shi and AbouRizk (1998). 
With the complexity in public housing construction (Chan et al. 1995), simulation provides a sound technique 
for investigating the process in more detailed. This paper presents a study on modeling and simulating 
the public housing construction by considering the major resources and operations. The construction time 
of a typical floor cycle and utilization of resources will be highlighted. 2 PUBLIC HOUSING IN HONG KONG 
Hong Kong possesses one of the world s largest public housing stocks that provide accommodation for half 
of its population, or 3.1 million people. These public housing stocks are allocated to its residents 
through renting or home ownership schemes. Two government bodies, the Housing Authority and Housing Society, 
are responsible for developing, allocating, and maintaining the public housing properties. According 
to the government prediction, Hong Kong will face a rapid growth of population in next twenty years. 
In order to meet the growing need for public housing, the Hong Kong government has established its long-term 
housing strategy, i.e. to produce 50,000 flat units from currently 35,000 units per year. 2.1 Floor Cycle 
Time Standardization is one of the many interesting features of public housing in Hong Kong. Currently 
public housing stocks are designed with 39 or 44 stories high to maximize land usage. Each floor has 
the same layout of four wings: A, B, C, and D as illustrated in Fig. 1. D A C B Pre-fabricated walls 
Figure 1: Floor Plan of Public Housing As many other housing projects, the duration of a public housing 
project is controlled by the construction of the framework structures of the building. Starting from 
level 2, the construction process is repetitive from one floor to next floor. The time required to construct 
one floor is called the floor cycle time. Although the floor cycle time varies from low floors to higher 
floors, site data show that the variations are minimal. It can be treated as an important indicator with 
respect to the project duration. As a matter of fact, contractors plan their site operations based on 
the cycle time. With the introduction of pre-fabrication and new construction methods, Hong Kong contractors 
have been able to reduce the floor cycle time from 8 days to 6 days. Recently, some contractors can complete 
one floor cycle in 4 days. With the increased annual production target, the contractors are required 
to study the possibility of 2 days per floor cycle. 2.2 Pre-fabricated Concrete Panels Pre-fabricated 
concrete panels are extensively used including external facade walls and semi-slabs. Eight pieces of 
these panels are used to form the entire non-bearing walls for each wing (four pieces on each side, see 
Fig. 1). These concrete panels are precasted off-site, and installed on site. In addition to time reduction, 
pre-fabrication also improves the quality by minimizing works in the air. 2.3 Construction Resources 
Tower canes are extensively used in public housing construction in Hong Kong. Because of high-rising 
(e.g. 39 stories), tower canes are needed for many construction activities such as installing pre-fabricated 
panels and pouring concrete. Therefore, tower cranes are usually one of the controlling resources. One 
tower crane is used for 8­day and 6-day floor cycle plans. Two tower cranes or the combination of one 
tower crane and one concrete pump are used for 4-day floor cycle plan. Housing construction is labor 
intensive. Many special gangs or crews are needed, mainly including: installation gang (InsG), bar-fixing 
gang (BarG), concrete-placing gang (ConcG), and carpenter gang (CarpG). The five major types of resources 
and their functions are summarized in Table 1: Table 1: Major Resources and Their Functions Name Symbol 
Required by activities Crane Crane Lifting, installation of façade walls and precast semi-slabs, erection 
of wall-forms, and placing concrete. Installation InsG Striking off wall-form, gang erection of wall-form, 
and installation of façade walls and precast semi-slabs. Bar-fixing BarG Fixing bar for walls and gang 
slabs. Concreting ConcG Placing concrete for walls gang and slabs Carpenter CarpG Erecting timer forms 
gang   3 SIMULATION STUDY As discussed in the previous section, the construction of each floor is a 
typical repetitive process. The six-day floor cycle is currently used in public housing projects by most 
contractors, and will be used as the basis in this study. A simulation model is studied to represent 
the construction process. A general simulation language named AweSim (Pritsker 1997) is employed to facilitate 
modeling and simulation. The cycle time and utilization of resources are then analyzed. Afterwards, cycle 
time reduction is explored by changing crew sizes. 3.1 Modeling the Construction Process of a Floor Cycle 
There are four wings on each floor. Wings A and C are identical, so are wings B and D. After certain 
differences, all wings involve the same construction process. After investigating site operations and 
contractors plans, the major construction activities are abstracted as listed in Table 2 for a floor 
cycle. Table 2: Major construction activities No. Symbol Description Required resources 1 ETF Erecting 
timber CarpG* form for corridor 2 EWF Erection of all- Crane, InsG form 3 FBS Fixing-bar for slab BarG 
4 FBW Fixing-bar for wall BarG 5 IFS Installation of Crane, InsG precast semi-slab 6 IPW Installation 
of Crane, InsG façade wall 7 LBF Lifting bracing Crane, BarG frame 8 LBS Lifting bar for slab Crane, 
BarG 9 LBW Lifting bar for wall Crane, BarG 10 LWP Lifting working Crane, InsG platform 11 PCS Placing 
concrete Crane, for slab ConcG 12 PCW Placing concrete Crane, for wall ConcG 13 SWF Striking off wall- 
InsG form * The 13 activities repeat in each of the four wings, which means a total of 52 activities 
for the entire floor construction. In the AweSim model, activities are labeled by:  See Table 1 for 
Resource Symbols Activityi i = wing A, B, C, or D Activity can be any of above 13 activities. For example, 
PCWB indicates placing concrete for wall at wing B. The major modeling elements are ACTIVITY, AWAIT, 
and FREE nodes (Pritsker 1997). AWAIT, and FREE nodes are used to allocate required resources before 
an activity starts and to free them after use. The durations of these activities vary in a small range 
for different wings and are collected from contractors performance. The logical sequence among these 
activities is based on contractors site plans, which also determine the priorities for competing shared 
resources. 3.2 Simulation results of the 6-day cycle If the resource capacities are given as identical 
sizes as the existing 6-day cycle plan as in Table 3, run the simulation model. The time to complete 
one floor cycle is 61 hours. Contractors use twelve working hours per day for planning 6-day cycle, which 
means that the 6-day cycle can actually be completed in five days without additional resources. Because 
there are four wings at each floor, it takes 1.5 days to complete one wing for the 6-day cycle. In other 
words, a crew simply repeats its work every 1.5 days. If the floor cycle time is reduced to five days, 
there is no a simple repetitive working pattern for a crew. Instead, the five-day cycle would require 
a different working plan every day for each gang. That is why contractors like 4-day cycle. They do one 
wing in one day, and each gang just repeats its work everyday. Average utilization is defined as average 
unit of the resource in use during the entire simulation time. Its value is obtained from simulation 
and is listed in the last column of Table 3. Table 3: Resource Information No. Name Symbol Size Avg. 
util. 1 Crane Crane 1 0.97 2 Installation InsG 8 2.47 gang 3 Bar-fixing BarG 8 5.56 gang 4 Concreting 
ConcG 5 1.82 gang 5 Carpenter CarpG 3 0.71 gang  Results in Table 3 show that the crane is highly utilized 
(97%). Approximately six (5.56) of the eight bar­fixing men are utilized. The utilization of other resources 
is very low. The average utilization gives a general overview how a crew is utilized. We can also investigate 
the utilization process of each resource in order to get a detailed picture how a crew is utilized. Figure 
2 plots the utilization of the five crews along the entire simulation time. 3 2 1 0 Figure 2 Utilization 
Process of Resources Utilization Fig.2a indicates that the crane is mostly engaged except two short 
breaks. This confirms that the crane is the bottleneck of the construction process. In order to reduce 
the cycle time, crane s capacity should be increased or some duties should be assigned to other equipment, 
such as concrete pump for placing concrete. Fig.2b shows that the installation gang, carpenter gang and 
concrete gang are seldom fully utilized, but bar-fixing is highly utilized most of the time. 3.3 Sensitivity 
analysis As concluded previously that the crane is the controlling resource and the bar-fixing gang is 
also highly utilized, the capacity of crane is doubled to two and bar-fixing gang is increased from 8 
to 10. Changing the capacities of the two resource blocks in the simulation model, run the model again. 
The new results can be obtained. The cycle time is reduced to 48.5 hours (i.e. 4 days). The average utilization 
of the gangs is listed in Table 4. Table 4: Modified Resource Information No Name Symbol Size Avg. util. 
1 Crane Crane 2 1.23 2 Installation gang InsG 8 3.13 3 Bar-fixing gang BarG 10 7.11 4 Concreting gang 
ConcG 5 2.31 5 Carpenter gang CarpG 3 0.90  The average utilization figures in Table 4 show that the 
utilization of cranes is reduced, but the utilization of other gangs has been improved. The utilization 
processes of the five gangs are also plotted from Fig.3a through Fig.3e. These figures show that mostly 
one or two cranes are busy; the bar-fixing gang is still highly utilized most of the time; the other 
gangs are low utilized.  CONCLUSION This paper studied simulation technique for modeling and simulating 
public housing construction in Hong Kong. The obtained results can not only show the floor cycle construction 
time but also highlight the utilization of resources. By increasing the capacities of the crane and the 
bar-fixing gang to 2 and 10 respectively, the floor cycle can be reduced to 4 days. The utilization of 
other resources is low. 0 1 2 0 Utilization Fig.3a Utilization of cranes 10 20 30 Time in hour 40 50 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 Utilization Fig.3b Utilization of installation gang 10 20 30 Time in hour 40 50 0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 Utilization Fig.3c Utilization of bar-fixing gang 10 20 30 Time in hour 40 50 
0 1 2 3 4 5 0 Utilization Fig.3d Utilization of concreting gang 10 20 30 Time in hour 40 50 0 1 2 3 0 
Utilization Fig.3e Utilization of carpenter gang 10 20 30 Time in hour 40 50 Figure 3: Utilization Process 
of Resources Some more work is under way to enhance the simulation model by including detailed operations, 
such as installation of precasted concrete panels, placing concrete, and crane operations. 3-D animation 
and visualization are the promising technique to convince contractors about the simulation results. They 
also allow the user to experiment various construction methods on a computer and to design a new floor 
cycle plan (e.g. 2-day cycle). Integrating simulation results with animation and 3-D visualization is 
the remaining work of this study. REFERENCES Bernold, L. (1989). Simulation of Nonsteady Construction 
Processes. J. Constr. Engrg. &#38; Mgmt., ASCE, June, 115(2), 163-178. Chan, W.M and M. M. Kumaraswamy 
(1995). A study of the factors affecting construction durations in Hong Kong. Construction Management 
and Economics, 13, 319-333. Chau, K.W. (1995). Monte Carlo Simulation of Construction Costs Using Subjective 
Data. Construction Management and Economics, 13, 369­ 386. Dawood, N. N. (1995). An integrated knowledge­based/simulation 
approach to production planning: an application to the pre-cast industry. Construction Management and 
Economics, 13, 53-64. Halpin, D.W. and Riggs, L. S. (1992). Planning and Analysis of Construction Operations. 
John Wiley &#38; Sons, Inc., New York, N.W. Huang, R., Grigoriadis, A.M, and Halpin, D.W. (1994). Simulation 
of Cable-stayed bridges using DISCO. Proceedings of Winder Simulation Conference, 1130­1136. Lansley, 
P.R. (1986). Modelling Construction Organizations. Construction Management and Economics, 4, 19-36. 
McCahill, D.F. and L.E. Bernold (1993). Resource-Oriented Modeling and Simulation in Construction. J. 
Constr. Engrg. &#38; Mgmt, ASCE, 119(3), 590-606. Martinez, J. and Ioannou, P.J. (1994). General purpose 
simulation with Stroboscope. Proceedings of Winter Simulation Conference, 1159-1166. Paulson, B.C., Jr., 
Chan, W.T., Koo, C.C. (1987). "Construction Operations Simulation by Microcomputer." J. Constr. Engrg. 
&#38; Mgmt., ASCE, 113(2), 302-314. Pritsker, A. A. B. (1997). Simulation with visual SLAM and AweSim. 
New York: Wiley, West Lafayette, Ind: Systems Pub. Corp. Sawhney, A. and AbouRizk, S.M. (1995). Simulation 
based planning method for construction project. J. Constr. Engrg. &#38; Mgmt, ASCE, 121(2), 297-303. 
 Shi, J. And S. AbouRizk (1997). Resource-based Modeling for Construction Simulation. J. Constr. Engrg. 
&#38; Mgmt, ASCE. Shi, J. and S. AbouRizk (1998). Continuous and Combined Event-process Models for Simulating 
Pipeline Construction. To appear in Construction Management and Economics. Smith, S.D., Osborne, J.R. 
and Forde, M.C. (1995). Analysis of Earth-moving Systems Using Discrete-Event Simulation. J. Constr. 
Engrg. &#38; Mgmt, ASCE, 121(4), 388-396. Tommelein, I. D., and A. M. Odeh (1994). Knowledge­based Assembly 
of Simulation Networks Using Construction Designs, Plans, and Methods. Proceedings of the 1994 Winter 
Simulation Conference, 1145-1158. Touran, A. (1987). "Simulation of Tunnel Operation", J. of Constr. 
Engrg. &#38; Mgmt., ASCE, 113(4), 554-568. Vanegas, J.A., Bravo, E.B, and Halpin, D.W. (1993). Simulation 
Technologies for Planning Heavy Construction Processes. J. Constr. Engrg. &#38; Mgmt., ASCE, 119(2), 
336-354.  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES JONATHAN JINGSHENG SHI is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Building 
and Construction at City University of Hong Kong. He received his Ph.D. in Civil Engineering from the 
University of Alberta in 1995. His research interests in simulation are focused on automated modeling, 
simulation, and optimization for construction. His other research interests include neural networks, 
construction scheduling and planning method, and construction productivity and improvement. S.X. ZENG 
is a Ph.D. candidate at Herbin University of Architecture and Engineering. He is currently a Research 
Associate in the Department of Building and Construction of City University of Hong Kong. His research 
interests mainly include public housing construction, its policy and productivity improvement. C.M. TAM 
is an Associate Professor in the Department of Building and Construction of City University of Hong Kong. 
Dr. Tam s research interests include construction safety, and information technology for construction. 
			