
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. A]exopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D. Goldsman MODELING A HOSPITAL MAIN CAFETERIA William A. Stout, Jr. OffIce of Organizational Effectiveness 
The Johns Hopkins Hospital Baltimore, Maryland 21287, U.S.A. ABSTRACT Taylor II version 2.0 is a PC 
based, menu-driven, discrete event simulation modeling software package featuring 2D/3D animation, a 
user programmable interface--Taylor Language Interface (TLI); graphics and paintbox (drawing) capabilities; 
distribution cmve­ fitting and context-sensitive help. Add-on modties include advanced statistics, a 
run-time development kit, and shaded animation. When learning a new simulation language, it is helpful 
to have a frame of reference that delineates at least the minimum progr amming elements required to formulate 
a successful model. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Often, examples in the documentation 
are presented out of the context of a completed model leaving it up to the simulation practitioner to 
assemble the various pieces. Concepts presented in sample programs included with the package may be difficult 
to follow and to place in the context of your Spedlc program development effort. The ptupose of this 
paper is to provide the new user with the basics of Taylor II by building a hard-copy application step 
by step. We illustrate the importance of the relationships between various individually presented menus 
to emphasize the linkage between menu choices and the construction of user-written functions. By providing 
an overview of the total application development cycle, the user gains perspective on how individual 
parts are integrated into a working model. 1 THE APPLICATION TO BE MODELED The process to be modeled 
is a hospital main cafeteria serving food to both staff and visitors. The cafeteria opens at 6 a.m. and 
closes at 6 p.m. Monday through Friday. Weekends and holidays are not included in the model. There are 
seven cashier stations which are staffed based on perceived customer flow requirements and availability 
of cashiers. The time to ring-up a sale (service time) varies according to time of day--breakfast transactions 
have a shorter service time than lunch transactions because the menu selection is more limited. Customer 
iuter-anival rates (1 customer every x number of seconds) also vary by time of day, lunch is the busiest 
time of the day and therefore is the time when most cashiers are needed. Historically, lunch times have 
been characttized as chaotic. The time of arrival at the cafeteria food service area and the time involved 
in the choice of individual food items is not modeled, although both could become parts of a more inclusive 
model of the entire process. Availability of food at point of service could also be modeled since delays 
here influence the arrival time at the checkout lines. This model will probably be expanded to address 
the above two issues. Inter-arrival times in the model are based on the time the customer arrives at 
the checkout line. If the cashier is idle, the customer receives service immediately, if the cashier 
is busy, the customer joins the queue for the cashier selected. No provision is made for reneging or 
jockeying between lines, although this could be included. It is assumed that customers naturally gravitate 
to the shortest line. As stated above, the service time distributions depend on the time of day. Early 
model development effort should be focused on the layout and the process routing requirements. While 
it is crucial to the accuracy of the final model, the absence of actual arrival rate/semice time distributions 
data should not hinder initial model development. Both the arrival and service time distributions are 
estimates suffkient to allow the model development phase to proceed. Actual arrival/service times can 
be observed, summarized, and the appropriate distributions identified and inserted independent of model 
development. 2 THE MODEL OVERVIEW Figure 1 depicts the layout of the seven cashier lines in the main 
cafeteria labeled AUX 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 >,N611 1060 Modeling a Hospital Main Cafeteria 1061 m u-i II 
II Qa am .. . NQ? r- Ii! J­-. Ull I (J ~ ,-(-J c! J-J t! -­ 1(M2 and Sandwich Line 7 . The box labeled 
Cashier Line Status indicates which cashiers are open/closed as well as the total number of cashiers 
open by time of day. Rectangles depicting the queues and the cashier locations are generated during the 
layout phase of model construction by choosing Layout from the menu options. The line status box and 
other text are generated in the paintbox feature included in the package. The columns of vertical numbers 
from 1 to 18 represent positions in the queues and were added as text to assist the observer in visually 
identifying the number of customers in the waiting line as the model runs. The text added in the paintbox 
is not required to run the model but is included to provide information and cltilcation to the viewer. 
It is assumed that your system meets the minimum requirements to run Taylor II and that the software 
has been properly loaded onto your hard drive in a directory named taylor or a name of your choice. Minimum 
system requirements are a 80386 (80486 is recommended) processor, 2mb RAM internal memory, mouse, and 
a VGA graphics adapter. An inkjet or laser printer is recommended. Also remember that Taylor II is DOS-based 
and must be executed fi-om the C prompt with Microsoft Windows inactive. If one wants to run Taylor II 
in the windows environment, one needs to use the taylor.pif file included with the software. Once a simulation 
opportunity has been identiled and an assumptions document written listing the problem, initial assumptions; 
process layout; data on process times and distributions (if available); and jointly defined clientlprovider 
expectation and outcome requirements, the steps in setting-up the simulation model can proceed as follows: 
1. Create the layout and routing. 2. Customize the layout and routing to fit the model. 3. Determine 
and enter time representation. 4. Enter the arrival rate and service time distributions.  5. Enter 
any special handling or routing requirements.  6. Enter any user-written fimctions required.  7, Add 
aesthetic detail using the paintbox feature. The remainder of this paper presents a discussion of these 
seven steps in modeling the cafeteria example. stout Examples of Taylor II screens designed for program 
selection options and user data input are shown. Some screens are not shown due to space considerations 
but may be discussed in the text. 3 CREATING THE TAYLOR II MODEL DESIGN Step 1. Create the layout and 
routing. Taylor II element types include machine, transport, buffer, aid, conveyor, path, reservoir, 
warehouse, and inout. The screen layout is approximated using the Taylor II elements. In the cafeteria 
model we will use inout, buffer, and machine elements. From the main menu click on Visuals , Settings 
to activate the visualization settings menu. This menu contains thirteen settings so cursor down to the 
Display numbers box and set it to On . This will cause the individual elements in the layout to be numbered. 
Press the escape key to clear the pop-up table. Click on Layout to begin and notice that the displayed 
default element is numbered. The f~st element is shown in the upper, left comer of the screen. Notice 
that the element on the screen has a cross-hair in the upper, left comer which ident~les it as the active 
element. Use the space bar to toggle through the types of elements or type the first letter of the element 
you want, in this case, the inout element. A new element is created and becomes active each time the 
enter key is pressed. Repeat the toggle or fnxt letter method of identifying the element and when all 
elements have been defined press the escape key to return to the sub-menu. To switch active elements 
simply click on the element you desire. Once the elements have been identiled, the programmer must specify 
the routing. Click on the Routing button. The element where routing begins is identified by a larger 
cross-hair than the one in the Layout section. Press the enter key to establish the routing from element 
to element. When routing is completed, press the escape key to return to the sub­menu. This routing establishes 
the initial linkage between elements only, and should not be tailored to fit actual model requirements 
at this time. Customizing the routing to flt the actual model requirements is discussed in step 2. Step 
2. Customize the layout and routing to fit the model. Elements may be repositioned and/or enlarged or 
contracted to fit layout requirements. The large block at the bottom, middle of the screen provides key-use 
instructions and a list of the available element types, Escape to the main menu and click on the first 
element you have defined. A menu titled What to edit? appears. Choose the Stages button to specialize 
the routing. A pop-up menu showing routing parameters Modeling a Hospital appears and allows you to specify 
where the flow is received from or sent to. Another way to do this is to select Detail , Routing from 
the main menu. The pop-up editing window can be moved from element to element with the left and right 
arrow keys. The number of the element in the crosshairs is shown at the top of the box. For instance, 
the top line of the example shows element 1, job 1 as the selection with present routing, Send to , to 
element 2. It is not necessary to always send the entity to the next sequential element and here is where 
the desired routing is identified. Once the job to be used is designated, cursor down to the Send to 
or Receive from lines (the active line changes color from grey to blue). If you want to modify only a 
portion of the present entry, press the enter key, and use the left cursor key to the position on the 
line where the new data is to be placed, make the updated entry, or use the delete key to remove unwanted 
characters. This is useful if the selection criteria is a statement ( select 1 from 2,3,4) rather than 
a single number. The enter key will cause the blue highlighted active line to change to yellow, ready 
for editing. The backspace key will clear the entry completely allowing new routing to be entered. The 
escape key will clear the edit mode (yellow) and retnrn you to the active line (blue). Step 3. Determine 
and enter time representation. It is important that time representation be coordinated in four separate 
but related areas--the time bar (F8); the clock (F1 O); the time settings menu, and in any user­written 
functions in TLI. The time units chosen on these menus must be compatible and whether they are or not 
will show up on the system clock when the Table 1: The Time Bar (F8) Time representation 1 60 units make 
1 minute 2 60 minutes make 1 hour 3 12 hours make 1 day 4 5 days make 1 week Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Time 
representation Main Cafeteria 1063 model is nm. The following three tables; Tables 1, 2, and 3; depict 
a compatible time representation. The clock (F1O) deftitions only affect the clock display on the screen, 
and do not have any effect on the model. The time units defined in each of these tables must be compatible 
within the tables and within any user-written functions. For example, the time to start the clock (6 
am. equals 360 minutes from midnight) and the total run time (720 minutes divided by 60 minutes equalls 
12 hours) are controlled in the Clockstart and Clockcycle sections of Table 2. The number of hours in 
the shift (day) is controlled by line 3 of Table 1. Time entries that are a part of user-written TLI 
functions must be in synchronization with the Units per hour entry in Table 2. Table 4 shows an example 
of the user-written function for service times contained in the cafeteria model. Notice that the time 
entries are in seconds, the Units per hour measure established in Table 2. As calculated, 43200 seconds 
equals 12 hours. Each if statement establishes a time period during which a particular lognormal distribution 
is active. These distributions are more or less intense depending on the time of the day or the complexity 
of the menu-­breakfast, lunch, and dinner are the busiest times of the day; breakfast has the least complex 
menu. In summary, every reference to time in the model (job times, TLI fimctions, user-defined events, 
etc.) must be defined in term of units as predefine in the time bar (1%) representation. Taylor II works 
in units and the user gets to define what a unit of time equals. Step 4. Enter the distributions for 
arrival rates and service times. Arbitrary distributions were chosen for initial model development and 
entered in Table 2: The Clock (F1O) Units . per hour I 3600 Hours ! On Minutes I On Seconds I off 360Clockstart(minutes) 
720Clockcycle(minutes) Delay o Continuous off ~ Clock. settirum 1064 stout Table 3: Go, Time Menu Selection 
Timenumber Timeunit II Length of simulation 1 <week> I I <week> Stop every 1 II Screen refresh every 
1 <units> Time settings TLI using the text editor shown in Table 4. Here is an example of special routing 
used to be Distributions were entered for arrival rates and service more specitlc in a Send to instruction 
from the times. Arrivals occur according to anon-homogeneous Stages menu. Instead of entering a single 
number to Poisson process while the service time distributions are route to the next element you could 
enter the statement lognormal. For instance, there are three separate arrival select 1 from 2,4,6,8,10,12,14 
order -elqueue~] . This patterns which describe customer load for breakfast, instruction says to select 
1 path from a group of lunch, and dinner. A less intense arrival pattern is used eligible paths by choosing 
the path with the shortest for the time periods between breakfast, lunch, and queue. dinner. These differences 
are apparent when the model is run. Also, once the basic model is written, the actual Step 6. Enter any 
user-written functions required. distribution data can be collected by observation and The format of 
user-written functions has already been included in the model. The modulo function (1) was shown in Table 
4. The f~st fimction, service , shows used to define a repetitive time period each day. service time 
distributions. The second fimction statement equates the user-supplied name ikon top 1 Step 5. Enter 
any special handling or routing then uses pl: as a handle to equate the icon symbol requirements. Special 
handling requirements include number in the if statement to the icon number in the such items as controlling 
the display of icons to product parameters menu. In this model product 1 is represent specitlc phases 
of the model. In this model I icon number 28, therefore, the symbol displayed is the changed the appearance 
of the icons representing symbol for icon 28, the number 1 enclosed in a breakfast, lunch, and dinner 
while using the default yellow square. icon for all times in between. his approach enhances the visual 
message of the model and promotes client Step 7. Add aesthetic detail using the paintbox buy-in when 
they recognize their process on the screen. feature. The screen visuals need not be limited to the Changing 
icons involves the Product parameters boxes generated during the create and layout phase. By menu and 
a written TLI user fimction (see Table 4) clicking on the paintbox icon located in the lower, left which 
relates the time periods during which specific comer of the main screen, drawing and text may be icons 
are active. added to the basic layout. Text can be added, sized, Another special handling feature is 
the ability to color selected, repositioned, cut and pasted (copied), specify when a particular server 
is open for service. By and erased by selecting appropriate buttons in the opening and closing servers, 
the demand for service paintbox. Boxes and shapes may also be added. Figure can be matched more closely 
with the supply of 1 shows an example of some of these features. The customers entering the system. A 
typical statement to numbers from 1 to 18 were included to assist the open a server provides the time 
to open and which viewer in quickly assessing the number of customers in server to open. The statement 
for the event is line at any point in time. Each cafeteria line is labeled. elaccept[3]=l which opens 
server number 3 at the The content of the table showing cashier line states time spectiled. The statement 
elaccept[3]=O turns the was f~st defined then enclosed in the boxes. Various sewer off. The Event list 
menu provides this feature. text styles and sizes are also shown. The paintbox The Event list is also 
useful for providing a beeping drawing screen is saved as background in a file titled sound to signal 
changes in the model you want to filename .drw which is associated with the main emphasize to the client. 
program file titled filename .sim. Modeling a Hospital Main Cafeteria 1065 Table 4: TLI Editor function 
service=pl if time143200>=0 and time143200<3600 then pl :=lognormal[30,10] if time143200>=3600 and time143200<12600 
then pl:=lognormal[40,5] if... function ikon=pl if time143200>=0 and time143200<3600 then pl :=4 if 
time143200>=33600 and time143200<12600 then pl:=l if...  The Taylor Texteditor functions 4 CONCLUSION 
F&#38;H Logistics and Automation B.V. 1993. Taylor 11 Training Nlmual Simulation Software. SpoorIan The 
introduction of animation to simulation has 424,5038 C G Tilburg, The Netherlands. provided a tool that 
is beneficial to both programmer and client. Animation assists the programmer in AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY understanding 
and debugging simulation models. Clients gain the advantage of earlier buy-in to the WILLIAM A STOUT, 
JR. is a Management Analyst accuracy of the simulated representation of their at the Johns Hopkins Hospital. 
He received a B.S. in process. Taylor II provides the platform to address business management and an 
M.B.A. from the these issues. University of Baltimore in 1970 and 1977 respectively. Hopefully, this 
paper removes some of the mystery of His interests lie in application of simulation techniques the nuts 
and bolts aspects of Taylor II. It speaks to in management decision-making. some of the detail in the 
context of a complete model rather than from fragmented pieces of information in the documentation. There 
are many features of Taylor II not mentioned herein, but perhaps, with this as a guideline, it will be 
easier to define the basic model and thereby have more time to investigate its many other features. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author thanks Cliff King of F&#38;H Simulations, Inc. for his assistance in reviewing and suggesting 
improvements to this document. REFERENCES F&#38;H Logistics and Automation B.V. 1993. Taylor 11 User 
s Guide. Spoorlan 424,5038 C G Tilburg, The Netherlands. F&#38;H Logistics and Automation B.V. 1993. 
Taylor 11 TLI. Spoorlan 424,5038 C G Tilburg, The Netherlands. 
			