
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. MODELING A CONTROLLED CONVEYOR NETWORK WITH MERGING CONFIGURATION Gary Gang Jing W. 
David Kelton José C. Arantes Ali A. Houshmand Seagate Technology Department of Quantitative Analysis 
Department of Mechanical, 5100 West 82nd Street and Operations Management Industrial and Nuclear Engineering 
Bloomington, MN 55437, U.S.A. University of Cincinnati University of Cincinnati Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0130, 
U.S.A. Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0116, U.S.A. ABSTRACT Simulation with Arena is used to analyze a controlled 
conveyor network with merging configuration (CNMC). We use simulation to realize the logic in a queueing­theoretic 
model (QTM), and to analyze the behavior of CNMCs under various conditions. We also examine the performance 
of QTM while keeping or violating the QTM assumptions and constraints. Simulation experiments are designed 
for the special features of CNMC operations. Various situations are investigated to identify the behavior 
of CNMCs as well as the robustness of QTM. A case study is reported where mainline and induction-line 
speeds change proportionally. INTRODUCTION Conveyor systems, an essential component of material­handling 
systems, are widely used in transportation and manufacturing, such as mail hubs, airports, distribution 
centers, cargo carriers, warehouses, and other sortation or delivery facilities. In many of these systems, 
the first and most popular situation to handle is a merging operation. After merging, cargo will be transported 
to downstream operations, such as sorting, splitting, or more merging. The system, or portion of a system, 
that exclusively handles merging operations is called a conveyor network with merging configuration (CNMC). 
 1.1 Conveyor Networks with Merging Configuration CNMCs play a key role in the performance of conveyor 
systems, since cargo conveyed on induction lines may be delayed due to contention for space when inducted 
into the main line. In some systems, such as distribution centers, warehouses, and airports where throughput 
is the primary concern, space contention on the mainline is intense, which decreases the operational 
efficiency of the whole system. In this case, the performance of CNMCs is critical to the performance 
of the whole system. Thus, it is important to improve the performance of CNMCs. The CNMC discussed in 
this paper is in Fig. 1. In such a system, several induction conveyor lines connect into the main conveyor 
line at consecutive places. Cargo is loaded at the up ends of induction lines, transported into the mainline, 
and then downstream. There is an operator assigned to each induction line. Each operator attempts to 
load at a given rate. The operator could be a person, a machine, or an upstream conveyor. If enough space 
is available on the induction conveyor, the operator places a parcel on the conveyor and then begins 
to unload the next package. Each parcel is random in size and requires a different amount of space in 
the induction conveyor. Since the output of this CNMC could be the input to an induction line of another 
CNMC, several CNMCs can form a complicated network.  Performance of a CNMC is primarily measured by 
its main-line throughput and utilization. High throughput and high utilization are desired. But high 
utilization increases contention for space, causing imbalance of throughput among induction lines and 
decreasing main-line throughput. Parameters need to be carefully chosen for a CNMC to reach high performance. 
 1.2 Controlled CNMCs A major problem in CNMCs is imbalance of throughput among induction lines. Since 
lines upstream have the advantage in seizing space, they are more likely to reach higher throughput than 
are those downstream, provided they have the same arrival rate. Balanced throughput rates among induction 
lines are desirable for even distribution of workload among the induction conveyors and corresponding 
staff, or for balanced downstream demand, or other reasons. For example, there might be several flights 
checking in at the same time, and baggage is checked in from different induction lines but transferred 
through the same main conveyor line. None of the flights or check-in stations should be blocked; the 
best way to do this is via a similar throughput rate. The imbalance problem is caused by natural contention 
under no control. In advanced systems, the merging operations of induction lines are under control. The 
philosophy of control is illustrated in Fig. 2. There is a section, called a buffer (queue 1, 2, 3, 4, 
), at the end of each induction line that connects to the main line. A detection system, which detects 
the size of parcels, is located at the entrance to each buffer. Based on the detection, a control system 
allocates appropriate spaces (windows) on the main line for parcels at a location in front of merging 
points called the window assignment station (WAS). A parcel is held in the buffer until the window assigned 
for it arrives at its merging point, when it is released for merging. When the merging operation occurs, 
the parcel enters the main line and takes the space reserved for it. Technically, the buffer sections 
operate at higher speeds than the induction section to pull gaps between the parcels. One-inch gaps are 
necessary for detection systems to work. Due to limited capacity, a buffer might be full, in which case 
it blocks (stops) the induction conveyor and reduces the throughput of the induction line. The blocked 
induction line will be resumed once a merging event occurs that allows the next parcel to enter the buffer. 
By controlling parameters such as the buffer sizes, one can influence the blocking rate of each induction 
line, so all lines can reach a balanced throughput. Arantes and Deng (1996) devised an algorithm (called 
QTM) based on queueing theory and this control philosophy to design the system so that different induction 
lines can reach a balance while maintaining high throughput. The QTM can identify proper buffer sizes 
based on the number of induction lines, arrival rates, conveyors speeds, parcel size, and the distance 
between buffers and the WAS. Since there are approximations and restrictive assumptions in QTM, how this 
algorithm works under various situations remains questionable. This problem motivated us to use simulation 
to analyze the behavior of controlled CNMCs. Figure 2: A Queueing-Theoretic Representation of CNMCs 
 2 A SIMULATION MODEL FOR CNMCS BASED ON QUEUING THEORY Simulation has been increasingly applied to 
conveyor­system analysis with the rapid improvement of simulation software. Yannopoulos, Jenness and 
Hawaleshka (1991) used the simple animated simulator PCmodel to simulate an automated paint-line conveyor 
system; Bartlett and Harvey (1995) used SIMAN to simulate a CIM cell in which two conveyors were considered; 
Gunal and Williams. (1996) modeled chain conveyors in Automod. So far, an application that focuses on 
a controlled conveyor network with merging configuration described here has not been observed. One special 
feature of controlled CNMC application is that nominated windows, which correspond to specific parcels, 
need to be generated on the main line. This is handled in our model by duplicating a dummy entity for 
the merged queue (WAS) once an entity enters a buffer, then disposes it after merging. 2.1 Types of 
CNMCs There are two different types of control systems for window assignment. One is to assign windows 
from a fixed window assignment station (WAS), called fixed WAS. An alternative is to allocate the closest 
available window in front of the merging point for a parcel. This is called moving WAS. There are also 
different kinds of control logic to assign windows. The logic could be first in first out (FIFO), longest 
queue first (LQF), highest priority first, random, natural (no control), or cyclic (round robin). There 
are two sizing styles for assigning windows, fixed length or variant length. For the fixed-length style, 
all windows have the same length. The length of the windows should be large enough to carry the longest 
package. The capacity of buffers could be measured in one of two ways: number of parcels or length of 
occupied space. The induction conveyor could also be one of two styles: accumulating and non-accumulating. 
There is no restriction on the distributions of arriving parcels. 2.2 Simulation Elements A CNMC can 
be broken into four kinds of basic parts: induction line, buffer, WAS, and main line. The simulation 
model can be integrated by four kinds of submodels: induction line, WAS queue, merging point, and exit. 
Duplicating induction-line and merging-point submodels can generate CNMCs with an unlimited number of 
induction lines, while duplicating WAS submodels can generate CNMCs with multiple main lines. Some auxiliary 
elements are also needed for specifying the simulation experiment, the output statistics, and the animation. 
2.2.1 Conveyor A conveyor is the basic element in a CNMC. In Arena, conveyors are aggregated by multiple 
conveyor units. A conveyor unit is indivisible; thus, no matter how small the unit, the conveyor must 
be an integer multiple of its unit in length. Also, the position on the conveyor must be counted discretely. 
This feature affects the simulation results. Too small a unit decreases simulation efficiency, while 
too large a unit decreases precision. Different conveyor unit lengths have been tested for our model. 
Experimental results have indicated that good precision and efficiency are attainable if the conveyor 
unit length is about 1/10 of its longest parcel size. 2.2.2 Animation For the same reason as for conveyors, 
animation requires that entities be presented in a discrete manner. Parcel sizes, which fall into a continuous 
interval, have to be clustered into picture sets in which the length is discrete. Based on our experiments, 
picture sets with six sizes and different colors for different lines are used. 2.2.3 Criteria for Evaluation 
Criteria used to evaluate the performance of CNMCs are as follows: Throughput of the main line or induction 
lines: 1/(average time between outputs).  Main-line utilization: (occupied space)/(available space) 
on the main line at any moment.  Utilization of induction line: 1 (blocking probability).  Balk rate 
of induction lines: (nominal arriving number real entering number) / (nominal arriving number).  Time 
in system: average residence time in the system.  Time in buffer: average waiting time in the merging 
queue.  Time between output: average time between con­secutive outgoing entities.   2.3 Submodels 
Figures 3 through 6 show the logic controlling the induction-line submodel, the WAS submodel, the merging­point 
submodel, and the exit submodel. This logic governed the construction of our Arena model.  2.4 The QTM 
Based Simulation Model for CNMCs A general simulation model for CNMCs (Fig. 7) has been built and tested 
in Arena by using the above submodels. Arena (Kelton, Sadowski and Sadowski, 1998) has been chosen as 
our primary simulation tool since its lower-level modeling features give us the necessary flexibility. 
The particular configuration used in this example comes from a real problem, which includes four non­accumulating 
induction lines merging at 5, 17, 29, and 41 feet from the WAS. The lengths of the induction lines are 
25 feet. The main line runs at 280 feet per minute (ft/m) while induction lines run at 100 ft/m. Packages 
arrive at the rate of 16 packages per minute. The system may have a fixed window size, such as a tilt 
conveyor system, or a variant window size. In both cases, a fixed gap must exist between consecutive 
packages; we used 12 inches. Hence, the window length, in the fixed-window-size case, was 60 inches, 
which is determined by the length of the longest package size plus the fixed gap length. The window 
length An entity on main line enters merging point in the variant-window-size case is the package s length 
plus 12 inches. No Creating entities based on exponential or other distributions Yes  Assign line 
and size identity Check No Check if Yes there is one waiting unblocked and a space to enter is available 
If the buffer is full, the induction line will be blocked and stopped. The entity on the induction section 
will stop moving Yes  and wait until a merging occurs to resume the line.  Duplicate a dummy entity 
for WAS queue  No Yes Figure 5: Merging Point Submodel Enter merging point and wait there for the corresponding 
dummy entity to arrive Figure 3: Induction Line Submodel Figure 4: WAS Submodel Dispose Figure 6: Exit 
Submodel There is no restriction on the distributions of inter­arrival times; by default, a stationary 
Poisson process is used. There is no restriction on the distribution of parcel size; by default, an empirical 
distribution collected from the real world is used in our analysis. Induction conveyors can be either 
accumulative or non-accumulative. By changing distributions, other arrival or size patterns could be 
investigated. The capacity of buffers is by default measured in the number of parcels. By slightly modifying 
the induction-line submodel, the buffer could be measured in length. By modifying the WAS submodel, other 
control logic could be used. The model cannot handle a moving WAS situation. In summary, this model is 
a fairly general one for CNMCs. Conveyor Network with Merging Configuration  Simulate 28800 ICS_fv_5 
Syste m Conveyor belt Conveyo r Variables belt2 t bufwarm Ele m e nts Conveyor belt3 Conveyor BLOCKAGES 
belt4 Block 2 Block 3Block 4 Block 5 TALLIES Conveyor belt5 DS TATS time m aint NRmid2_R mr mid2_PARAMETERS 
time 1 aint( NR( mid3_R)/ mr( mid3_r) ) time 2 aint(NR(mid5_R)/mr(mid5_r)) aint(NR(mid4_R)/Mr(mid4_r)) 
time 3lC(belt)/636time 4 length ncmain line output)/(buf(1)-warm) COUNTERS nc( out 1)/(buf (2)-warm) 
nc(out 2)/(buf (3)-warm) nc(out3)/ (buf(4)-warm)Main line output Sets WindowAssignednc(out4)/ (buf(5)-warm) 
 Figure 7: A General Simulation Model for CNMCs DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS AND OUTPUT ANALYSIS We are interested 
in the steady-state behavior of a CNMC with a specified buffer size. We want to compute a point estimate 
and confidence interval for the mean ofcriteria mentioned earlier. We chose batch means confidence-interval 
formation (Law and Kelton, 1991). the for 3.1 Batching Experimental Design The run length covers at 
least ten batches, while each batch covers at least ten significant correlation lags (Pegden, Shannon 
and Sadowski, 1995) as shown in Fig. 8. The length of a non-terminating simulation run in our case is 
selected to be 8 hours, corresponding to a work shift. The simulation run is split into 24 batches of 
1200 seconds each. The first 600 seconds corresponds to the warm-up period and is therefore excluded 
from data collection; the first batch is also excluded from statistical analysis. The design of the simulation 
experiments is the same for all the cases referring to non-terminating systems. This facilitates analysis 
while providing the necessary precision. A case study shows that this design produces simulation results 
with adequate precision. The CNMC is studied as a terminating system later for the investigation of non-stationary 
arrival processes. The thinning method (Law and Kelton, 1991) is used to generate this non­stationary 
Poisson arrival process. 3.2 Investigating CNMC Behavior and QTM Performance Under Various Situations 
With the simulation model and the experimental design, system performance under various conditions is 
investigated. The configuration defined by QTM is investigated first, and then some QTM assumptions and 
constraints are violated to assess the robustness of QTM. The situation that obeys the QTM assumptions 
corresponds to the default set-up of our simulation model. This situation is for fixed FIFO WAS and non-accumulative 
 Do moving average analysis on 5 - 20 points to find out the warm-up period Design a simulation run. 
The length should be no less than 10 batches long after the warm-up period, and each batch should not 
be less than 10 times longer than the correlation lag Figure 8: Batching Experimental Design and Output 
Analysis conveyors with buffers measured by the number of parcels. For each of the induction lines, 
the distribution of interarrival times between consecutive parcels is assumed to be exponential. Other 
situations investigated include non-stationary arrival rates, different arrival distributions, buffers 
measured in length, different parcel-size distributions, changing mainline and induction-line speeds, 
and changing the number of branches. The buffer sizes identified by QTM are used unless other requirements 
are specified. These investigations, as well as the detailed numerical comparison between QTM and simulation 
results, are presented elsewhere (Jing, Arantes and Kelton, 1998; Arantes, Jing and Houshmand, 1998). 
CASE STUDY: MAINLINE AND INDUCTION-    LINE SPEEDS CHANGE PROPORTIONALLY As an example, we explore 
a situation where mainline and induction-line speeds change proportionally. In practice, the speed of 
the mainline and that of the induction lines are more likely to be adjusted synchronously. We want to 
find out how the buffer sizes, identified by QTM for the primary speed setting, work in this situation. 
The effect of induction-line speed is ignored in QTM but can be considered in simulation. The results 
for some parameters are in Fig. 9, where (a), (b) and (c) represent induction-line blocking probabilities 
(Bi, i=1, ,4), mainline utilization Um, and throughput Tm, respectively. In Fig. 9, simulation results 
are denoted by Sim_ while QTM results are denoted QTM_ . Compared with those of mainline-speed-change­only, 
the simulation results are closer to those of QTM. The two most significant differences are: Tm for 
simulation is more consistent with that of QTM. The values of Tm from the two methods fit very well at 
high speed, starting from the primary speed where Um.0.5  Blocking probabilities for simulation drop 
at low speeds, forming a steadier trend for an upstream line to have a lower blocking probability. The 
explanation for the blocking probabilities dropping is that the low induction-line speed retards buffer 
filling, which QTM cannot detect. The agreement of the values for Tm is due to the fact that the arrival 
rate increases while the induction-line and mainline speeds increase.  A break point exists around Um 
= 0.8, below which the results for the two methods are significantly different. The lower the speeds 
the more significant the difference. Above this point, Um and Tm are almost the same. The difference 
is expected and is because the QTM approximation deteriorates at high mainline utilization. There is 
also a break point with respect to mainline speed, above which the mainline throughput is bounded by 
the arrival rate, and below which the mainline throughput is bounded by its capacity. The turning-point 
speed can be obtained analytically by imposing N.=µ0, where N is the number of induction lines, . is 
the nominal arrival rate, and µ0 is the service rate at the merged queue for the WAS. The turning point 
is unimportant here because the arrival rate and throughput capacity change with the speed changes. The 
inconsistency between the blocking probabilities and the (Um, Tm) values from simulation is bigger at 
lower speeds. The same thing happens in QTM. However, the overall performance (Um, Tm) from simulation 
and from QTM gets closer. The biggest relative difference still occurs around the break point. The consistency 
at high speed but inconsistency at low speed reveals that the approximation error in QTM is small at 
high speeds (low Um), but is large at low speeds (high Um). Thus, the QTM design (buffer sizes) is less 
sensitive (compared to mainline-speed-change-only) to the decrease, and is not sensitive to the increase 
when the two speeds increase simultaneously. a 1.0 Main Line Utilization 1.0 Main Line Troughput Sim_Um 
0.0 0.5 QTM_Um 0.0 0.5 Sim_Tm QTM_Tm 0 200 400 600 800 0 200 400 600 800 Mainline Speed Mainline Speed 
 b c Figure 9: Mainline and Induction Line Speeds Change Proportionally CONCLUSIONS With our simulation 
model, the performance of CNMCs under various situations has been investigated, and thus the robustness 
of QTM has been tested. Overall, our findings are: CNMCs have short warm-up periods and reach steady 
state quickly, so a terminating system can be treated as non-terminating with reasonable precision. 
 QTM is quick and conservative in finding a reasonably good initial design for CNMCs to reach a balanced 
throughput. With reasonable relative precision on simulation-generated confidence intervals, QTM generally 
works well. Otherwise, the results may need to be improved by other means such as simulation for high 
precision.  QTM is sensitive to neither the assumption of a stationary arrival process nor to the interarrival-time 
distribution nor to the way in which buffer lengths are measured. Further simulations showed that QTM 
deteriorates as the main-line utilization is high. As a result, under the same conditions, QTM fits VWS 
better than FWS since VWS has lower main-line utilization.  QTM is more stable against changes of branches 
than changes in speeds. The QTM results and simulation  results agree very well under a variable number 
of branches. There is a turning point with mainline speed beyond which the mainline throughput will be 
bounded by the arrival rate, and below which the mainline throughput will be bounded by its capacity. 
The turning-point speed can be obtained analytically. There is a threshold for induction-line speed above 
which we confirmed the conclusion from the analytical results, that the induction speed does not have 
a significant impact on the performance of the conveyor network studied. We conclude that the value of 
the mainline speed at the turning point is actually the optimal mainline speed. The induction-line speed 
at the threshold is also optimal since we want to reach reasonably high throughputspeeds. with reasonably 
low REFERENCES Arantes, J.C. and S. Deng. 1996. Modeling and solution methods for the design and control 
of conveyor systems with merge configuration. In Progress in Material Handling Research 1996, ed. R.J. 
Graves, L.F. McGinnis, D.J. Medeiros, R. Ward and M.R. Wilhelm, 35 50. Material Handling Institute, Charlotte, 
North Carolina. Arantes, J.C., G.G. Jing, and A.A. Houshmand. 1998. Using simulation to evaluate the 
robustness of a conveyor-network queueing model when the conveyor s speed changes. In Progress in Material 
Handling Research 1998, ed. R.J. Graves, L.F. McGinnis, D.J. Medeiros, R. Ward and M.R. Wilhelm, to appear. 
Material Handling Institute, Charlotte, North Carolina. Bartlett, H. and J. Harvey. 1995. The modeling 
and simulation of a pick-and-place computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) cell. Computers in Industry 
26: 253 260. Gunal, A.K. and E.J. Williams. 1996. Modeling of chain conveyors and their equipment interfaces. 
In Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J.M. Charnes, D.M. Morrice, D.T. Brunner 
and J.J. Swain, 1107 1114. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. 
Jing, G.G., J.C. Arantes, and W.D. Kelton. 1998. Robust analysis via simulation for a merging-conveyor 
queueing model. Under review at IIE Transactions. Kelton, W.D., R.P. Sadowski, and D.A. Sadowski. 1998. 
Simulation with Arena. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Law, A.M. and W.D. Kelton. 1991. Simulation modeling 
and analysis. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Pegden, C.D., R.E. Shannon, and R.P. Sadowski. 1995. 
Introduction to simulation with SIMAN. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Yannopoulos, E., J.D. Jenness, 
and O. Hawaleshka. 1991. Animated simulation of an automatic conveyor system, Proceedings of the Thirteenth 
Canadian Congress of Applied Mechanics, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES GARY GANG JING 
is a Ph.D. candidate in industrial engineering at the University of Cincinnati. He received a B.S. in 
Mechanical Engineering and an M.S. in applied statistics and reliability engineering from Southwest Jiaotong 
University, PRC. His research interests include quantitative analysis, simulation, process improvement, 
OR, QC, and material handling. W. DAVID KELTON is a Professor in the Department of Quantitative Analysis 
and Operations Management at the University of Cincinnati. He received a B.A. in mathematics from the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, an M.S. in mathematics from Ohio University, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees 
in industrial engineering from Wisconsin. His research interests and publications are in  the probabilistic 
and statistical aspects of simulation, applications of simulation, statistical quality control, and stochastic 
models. He serves as Simulation Area Editor for Operations Research; he has also been Simulation Area 
Editor for the INFORMS Journal on Computing and IIE Transactions, and Associate Editor of Operations 
Research, the Journal of Manufacturing Systems, and Simulation. He is the INFORMS co-representative to 
the Winter Simulation Conference Board of Directors and is Board Chair for 1998. In 1987 he was Program 
Chair for the WSC, and in 1991 was General Chair. JOSÉ C. ARANTES is an Assistant Professor of operations 
research in the Department of Mechanical, Industrial and Nuclear Engineering at the University of Cincinnati. 
He received his B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Instituto Tecnologico de Aeronautica, 
Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil, his M.Sc. degree in industrial management from the Katholieke Universiteit 
te Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, and his Ph.D. in industrial engineering from The University of Michigan, 
in 1991. His areas of interest are modeling of manufacturing systems, logistics, scheduling, and mathematical 
programming ALI A. HOUSHMAND is an Associate Professor of Industrial Engineering at the University of 
Cincinnati. He has a B.S. (1981) and M.S. (1983) in mathematics from University of Essex, UK, and M.S. 
(1985) and Ph.D. (1989) in industrial engineering and operations research from The University of Michigan. 
His research and teaching interests are in applied statistics, quality control, design, and management. 
 
			