
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G. W. Evans, eds. MODULAR SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS: AN OBJECT MANAGER BASED ARCHITECTURE Charles R. 
Standridge Padnos School of Engineering Grand Valley State University 301 West Fulton Grand Rapids, MI 
49504-6495, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT To perform a simulation project, simulationists employ simulation specific 
software tools, general purpose software tools, and perhaps software developed to meet the needs of a 
particular project. Ideally, these divergent tools would work together in a seamless simulation environment. 
Modular simulation environments are one way of meeting this goal. Software tools can be added to or deleted 
from a modular simulation as needed. Thus, the simulation environment can be configured on a project 
by project basis or even dynamically during the course of a project. The flow of data between the tools 
in the environment is also a primary concern. An object manager based architecture provides the capabilities 
to add and delete software tools as necessary as well as to control the flow of data between the software 
tools. Each software tool and each data set can be viewed as an object with certain attributes. The object 
manager controls the invocation of the software tools as well as meeting input data requirements and 
organizing and managing the results of each operation. The design of such an object manager is presented. 
An example modular simulation environment is given and its configuration and operation illustrated. 
INTRODUCTION Ideally, each simulationist would be able to select the set of software tools to use on 
each simulation project (Standridge and Centeno 1994). The selection would be based on the particular 
requirements of that project. The tool set would contain both simulation specific tools such as model 
builders and simulation engines as well as tools with wide applicability such as word processors, statistical 
analysis packages, and spreadsheets. Modular simulation environment concepts seek to provide the standard 
by which ad hoc collections of software tools can be used together to perform a simulation project. These 
concepts specify how simulation related data flows between tools in a general way so that heterogeneous 
software can work together (Standridge, et al., 1996). Some benefits of modular simulation environments 
are as follows: 1. High flexibility for end user selection of simulation software. This supports simultaneous 
use of simulation software from multiple software providers as well as locally developed tools. 2. Use 
of widely applicable software with which the simulationist is already familiar. 3. Inclusion of tools 
such as spreadsheets, word processors and presentation graphics generators that have not traditionally 
been a part of simulation environments. 4. Management and selective use of simulation inputs and results. 
 5. Definition of a standard for simulation environment structure. Because of its flexibility, simulationist 
may generally adopt such a standard and tool builders may find developing software compatible with the 
requirements of the standard helpful.  The specification of an implementation architecture that supports 
the dynamic inclusion of software tools and the management of simulation data is one significant issue 
in the development of modular simulation environments. Object management is one approach that shows promise 
in successfully addressing this issue. This paper presents an object manager based architecture for modular 
simulation environments. An example simulation enviroment is presented and the operations that it can 
perform illustrated. 2 SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT OVERVIEW Traditional simulation environments have three 
major components: (1) a fixed set of software tools prescribed by the environment designers and implementers, 
(2) a database management system that controls the flow of data between the software tools transparently 
to the environment users, and (3) a user interface that gives access to all environment capabilities. 
Each software tool uses existing information in the database and adds the results of its own operations 
to the database. Furthermore, these simulation environments may be divided into two major categories: 
those that emphasize model building tools and those that emphasize experimentation and tools for handling 
simulation related data. TESS (Standridge 1985; Standridge and Pritsker 1987) was an early, pre-graphical 
user-interface, simulation environment emphasizing data handling and experimentation. Basic modeling 
tools provided for building SLAM II network models and editing sets of SLAM II control statements. The 
database manager organized simulation inputs and outputs. Simulation results could be collected automatically 
from SLAM II, GPSS/H, and MAP/1 simulations. Software tools supported constructing animations, graphing 
data, and reporting data. A command language served as the user interface. Selective querying of the 
database was supported. A database subprogram library allowed computer programs to store and retrieve 
data from the TESS database. Balci and Nance (1987, 1992) designed and implemented a simulation model 
development environment. This work has lead to the visual simulation environment (Balci et al. 1995). 
A visual user interface supports the development and simulation of visual models that may be hierarchical 
and object oriented. The collection of tools includes a visual editor, a library of existing component 
models, a static model analyzer, a model dynamics tester, a simulator, an analyzer for simulation results, 
a multi-media learning support system, and an evaluator for accessing the credibility of a simulation 
study. Fritz, Sargent, and Daum (1995) report the development of a similar simulation environment for 
building and executing hierarchical control flow graph models. Modular simulation environments are distinct 
from these existing environments in that the set of software tools are not pre-determined, the use of 
widely applicable software is encouraged, and the user-interface relies on the standards set by existing 
graphical user interfaces. Data and software tool management must accommodate the open-ended nature of 
the environment. THE OBJECT MANAGER APPROACH A simulation environment consists of a set of tools as well 
as the data needed for input to the tools and the data resulting from the use of the tools. In an object 
manager­based architecture, each tool as well as each input data set and output data set is considered 
to be an object. Each object may be characterized by attributes that can be given values. The AVS/Express 
visualization software environment employs such a object manager architecture. (Cunningham 1998). The 
object manager controls the definition of each object and the assignment of values to object attributes 
as well as the invocation of tools. Object manager control includes making sure that object attribute 
values are of the proper type and within the proper range as well as assuring that all inputs to a tool 
object are acceptable before the tool is invoked. In a modular simulation environment with an object 
manager-based architecture there are two basic classes: tools and data sets. Tools may be simulation-specific 
such as a graphical model builder or even an entire simulation environment. Alternatively, tools may 
be general purpose such as a spreadsheet or a graphics package. Furthermore, tools may be from another 
domain such as an optimization package. A tool may be invoked independently or from within another tool. 
For example, a simulation may stop periodically to invoke an optimization to determine how much product 
to produce and inventory to ship over the next four weeks. Data sets result from the operation of tools 
or are constructed as input to tools. A data set object may be output from one tool and input to another. 
Data sets may be generic sets of values or have a simulation specific structure such as a time series 
of time persistent value observed during a simulation run, e.g. the volume of work in progress. Standridge 
et al. (1996) characterize the types of data set subclasses associated with simulation inputs and outputs. 
A data set object may have a specific structure as required by a particular tool for input or resulting 
from the use of a tool. For example, the Proof animation package requires a data set of instructions 
to create an animation.  4 AN OBJECT MANAGER BASED SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT Figure 1 shows the object 
manager based architecture for the modular simulation environment under development at the Padnos School 
of Engineering, Grand Valley State University. This environment will be used in teaching both undergraduate 
and graduate manufacturing engineering students as well as supporting simulation projects in partnership 
with local industry. Some tool objects in the environment are simulation specific in nature (AweSim, 
Proof, ExpertFit), some are general purpose software (EXCEL, Text Editor), some are from the optimization 
domain (GAMS) (Brooke, et al. 1998), and some are developed specifically to support the operation of 
the environment (List Builder, Data Collection, and Data Set Operations). DataSetList/ Generic ScenarioName 
 DataSetList/SimResult  DataSet/Generic DataSetList/ ColSpec DataSet/ProofSpec   Figure 1: Example 
Object Manager Based Architecture for a Modular Simulation Environment The modular simulation environment 
can include other simulation environments as objects. AweSim (Pritsker, O Reilly, and Laval 1997) is 
itself a simulation environment. It is used within the modular simulation environment as it would be 
in a stand alone mode. However, the data sets resulting from AweSim simulations are organized and processed 
in a systematic manor within the modular environment instead of on an ad hoc basis. Each is labeled with 
the name of a scenario that identifies the specific experimental conditions for a particular simulation. 
In addition, input data sets setting specific experimental conditions and model parameter values are 
organized and labeled systematically. The modular simulation environment can link heterogeneous commercial 
software products. AweSim, Proof (Henriksen 1996), and ExpertFit (Law and McComas 1996) are all commercial 
simulation software products but are not integrated with each other. The modular simulation environment 
provides the structure for the flow of data between these tools. AweSim simulations can produce data 
sets for animation by Proof. Distributions fit to data by ExpertFit provide the basis for random sampling 
within AweSim simulations. The modular simulation environment can link simulation specific software and 
general purpose software. AweSim simulation results can be processed by EXCEL to produce statistical 
summaries, histograms, and graphs. AweSim inputs could be prepared using a text editor. In this way, 
various versions of each input data set could be prepared and managed by the simulation environment. 
Each version corresponds to a unique set of simulation parameters defining a different scenario to evaluate. 
Version support is not provided by AweSim. The modular simulation environment can support the joint use 
of simulation and other analysis techniques such as optimization. Optimization models can be employed 
to make decisions periodically within simulation runs or to set the parameter values of a simulation 
run. The modular environment provides the data links between the simulation and optimization as well 
as the mechanism for invoking the optimization from the simulation. The modular simulation environment 
contains its own tools for managing data. One tool, data collection, provides the mechanism for specifying 
which simulation results are collected and how to integrate them into the modular environment. Another 
tool, list builder, produces lists of data sets to input to a simulation as well as lists of data sets 
resulting from a simulation. A third tool, data operations, provides merge, extract, and elementary computation 
operations on data sets of simulation results. Thus, additional data sets are created. The modular simulation 
environment provides alternative mechanisms for performing the same tasks. A user is free to choose among 
the mechanisms at will. For example, simulation input data could be prepared using either the text editor 
or the EXCEL spreadsheet. The modular simulation environment provides for the organization and management 
of data set objects that can be further classified into various types. Data set objects may be generic 
or of a specific type such as simulation results, Proof specifications, and collection specifications. 
Simulation results and Proof specifications may be further identified by the simulation scenario and 
replication from which they were generated. Each generic data set may have multiple versions representing 
alternative simulation input values. The object manager can perform the following operations: 1. Define 
new tool A new tool enters the modular simulation environment. 2. Remove tool A tool departs the simulation 
environment. 3. Run tool A tool in invoked. 4. Define data set A new data set enters the simulation 
environment. 5. Remove data set A data set leaves the simulation environment.  The operations may 
be performed from within a tool via an application program interface or from the user interface of the 
object manager. Typical object attribute types are numeric, string, data set, and data set list. EXAMPLE 
OPERATION OF A MODULAR  SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT Consider the following example application of the modular 
simulation environment shown in Figure 1. A manufacturing firm supplies goods sold by a large retailer. 
A simulation is required to determine the re-order point for the retailer along with the manufacturer 
s inventory level that would allow production to be suspended for one day. The simulation analyst assigned 
to the project determines that two types of input data sets are required. One contains values of the 
parameters of the inventory system whose values are changed from run to run: the retailer s reorder point 
and the manufacturers production cut-off point and is called EXPERIMENT. The other contains values for 
the remaining operating parameters of this simple supply chain and is called PARAMETERS. There is one 
version of the PARAMETERS data set called BASELINE and as many versions of the EXPERIMENT data set as 
scenarios to be evaluated by the simulation. Two versions of the latter called LOWREORDER and HIGHREORDER 
define alternative scenarios. The two data sets EXPERIMENT and PARAMETERS are defined in the simulation 
environment using object manager commands. In the following, all tools are invoked using the object manager 
commands. Values for PARAMETERS version BASELINE and EXPERIMENT versions LOWREORDER and HIGHREORDER are 
entered using the text editor. Note that alternatively an EXCEL spreadsheet could have been used for 
this task. The list builder is used to create two lists of input data sets: 1 LOW containing PARAMETERS 
version BASELINE and REORDER version LOWREORDER. 2 HIGH continuing PARAMETERS version BASELINE and REORDER 
version HIGHREORDER. The list builder is used to specify that a data set containing two time series: 
the inventory at the retailer and the inventory at the manufacturer is a simulation output. This list 
is called INVENTORY. Two scenarios are simulated. The name of the scenario is the same of the name of 
the input data set list used in the simulation, LOWREORDER and HIGHREORDER. One simulation result data 
set is produced for each scenario using standard AweSim capabilities: INVENTORY version LOWREORDER and 
INVENTORY version HIGHREORDER. Graphs of the inventory times are desired. EXCEL is invoked and the data 
set INVENTORY version LOWREORDER loaded. The graph is created using EXCEL commands. This process is repeated 
for the data set INVENTORY version HIGHREORDER. In each scenario, the inventory levels are observed and 
recorded at the same points in time. It is of interest to have a data set containing the inventory at 
the retailer in each scenario as well as a time series of the difference between the scenarios. The data 
set operations tool can be used to merge the data sets INVENTORY version LOWREORDER and INVENTORY version 
HIGHREORDER, extract only the time series of inventory levels, and compute the difference. This creates 
a new data set named by the user: DIFFERENCE version LOWHIGH. GraphiC is a C programming language based 
subroutine library for generating high quality graphs. A GraphiC application program is written for generating 
graphs of the inventory levels. This program with attributes data set list is added to the modular simulation 
environment shown in Figure 1 using the define new tool capability of the object manager. The data set 
list contains the names of the data sets with information to graph.  SUMMARY A modular simulation environment 
meets the requirement to select the software tools needed to perform each simulation project. Simulation 
specific tools and general purpose tools as well as tools developed particularly for the project can 
be included. The data flow between the tools can be defined. New tools may be added as needed during 
the course of the project. An object manager architecture is an effective implementation strategy for 
a modular simulation environment. Each tool and data set in the environment is viewed as an object under 
the control of the object manager. The object manager organizes the data sets and invokes the tools as 
needed, either independently or from within other tools. It ensures that the inputs to tools and the 
results from tools are complete and acceptable as well as integrating them into the environment. A demonstration 
modular simulation environment is under development in the Padnos School of Engineering at Grand Valley 
State University. This environment will support teaching undergraduate and graduate simulation courses 
as well as performing projects with local industry. The environment will include simulation specific 
software such as a traditional simulation environment, fitting distributions to data, and animation; 
general purpose software such as spread sheets and text editors; optimization software; and data management 
software developed specifically for the environment. An example simulation project performed using the 
demonstration environment has been presented. REFERENCES Balci, O. and R. E. Nance. 1987. Simulation 
model development environments: a research prototype. Journal of the Operational Research Society 38:753­ 
763. Balci, O. and R. E. Nance. 1992. Simulation model development environment. In Proceedings of the 
1992 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. J. Swain, D. Goldsman, R. C. Crain, and J. R. Wilson, 726-735. 
IEEE, Piscataway, New Jersey. Balci, O., A. I. Bertelrun, C. M. Esterbrook, and R. E. Nance. 1995. A 
Picture-Based Object Oriented Visual Simulation Environment. In Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation 
Conference, ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and D. Goldsman, 1333-1340. IEEE, Piscataway, 
N.J. Brooke, A., D. Kendrick, A. Meeraus, and R. Raman. 1998. GAMS: A User s Guide. GAMS Development 
Corporation, Washington, D.C. Cunningham, I. 1998. Creating Engineering Visualization Applications with 
AVS/Express. Technology White Paper. Advanced Visual Systems, Inc., Waltham, M.A. Fritz, D. G., R. G. 
Sargent, and T. Daum. 1995. An overview of HI_MASS (Hierarchical Modular and Simulation System). In Proceedings 
of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and D. Goldsman, 
1356-1363. IEEE, Piscataway, N.J. Henriksen, J. O. 1996. The power and performance of Proof animations. 
In Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. M. Charnes, D. M. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain, 460-467. IEEE, Piscataway, N.J. Law, A.M. and M. G. McComas. 1996. ExpertFit: Total 
support for simulation input modeling. In Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. 
M. Charnes, D. M. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and J. J. Swain, 588-593. IEEE, Piscataway, N.J. Pritsker, 
A. A. B., J. J. O Reilly, and D. K. LaVal. 1997. Simulation with Visual SLAM and AweSim. New York: Halsted 
Press. Standridge, C. R. 1985. Performing simulation projects with the extended simulation system (TESS). 
Simulation 45: 283-291. Standridge, C. R. and A. A. B. Pritsker. 1987. TESS: The Extended Simulation 
Support System. New York: Halsted Press. Standridge, C. R. and M. A. Centeno. 1994. Concepts for modular 
simulation environments. In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, 
D. A. Sadowski, and A. F. Seila, 657­ 663. IEEE, Piscataway, N.J. Standridge, C. R., J. F. Kelly, T. 
Kelley, and J. Walther. 1996. Progress in modular simulation environments. In Proceedings of the 1996 
Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. M. Charnes, D. M. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and J. J. Swain, 714-720. 
IEEE, Piscataway, N.J. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY CHARLES R. STANDRIDGE is an associate professor in the Padnos 
School of Engineering at Grand Valley State University. He led the development of the Simulation Data 
Language (SDL) and of The Extended Simulation Support System (TESS) for Pritsker Corporation. His current 
interests lie in the development of teaching approaches for simulation including a modular simulation 
environment based teaching laboratory. He is working with industry on simulation-based approaches to 
problems in inventory management and supply chain operations. 
			