
 MOLECULAR DOCKING USING GENETIC ALGORITHMS Yong L.Xiao and Donald. E. Williams University of Louisville 
 KEYWORDS: Genetic algorithms, function optimization, intermolecular interactions, molecular docking 
Abstract Genetic algorithms are applied to dock molecules to binding siies of known structure. Intermolecular 
interaction energy is minimized using the genetic algorithm approach for the docking process. A software 
package has been developed especially for handling intennolecular energy minimization problems by GA 
optimization. Interrnolecular interactions of both small organic dimers and a larger molecular complex 
of an anticancer drug have been investigated. The performance of GAs on molecular docking calculations 
is discussed and compared with numerical methods. The results of implementation indicate that the GA 
approach is superior to conventional methods used in energy minimization when there exist many local 
minima as well as a global minimum. Significant improvement over conventional computational methods for 
molecular docking can be seen when applying GA to large molecular systems. Introduction Molecular docking 
has proved to be a useful tool for molecular recognition studies, yet it is a difficult problem both 
in terms of understanding the primary determinants and developing computational methods. A good docking 
procedure may have practical applications in rational drug-design, identification of functionally related 
surface structures, prediction of molecular complexes, computer simulation of molecular association between 
substrate and enzyme, and so on. One molecule can be docked into another molecule in a lock-and-key fashion 
due to the attractive forces between two molecules with matched georfletry shapes, l.ntermolecular forces, 
in principle, can be obtained from quantum mechanical calculations,J1] but usually, these calculations 
are prohibitively lengthy. At present this quantum mechanical approach is not practical for systems of 
significant size because of computer limitations. Instead, the intermolecular energy may be represented 
by an empirical "force field" from which the ensemble intermolecular energy may quickly be calculated. 
[2] An additional serious problem has to be solved in finding optimum molecular docking: the energy hypersurface 
for systems beyond the simplest has many subsidiary energy minima as well as a global minimum. The major 
difficulty to be overcome in predicting the structure of molecular clusters and docking through energy 
minimization is the challenge of searching the large and complex energy hypersurface to find the most 
stable or global energy minimum. Various approaches to optimization of functions are well documented 
in literature.J3] The commonly used methods in potential energy minimization are numerical methods (steepest 
descent, Newton-Raphson). These conventional methods generally fail to accomplish the task of finding 
a global minimum of the intermolecular energy Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or dixtributeal for diroct commercial advantagc, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and noticeis given that copying 
is by permission of the .Association for Computing Machine~. To copy otherwise, or ,to republish, requires 
 fee ~ndlor specific permission.  O 1994 ACM 0~791-647-6/ 94/ 0003 $3.50 function.J4] Recently, genetic 
algorithms (GAs) [5, 6, 7] have been showing broad promise in many application areas. In this paper we 
report our work on efficiently finding global intermoleeular energy minima of docking using a genetic 
algorithm approach. First we will briefly address molecular docking problems related to rational drug 
design. Then the current computational approaches to minimization of intermolecular energy are discussed. 
Next the implementation of our genetic algorithm is described. Also the results of our application . 
are discussed in some detail. Meanwhile, comparison is made between these results and pi-evious work 
done by numerical methods. And finally, the conclusion of our study is provided. Molecular Docking in 
Rational Drug Design Drug developers have long sought out new approaches for improving the drug discovery 
process. The industry now spends multi-billions of dollars a year on drug research and development. As 
the drug development pipeline has become an even more critical factor in drug industry, improving the 
productivity of drug R&#38;D by incorporating new approaches in drug discovery has been a major means. 
Much of the emphasis in improving the drug R&#38;D process is placed on rational methods of drug discovery 
and design, encompassing techniques of computational chemistry, NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. 
For instance, drugs find their own binding sites in hemoglobin and influence the equilibrium between 
its two alternative structures in unexpected ways.[8] Drugs dock into niches of the protein which fit 
their van der Waals volume and take up positions that minimize the intermolecular potential energy. The 
major intermolecular interactions between drug and protein are electrostatic including strong hydrogen 
bonds and weak interactions between aromatic quadrupoles and nonpolar interactions between aliphatic 
hydrocarbons. Elucidation of the binding sites of drugs in proteins is apparently important when designing 
new drugs. Molecular docking, the integral part of molecular recognition between two molecules, is achieved 
through complementarity of molecular surface structures and energetics. This complementarity can take 
many forms: charge-charge interaction, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals' interaction and the size and 
shape of surfaces. Among these features, well-defined geometrical relationships among the individual 
molecules of the formed protein complexes are the fundamental considerations of the binding or association. 
Many works done for protein docking problem are based on this assumption.J9, 10] In a purely geometry 
docking, the procedure involves analysis of molecular surfaces and shapes, matching the complementary 
shape and size. This is an optimization of the position of molecules relative to each other; an optimization 
procedure can reduce the computational problems associated with the docking. However, a purely geometry 
optimization procedure may 196 completely exclude large regions of-configurational space, h is desirable 
to have a method to dock proteins efficiently without excluding portions of eonfigurational space. The 
ideal ease is to search exhaustively for the global minimum of intermolecular energy of tentative docking 
complexes. There may be millions of possibilities of docking model and energies must be calculated for 
each model using empirical methods. It is extremely difficult to do so because of computer limitations. 
Therefore an empirical energy calculation with a robust optimization method is needed to implement the 
docking procedures. Molecular docking problem is a problem of molecular recognition between two molecules. 
Protein-recognition processes are determined by the structure of protein surfaces. The interaction of 
two protein surfaces is a complex event involving molecular flexibility, induced fit, the solvent, entropy, 
and hydrophobic, van der Waals, and electrostatic interactions. X-ray crystallography has shown that 
water-soluble globular proteins have well-defined three-dimensional structures. In general, the preferred 
solution conformation, irrespective of solvent, is similar to the crystal conforrnation.{l 1] The formed 
complexes have well-defined geometrical relationships among the individual molecules. Given the three-dimensional 
structure of any two molecules, we would like to predict whether they will associate and how the two 
molecules are docked. Molecular recognition is achieved through complementarity of molecular surface 
structures and energetics. A docking process should take this complementarity into consideration which 
includes not only the size and shape of molecular surfaces, but also charge-charge interaction, hydrogen 
bonding, van der Waals' interaction. The last three forms can be related to intermolecular energy calculations 
which can help us to identify the correct complex conformation. I C !,~ C ,,.tl C \ /C U..C H/c | i c. 
a CH~ \N--C. L ,M iI f'TylV aIJ¢lo I c%--~===° o=c~ 3 . bl2C ~ /CH 2 ] /N--C H3 GH3--N\c =0 $~Sme t .o'---o".= 
o H C-" / \ CH O "-,....... N N i Z O C / ~CH2 L Ptolmo CH ~ / \ /CH 3 3 C H --~.I C / C b'*"- H C ~ 
CH3/ \NH HN CH2* / \ o.~. c\ /c ----o CPI~CH HC --H C I / \ \ t-TIw~,-,~ CH 3 HN~O O~NH CH H '~,. C 
~ C '~ C .,~ N ,-~C ~ C ,~ C ~ N H 2 I II I I Ptwll>llZOlllH *~ C"~C"'C ~"O ~C'~c "C'~o I I CH 3 CH 3 
Figure 1. Structural formula of actinomycin D. The phenoxazone-ring system and the five amino acids in 
each cyclic pentapepide chain are labeled.  Most drug targets are membrane-bound receptors that alter 
their structures in response to stimuli by neurotransmitters, hormones, cytokines, and other factors. 
Drugs find their own binding sites in proteins. The mapping out these binding sites in atomic detail 
may lead to some general rules about the stereochemistry of interaction between drugs and proteins and 
may be helpful in the design of drugs for binding to proteins of unknown structure. As an example the 
well known anticaneer drug actinomycin D [12],_ shown in Figure 1, may be used for mo[eeular docking 
calculations to test power of GAs. Actinomycin D is an important antibiotic that binds to double-stranded 
DNA and -selectively inhibits RNA synthesis. There is a general requirement, i. e., resulting from the 
hydrogen bond formation between the.guanine base and the pcntapeptide ring [13], that a guanine base 
be present when actinomyein D binds to DNA. The x-ray crystal structure of a complex of actihomycin D 
with two deoxyguanosine molecules [14] provides us with data to test our computational method of docking. 
For the prediction of association of two molecules one then needs to select an empirical forcefield for 
the intermoleeular system. Minimization of Intermolecular Energy The interrnolecular energy, depending 
on the relative orientations of the molecules, as well as their separation, is a sum of atom-atom interactions. 
[15] An atom in a given molecule is assumed to interact with an atom in a different molecule according 
to the equation E/k = -Ai~ r/~6 + Bik exp(--Cikrik)+qjqk~ ~ commoN), referred to as an (exp-6-1) interatomic 
energy function, which gives the interaction energy of atoms j and k at distance. ~. The energy function 
actually includes the geomelric factor In terms of separation. The first term represents dispersion attraction 
energy, the second represents the short range exchange repulsion energy, and the last long range coulombic 
interaction between net atomic charges. Values for the empirically adjusted parameters A, B, and C were 
adopted from a study of 18 hydrocarbon crystal structures.[16] Values for the net atomic charges of aromatic 
hydrocarbons were obtained by the potential-derived method [17] as reported previously[18]. Atomic charges 
of actinomycin D and deoxyguanosine molecules were calculated by Discover [19]. The commonly used Lennard-Jones 
(12-6-1) nonbonded interaction formula and consistent valence forcefield (CVFF) were chosen for actinomycin 
D complex. E jk = --A/k~-k 6 + B/kr~ 12 + q iq~rj-k ~ The energy of the molecular cluster is then the 
sum of all nonbonded pair potentials between the atoms of the molecules. Since all molecules are considered 
rigid, and one molecule is fixed in space to set the origin, there are six degrees of freedom in a molecular 
dimer. In a larger cluster of N molecules there are 6(N-l) degrees of freedom, divided equally between 
rotation and translation. The rigidity of the molecules in the cluster leads to a complicated interrnolecular 
energy surface which includes subsidiary minima as well as the global minimum.. The major difficulty 
to be overcome in predicting the structure of these clusters through energy' minimization is the challenge 
of searching the large and complex energy hypersurface to find the most stable or global energy minimum. 
Intermolecular energy minimization methods generally used are numerical methods thaf require derivatives 
of the energy with respect to molecular translation and rotation.[18] Derivative calculations are very 
time consuming. Moreover, numerical calculation results will depend highly on the configuration of starting 
positions. When a docking molecule is placed in a local minimum region the minimum found may only be 
local, not the global minimum, For molecular docking of unknown structure the nonboncled energy surface 
is complex and detailed, and usually several subsidiary minima exist. Total confidence in reaching global 
minima can only be achieved with an exhaustive grid search or by making use of more detailed advance 
knowledge about the shape of ~e hypersurface. The GA approach is a good choice to solve the global search 
problem for intermolecular energy minimization because it not only searches for the optimal point but 
also improves the performance toward that point. Implementation of GA for Molecular Docking In our study, 
GA is implemented as follows: First, a real-world problem of intermolecular interactions between two 
or more molecules is chosen from our previous work [18] done by numeric methods to test whether GA can 
work for our purpose. Second, a relatively large molecular complex of drug is investigated. The docking 
calculation of the second system hasn't been done before, to our knowledge. For interactions between 
two molecules M 1 and M 2, let M 1 be fixed at its origin. M 2 can be freely translated toward M 1 along 
X, Y, and Z directions and rotated about its own mass center to any orientation. The six degrees of freedom 
can be coded by a set of binary bits to form a bitstring called an individual. At the initial stage, 
called initial generation, an initial population of N i individuals is formed by randomly flipping 1 
or 0 at each bit in a bitstring. This will give an initial sampling of a search space where each bitstring 
can be decoded back to a set of parameters, such as X, Y, Z, o~, 0, and 0. This set of parameters will 
then translate all atoms in the molecule by X, Y, Z and rotate them by ~, 0, and 0 angles referring to 
the molecular mass center. Much effort was made to efficiently handle the molecular geometry database. 
A computer program [20] GAME (Genetic Algorithm for Minimization of Energy) has been developed to combine 
the ftmctions of energy minimization and molecular geometry handling. An objcctive functkgrt (exp-6-1) 
or (12-6-1) is defined automatically in the program that is used to rank the individuals. GAME selects 
parents from a population of strings based on a fitness parameter which is related to the objective function. 
The objective function value E is transformed into the fitness valuesf in the way that the negative energies 
will have positive fitness values f equal to the absolute energy value E plus a fitness base value F. 
f(i) = F - E(i) when E(i) < F; f(i) = MOD(E(i), F) otherwise Meanwhile, a positive energy value is reverse 
mapped within the base value range. Art energy value that is positively too high is scaled to th~ remainder 
of the base value. The probability of selection as a parent is proportional to the fitness. Two parents 
are selected to reproduce two children by uniform crossover [21] and mutation. Uniform crossover is considered 
to be a better choice because our chromosome consists of a set of N-dimensional parameters and uniform 
crossover generally performs better than either one-point or two-point crossover [22]. The process is 
repeated until the same number of individuals as in the last generation have been generated. After each 
new generation is createdand fitness is evaluated, the best individual of the current generation is compared 
to that of the last generation. Then the new generation is accepted if the best fitness is. greater or 
equal to that of the last generation. Otherwise the new generation will be abandoned. The program will 
stop before reaching the number of allowed generation cycles if this repeating process exceeds a preset 
limit. GAME implements as follows: Initialize P(O); Decode each member in P(O) to X, Y ,Z, o~, 0, ~; 
Translate and rotate every atom in each molecule; Evaluate intermolecular energy and map for(N-i); While 
( N < generation size) do { Repeat T times { Generate P(N) { Selection; Reproduction (crossover and mutation); 
) Decoding i" Molecular operation; Evaluation; } until (fiN) >f(N-l) or T > repeat limit); N=N+I; GAs 
are stochastic search methods such that the performance of a single run depends on a random number generator; 
they also depend on the populatio~a and generation size, ahd the probability of crossover and mutation. 
These parameter sets were varied and tuned for molecular systems of different size. Several runs were 
performed to find practical structures which have chemical and physical meaning. It was found that a 
suitable population size is 100 strings. The number of generation varied from less than 100 for small 
molecular dimer system up to 400 for large molecular complex of actinomycin-guanosine. The mutation rate 
can be set as low as 0.3% for small systems and increased to 5% for more complicated systems. Results 
and Discussing GAME was utilized to calculate optimum structures of molecule dimers of benzene, naphthalene 
and anthracene, "/vhich had been done earlier using numerical methods [I 8]. In addition, the work was 
extended to include optimization of molecular clusters of trimer and tetramer of these molecules. The 
detailed discussion of these cluster calculations by both GAs and numerical energy minimization methods 
is published elsewhere. [4] In the docking calculations, one molecule is fixed at the origin and other 
molecules are randomly placed in space at initial stage. One of the important features of GA is that 
the initial relative positions of the molecules does not affect the results for the final optimum. This 
is significant because the success of numerical methods such as steepest descent or Newton-Raphson in 
locating global minima depends totally on this starting position. Figure 2 shows a side view of the three, 
dimensional chemical s~ucture of Aetinomycin D. We can use this figure to illustrate different docking 
behavior between GAs and numerical methods. In Figure 2, A, B, and C are the possible docking sites where 
A is supposed to be most favorable, B is a little bit less than A, and C the least. In numerical methods, 
if a molecule is placed near C at the beginning, the molecule can be optimized to the C position which 
is a local minimum. It is impossible for the molecule to cross the wall of the target molecule to go 
into A or B positions. Furthermore, if a molecule is placed somewhere other than close to these energy 
wells, the docking may head in a completely wrong direction to a local minimum which has much higher 
energy. Our experiments show that molecules in GA docking can penetrate the energy barrier and there 
is a high probability that from any starting separation position between two molecules the global minimum 
is reached. enough in GA, it is more likely that the global minimum will be located, or at least its 
vicinity has been found which can be fine- tuned to the global minimum by numerical methods such as Newton-Raphson. 
(.) Bmz~ dr,am Co)Nag/la~latc Figure 2. Three dimensional structure of actinomycin D revealed by X-ray 
crystallography. A, B, and C are the possible docking sites.  The generation size was set to 100 individuals 
with each random generated bitstring having a length of 48 bits. The bitstring contains six subsets of 
8 bits long which can be decoded into X, Y, Z, ct, 0, and ~ parameters. After the initial population 
is generated and the fitness of each individual is evaluated by the energy function, operators of selection, 
crossover and mutation are applied on the chromosome pool. Using a roulette wheel spin method,[6] the 
selected mates from the chromosome pool are those bitstrings with relatively high performance. The crossover 
rate is set to 0.8 and a uniform crossover technique is employed. A mutation rate of 0.0033 was used. 
The results show that GAME can successfully converge to a minimum. Usually the smaller molecules will 
converge in fewer generations. The study suggests that running the program several times with a small 
generation size is better than running it just one time with a large generation size. The optimized structure 
of benzene, naphthalene, and anthracene dimers is shown in Figure 3. In the application to trimers and 
tetrarners there are 12 and 18 degrees of freedom, respectively. The individual in the sampling population 
consists of an array of chromosomes. Since there are several subsidiary minima most runs of the conventional 
algorithm may fail to locate the global minimum. Therefore, to obtain intermolecular energy minima for 
benzene trimer and tetramer, a numerical method should be augmented by .the stochastic methods such as 
simulated annealing as in the previous work done by using the OREMWA [23] method. It was found that the 
GA method can quickly go to nearly optimum positions. GA can learn from the performance of each generation 
and quickly get on the right track to the global minimum. Both GA and OREMWA depend on generation of 
random numbers. For a single run one can never be sure the global minimum is reached. However, if one 
sets the number of generations large Figure 3. Optimized dimer structures: (a)benzene; (b)naphthalene; 
(c)anthracene.  Another successful application of GA to docking is the calculation of binding sites 
in actinomycin D (Figure 1). Actinomycin D is a cyclic polypeptide antibiotic which binds to double helical 
DNA and specifically inhibits R.IqA synthesis. It contains two polypeptide chains connecting to a phenoxazone 
ring with a total of 176 atoms (C: 62; O: 16; N: 12; H: 86). An interesting feature of actinomycin D 
binding to DNA is that the presence of guanine residues is mandatory. To understand how actinomycin D 
associates to guanine residues, the mode of binding must be fully studied. The crystal structure of actinomycin 
D complex with dexoyguanosine was solved [13] showing that approximate 2-fold symmetry of actinomycin 
and two chemically equivalent binding sites available to deoxy-guanosine for complex formation. , To 
locate these binding sites, we first dock one deoxyguanosine molecule to actinomycin. The searching for 
the first active site led to the conclusion that GA can correctly identify both binding sites The searching 
for the second binding site was easier when we fixed one degxyguanosine to actinomycin and docked the 
second deoxyguanosine to initial complex of two molecules It is much faster for GAME to find the second 
active site which is nearly identical to the gl6bal minimum of the complex observed in the crystal. Although 
it takes longer to dock both deoxyguanosine molecules simultaneously to actinomycin D, most of these 
runs were nearly as good as docking them one by one. The lowest energy structure from these docking calculations 
shown in Figure 4. This predicted docking is very close to the corresponding three-dimensional structure 
observed in the crystal. The R.MS error of fitting is very small, with an average below 0.1 angstrom. 
This suggests that the docking calculations not only correctly predicted the geometric mode of actinomycin- 
guanosine interaction, but also that the assoeiamd complexing energies are meaningful on a relative basis. 
Figure 4. Three-dimensional view of the binding of two deoxyguanosine molecules (lighter shaded) to actinomycin 
D; Face view as docked by GAME; We found that CPU time increased for the large actinomycin- dcoxyguanosine 
complex system of 240 atoms with a reasonable scale compared to a benzene dimer of 24 atoms. We may divide 
the CPU time spent into three parts: evolution operation, geometry operation, and energy evaluation. 
The time consumed in the first part will be the same, given the same bitstring length, regardless of 
molecular size. Numerical methods will have to do very lengthy derivative calculations. The CPU time 
increase is caused by geometry operations and energy evaluations. Relocation of large molecules wilt 
take more CPU time because of more atoms are involved. For example, a generation of population size 100 
needs 100 times 3 times NA operations of translation and the same number of rotation operations, where 
NA is the number of atoms in that particular molecule. This suggests that a good strategy will be docking 
small molecules to a large target molecule. However, the time increase for evaluating the energy function 
is proportional to molecular size. Genetic algorithms have the potential power to solve this problem 
because parallel calculations can be easily performed in GAs to calculate energies of different individuals 
concurrently.  Conclusions This paper has described the application of genetic algorithms to a computer 
assisted drug design problem-docking molecules to the binding sites of a peptide. GAs have shown many 
advantages over conventional minimization methods. The study shows that GA can perform intermolecular 
energy minimization, not only for small molecular dimers with only one minimum (whiCh can be treated 
by numerical methods), but also for large molecular complexes with complicated energy hypersurface in 
which there is a global minimum as well as many local minima. The success of locating the global minimum 
of large molecular complexes will lead to significant changes in the way drug development is being approached. 
 References [1] H. Margenau, and N. R. Kestner. (1969). Theory of Interrnolecular Forces, Pergamon, 
New York. [2] D. E. Williams. (1981). Topics in Current Physics, 26, 3. [3] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, 
S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T. Vetterling. (1986). Numerical Recipes, Cambridge Univ. ~ress. [4] Y. L. Xiao, 
and D. E. Williams. (1993). Chem. Phys. Let. (in press). [5] J. H. Holland. (1975). Adaptation in natural 
and artificial systems. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI. [6] D. E. Goldberg. (1989). Genetic 
algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning, Addision-Wesley, New York. [7] L. Davis. (1991). 
Handbook of genetic algorithms. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York. [8] M. Perutz. (1992). Protein structure: 
new approaches to disease and therapy. W.H. Freeman, New York. [9] M. L. Connolly. (1986). Biopolymers, 
25, 1229. [10] H. Wang. (1991). J. Cornput. Chem., 12, 746. [11] A. J. Hopfinger. (1977). lntermolecular 
interactions and biomolecular organization, John Wiley &#38; Sons, New York. [12] S: Ginell, and L. Lessinger. 
(1988). Biopt~lyrners, 27, 864. [13] S. C. Jain, and H. M. Sobell. (1972). J. Mol. Biol., 68, 1. [14] 
H. M. Sobell, and S.C. Jain. (1972). J. Mol. Biol., 68, 2l. [15] A. I. Kitaigorodsky. (1973). Molecular 
Crystals and Molecules, Academic Press, New York. [16] D. E. Williams and T. L. Starr. (1977). Cornput. 
Chem. 1, 173. [17] D. E. Williams. (1991). Rev. Comp. Chem. 2,219. [18} D. E. Williams and Y. L. Xiao. 
(1993). Acta Cryst. A49, 1. [19] Discover Molecular Modeling System, Biosym Technologies, Inc., 10065 
Barnes Canyon Road, Suite A, San Diego, CA 92121. [20] Y. L. Xiao, and D.E. Williams. (1992). GAME: Genetic 
Algorithms for Minimization of Energy, Department of Chemistry, University of Louisville, Louisville, 
KY 40292. lnternet: dewill0 l@ulkyvx.louisville.edu [21] G. Syswerda. (1989). Uniform crossover in genetic 
algorithms. In J. D. Schaffer (ed.), Proceedings of the third international conference on genetic algorithms, 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA. [22] L. J. Eshetman, and J. D. Schaffer. (1993). Crossover's niche. In 
S. For'rest (ed.), Proceedings ofthefifih international conference on genetic algorithms, Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Marco, CA. [231 D. E. Williams. (1992). Chem.Phys. Let., 192, 538.  
			