
 NASA s Earth Science Data Systems Lessons Learned and Future Directions Hampapuram K. Ramapriyan NASA 
Goddard Space Flight Center Earth Science Data and Information System Project, Code 423, Greenbelt, MD 
20771 1-301-614-5356 Rama.Ramapriyan@nasa.gov ABSTRACT One of NASA s strategic objectives is to Study 
Earth from space to advance scientific understanding and meet societal needs . NASA s Earth Science Data 
Systems (ESDS) directly support this objective by providing end-to-end capabilities to deliver data and 
information products to users. The Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) is the 
largest of NASA s ESDS. Dozens of satellites contribute to the multi-petabyte EOSDIS archive, which consists 
of data and derived products in variety of Earth science disciplines. These products are currently being 
distributed to hundreds of thousands of users each year at the rate of 7 to 10 Terabytes a day. EOSDIS 
is a distributed, heterogeneous set of systems located at several NASA centers, other federal agencies 
and universities. Operating since 1994, EOSDIS has evolved from a near-line tape-based system to an on­line 
disk-based archive. The distributed components of EOSDIS are interoperable at the inventory level to 
provide one-stop shopping for access to data files. EOSDIS supports NASA s open data policy whereby data 
are available to users at no charge and on a non-discriminatory basis. One of the requirements of EOSDIS 
is to ensure that the data are preserved in its archives or are transitioned to other permanent archival 
agencies. From the point of view of long-term preservation of digital data, temporal interoperability 
is critical. This is enabled by media standards, migration policies, and standards for metadata and documentation. 
 Categories and Subject Descriptors H.2.5 Heterogeneous Databases; H.3.2 Information Storage; H.3.3 Information 
Search and Retrieval. General Terms Management, Measurement, Documentation, Performance, Design, Security, 
Standardization.  Keywords Data Systems, Earth Science, Remote Sensing, Data Preservation, Interoperability 
1. INTRODUCTION One of NASA s strategic objectives is to Study Earth from space to advance scientific 
understanding and meet societal needs [1]. To meet this objective NASA has a series of satellite and 
airborne missions to make Earth observations, an Earth Science research program to advance understanding 
of the Earth system, a technology program to enable future satellite and airborne missions, and applied 
sciences program to advance utilization of This paper is authored by an employee(s) of the United States 
Government and is in the public domain. Non exclusive copying or redistribution is allowed, provided 
that the article citation is given and the authors and agency are clearly identified as its source. John 
Moses NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Earth Science Data and Information System Project, Code 423, Greenbelt, 
MD 20771 1-301-614-5308 John.Moses@nasa.gov Earth science measurements by other organizations. NASA 
s Earth Science Data System (ESDS) program resides within NASA s Earth Science Division and supports 
the above strategic objective by providing end-to-end capabilities to deliver data and information products 
to users. This program consists of core and community capabilities that complement each other to provide 
a value-chain for users of Earth science data. The core data system elements reflect NASA s responsibility 
to manage Earth science mission data characterized by continuity of research, access and usability. The 
core consists of all the hardware, software, physical infrastructure, and intellectual capital NASA recognizes 
as necessary for performing its tasks in Earth science data system management. Community elements are 
capabilities developed and deployed largely outside of the NASA core elements and are characterized by 
their agile evolvability and innovation. The largest of the NASA ESDS core capabilities is the Earth 
Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS). Dozens of satellites contribute to the multi-petabyte 
EOSDIS archive, which consists of data and derived digital data products in a variety of Earth science 
disciplines such as atmospheric science, land processes, oceanography, hydrology, and cryospheric science. 
These products are currently being distributed to hundreds of thousands of users each year at the rate 
of 7 to 10 Terabytes a day. EOSDIS is a distributed, heterogeneous set of systems located at several 
NASA centers, other federal agencies and universities. The community capabilities of NASA ESDS are projects 
selected through peer-reviewed proposals under the auspices of the Research Opportunities in Space and 
Earth Science (ROSES). There have been over 100 such projects since 2003 in three programs: Research, 
Education and Applications Solutions Network (REASoN), Advancing Collaborative Connections for Earth 
System Science (ACCESS), and Making Earth System data records for Use in Research Environments (MEaSUREs). 
The data products from the community projects will be archived in EOSDIS after appropriate scientific 
reviews. The data resulting from NASA s missions are a valuable resource that needs to be preserved for 
the benefit of future generations. In the near-term, as long as the data are being used actively for 
scientific research, it is important to provide easy access to data and services commensurate with current 
information technology. For the longer term, it is essential to preserve the data and the information 
needed for a user to be able to understand how the data were used for deriving information, knowledge 
and policy recommendations, and to be able to repeat the experiment to verify correctness of conclusions 
of the past. The purpose of this paper is to discuss how some of the lessons learned through the nearly 
20-year history of development and operation of EOSDIS and the more recent community capabilities of 
NASA s ESDS are broadly applicable in considering a road map for the data preservation interoperability 
framework. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief historical background 
of NASA s ESDS and introduces the reader to its distributed implementation. Section 3 discusses the content 
and key metrics of ESDS. Section 4 describes access to ESDS data from the points of view of policy and 
technical mechanisms. Section 5 presents the impact of the digital data managed by ESDS. Section 6 discusses 
lessons learned and how they apply to the data preservation interoperability framework. Section 7 provides 
concluding remarks. 2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND This section covers briefly the historical background of 
NASA s ESDS. More details can be found in references [3, 4]. In the 1970s and 1980s NASA s Earth science 
data were managed using one of two approaches. With the first, data were held by principal investigators 
(PIs) or at specialized data systems. With the second, a central data system was used for processing, 
archiving and distributing the data. Access to data from the missions was limited to the principal investigators 
(PIs) in the respective programs for a specified period. For example, in the case of the Upper Atmospheric 
Research Satellite (UARS, a program initiated in the 1980 s, with satellite launched in 1991) access 
to data was limited to PIs for two years after launch. With either of the two approaches there were no 
policy-driven requirements for PIs to make their data available to other scientists or to a broader user 
community until the end of their missions. Relatively small and isolated data systems had been developed 
with virtually no interoperability. As NASA prepared for the Earth Observing System (EOS) Program in 
mid-1980 s, it developed a more open data policy. To date, this policy has been adhered to and states 
that there is no exclusive access to data after an initial checkout period [2]. The goal is to make the 
data promptly available to all users within and outside the EOS science teams. For the EOS satellite 
missions, a set of standard data products was defined to result from each of the instruments on the spacecraft. 
These products, produced using peer-reviewed algorithms would be available to all research and applications 
users. Recognizing the importance of data management, NASA established the Earth Science Data and Information 
System (ESDIS) Project at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) independent of the typical flight projects 
to design, develop, and operate the EOS Data and Information System (EOSDIS). Initially, there were to 
be two organizations that would process, archive and distribute the data from the EOS missions. However, 
in response to strong recommendations from the scientific user community and in recognition of the facts 
that: scientific data management requires an understanding of the data to be managed; EOS covered many 
Earth science disciplines; and the knowledge of these discipline could not be provided by one or two 
organizations, EOSDIS was designed with a distributed set of 8 data centers called Distributed Active 
Archive Centers (DAACs). These DAACs were selected to be collocated with scientific expertise in the 
respective Earth science disciplines and geographically distributed across the United States. The DAAC 
organizations also had data from pre-EOS missions, and it was recognized that making these heritage data 
more easily available to the community would be good preparation for managing the large data flows from 
EOS. The initial version of EOSDIS to accomplish this was called Version 0 (V0) [5]. The development 
of V0 involved improving documentation and metadata, migrating data to newer media, setting up inventory 
databases, and establishing inventory-level interoperability to enable cross-DAAC searching and ordering 
using a V0 Information Management System (IMS). V0 was operationally released to users in August 1994. 
The V0 IMS served a broad user community not necessarily aware of where the data of interest were held. 
However, it appeared too complex for users who were already familiar with the location of the data because 
of extra steps that were viewed as unnecessary. To accommodate such users, the DAACs developed interfaces 
to their specific holdings. In parallel with the V0 development, NASA was preparing for the large data 
flows from the EOS missions. The systems to handle these flows were the EOS Data and Operations System 
(EDOS) and the EOSDIS Core System (ECS). The former was for handling data capture and generating Level 
0 products (raw data with telemetry artifacts removed). The latter was for processing data into higher 
level products (calibrated radiances, geophysical parameters, mapping to standard spatio-temporal grids 
and model outputs), and archiving and distributing them to users. ECS, consisting of the hardware and 
the common software components for the functions mentioned above was to operate at four of the DAACs 
that were responsible for most of the data from the EOS instruments. To reduce the complexity of the 
development of ECS resulting from the extensive set of requirements it had to meet, the processing for 
most of the instrument data was moved to Science Investigator-led Processing Systems (SIPSs) developed 
and operated by the respective instrument teams. Thus, EOSDIS in fact became a more distributed system 
than was originally planned. Today, there are 12 Science Data Centers (including the original 8 DAACs) 
and 14 SIPSs. While the development of EOSDIS was in progress in the mid 1990 s, there was growing concern 
about the centralized nature of the development of EOSDIS and doubts about its ability to meet all the 
requirements of the broad user community. A review committee of the National Research Council recommended 
in 1995 that the science data processing, archiving and distribution should be performed by a federation 
of competitively selected Earth Science Information Partners (ESIPs) [6]. In response to this recommendation, 
NASA initiated an experiment with a self­governing federation consisting initially of 24 competitively 
selected ESIPs. The DAACs, whose primary responsibility was schedule-driven operational production and 
support of large user communities, were eventually invited to join the federation. Today, while NASA 
continues to be one of the federal agency sponsors of the federation, the membership in the federation 
has increased to about 120 including government, university and commercial organizations. Also, in 1998, 
NASA sponsored a New Data and Information Systems and Services (NewDISS) Strategy Team with the charter 
to define the future direction, framework, and strategy of NASA s ESE data and information processing, 
near-term archiving, and distribution. The main recommendations were to provide smaller, more heterogeneous 
components than were being developed with EOSDIS, to foster competition and to ensure that the components 
interact to meet the overall objectives of ESE through appropriate definition of standards and interfaces 
[7]. This resulted in the concept of Core and Community capabilities (see section 1, above), and was 
followed by a study of Strategic Evolution of Earth Science Enterprise Data Systems (SEEDS) resulting 
in recommendations for implementing community capabilities and to set up a set of working groups to provide 
community inputs for various aspects of ESDS, including technology infusion, standards, software reuse, 
and metrics planning and reporting. By 2005, EOSDIS had been operating for a decade and some of the hardware 
and software technologies were becoming obsolete. Therefore NASA initiated a study on the Evolution of 
EOSDIS Elements with the following objectives: . Increasing end-to-end data system efficiency while decreasing 
operations costs . Increasing data interoperability and usability by the science research, application, 
and modeling communities . Improving data access and processing . Ensuring continued safe stewardship 
This study developed a set of tenets for EOSDIS Vision 2015 [8]. Based on these tenets the first step 
of evolution was completed during 2006-2008. This step has resulted in reduction of operations costs 
by about 30% with improved services to the user community due to system simplifications and greater on-line 
availability of data [9].  3. CONTENT AND KEY METRICS 3.1 Data Holdings The data holdings in EOSDIS 
are from several different disciplines in Earth sciences as indicated above. With a small number of exceptions, 
all data held in EOSDIS are born digital . The 12 EOSDIS Data Centers and the disciplines covered by 
them can be found in [9]. Some examples of the Earth science disciplines whose data are held at the Data 
Centers are: Solar Irradiance, Radiation Budget, Clouds, Aerosols, Tropospheric Chemistry, Atmospheric 
Composition, Atmospheric Dynamics, Lightning, Severe Weather Interactions, Hydrologic Cycle, Land Processes, 
Land Use, Space Geodesy and Geodetics, Biogeochemical Dynamics, Ecological Data, Environmental Processes 
and Sustainability, Snow and Ice, Cryosphere, Climate Interactions and Sea Ice, Ocean Biology, Physical 
Oceanography, Sea Ice, Polar Processes, Global Modeling, Human Interactions and Socioeconomic Impacts. 
The largest volume of data held at these Data Centers originates from the satellites that are part of 
the EOS program. These satellites have been operating since November 1997 (starting with the launch of 
the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission TRMM). There are data from other missions that preceded the 
EOS program, as well as several missions that are not within the EOS program (e.g. the Canadian Radarsat-1 
mission, European Remote Sensing Satellites ERS-1 and 2, Japan Earth Resources Satellite). The production 
and archival of these data involve data flows from the source to the archiving data centers. For illustrative 
purposes we will discuss the EOS mission s holdings and the data flows below. The digital data products 
held in the Data Centers are Level 0 though Level 4, as defined in [2]. These definitions are provided 
below for completeness: . Level 0: Reconstructed, unprocessed instrument/payload data at full resolution; 
any and all communications artifacts, e.g., synchronization frames, communications headers, duplicate 
data removed. . Level 1A: Reconstructed, unprocessed instrument data at full resolution, time-referenced, 
and annotated with ancillary information, including radiometric and geometric calibration coefficients 
and georeferencing parameters, e.g., platform ephemeris, computed and appended, but not applied to the 
Level 0 data. . Level 1B: Level 1A data that have been processed to sensor units (not all instruments 
have Level 1B data products). . Level 2: Derived geophysical variables at the same resolution and location 
as the Level 1 source data. . Level 3: Variables mapped on uniform space-time grids, usually with some 
completeness and consistency. . Level 4: Model output or results from analyses of lower level data, e.g., 
variables derived from multiple measurements. With a few exceptions, the Level 0 data are processed to 
higher level standard digital data products by Science Investigator-led Processing Systems (SIPSs) managed 
by the respective instrument science teams. The data are then sent to the Data Center specifically assigned 
to the individual products (based on Earth science discipline addressed by the product). 3.2 Architecture 
A simplified organizational and functional architecture diagram is shown in Figure 1. The left half of 
the figure shows Mission Systems where the satellite and instrument control, data capture and Level 0 
processing occur. The right half of the figure shows Science Systems where processing to higher levels, 
archiving of the data products and distribution to users occurs. Figure 1. Organizational/Functional 
Architecture and Interfaces It is to be noted that Figure 1 focuses on elements involved in the management 
of data from satellites. EOSDIS data centers hold data from field experiments, socio-economic data, and 
data products resulting from Community data systems as well. The science systems part of the figure is 
similar for such data flows. Organizationally, the Flight Projects integrate instruments on satellites 
and launch them. After launch and a checkout period, the responsibility for operating the satellites 
and instruments shifts to the Earth Science Mission Operations Project at NASA GSFC, which maintains 
and operates the mission systems. The ESDIS Project is responsible for the maintenance, operation and 
evolution of the science systems, which include the SIPSs and the Data Centers. The ESDIS project is 
also responsible for the Metrics System and the Metadata Clearing House. The data flows among the various 
geographically distributes systems are handled through a combination of private and public networks. 
Between each pair of interfacing entities, there are agreements, requirements documents and/or interface 
control documents that specify how they interact with one another. 3.2.1 Standard Product Generation 
The responsibility for scientific data products rests with the instrument science teams. This includes 
defining the standard products, developing algorithms, processing, and ensuring their quality. The standard 
products at the various levels indicated above are produced using algorithms that have been vetted by 
the scientific community through a rigorous peer review of the Algorithm Theoretical Basis Documents 
(ATBDs). The science teams provide on-going quality assessment and validation of their products. Changes 
to algorithms are required occasionally as the improved analytical methods are discovered or instrument 
characteristics change with age. The entire mission data starting from the beginning are reprocessed 
when algorithms change. As new versions of products are produced, in some cases older versions are discarded, 
while in other cases all versions are kept. In all cases, all versions of the algorithmic software are 
maintained in the archives along with some samples of data products from each of the versions. As indicated 
above, most of the data products are generated at the SIPSs and delivered to the Data Centers for archiving 
and distribution. In the few cases where the products are generated at the Data Centers, the algorithmic 
software is developed by the respective science teams and integrated into the production systems at the 
Data Centers, and the resulting products are archived at the Data Centers. 3.2.2 Metadata All data products 
are accompanied by metadata. Metadata occur at both Collection Level and Granule Level . A unique data 
type (e.g., Version 5.0 of Land Surface Temperature derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
 MODIS on the Terra satellite) is referred to as a Collection. An individual instance of a data product 
(file) belonging to a Collection is referred to as a Granule. Both the Collection and Granule level metadata 
follow the EOSDIS Core System Metadata Model. This model was developed in the mid-1990 s and has had 
influence on the Federal Geographic Data Committee s (FGDC) metadata standard s extensions to remotely 
sensed data [10]. Software toolkits are provided to the science teams to facilitate automated generation 
of metadata during production of standard products. Metadata from the products are sent from the Data 
Centers to a metadata clearing house called EOS Clearing House (ECHO). ECHO provides users the ability 
to perform searching and accessing data from multiple Data Centers without needing to know where the 
data are actually held. Standard Application Program Interfaces (API s) are used to permit development 
of community-specific clients to query ECHO s metadata holdings. A general client called Warehouse Inventory 
Search Tool (WIST) is currently in operation. 3.2.3 Data Formats EOSDIS supports several data format 
standards that are in use by the earth science community. The primary format of the EOS data products 
is the Hierarchical Data Format for EOS (HDF-EOS), which is a particularization of the HDF developed 
by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois in early 
1990 s and currently maintained by The HDF Group. HDF is really a formatting system in that it provides 
specifications of structure as well as software tools. Within the defined structure there is considerable 
flexibility for users to define profiles . HDF-EOS consists of specification of profiles suitable for 
remote sensing data. Other formats used in the community such as NetCDF, GeoTIFF and binary are accommodated 
using translation software. There are also many non-EOS datasets in EOSDIS, which are held in their native 
formats. An effort is underway to generate XML maps of HDF file structures to facilitate readability 
of archived files independent of HDF software tools. This is expected to facilitate long-term preservation 
of the data even if the HDF software versions that created the data are no longer maintained. The Standards 
Processes Group (SPG), one of NASA s community-based Earth Science Data System Working Groups (ESDSWG), 
recommends standards for adoption by NASA. The recommendations of the SPG apply to metadata, data, access 
protocols, etc.  3.3 Metrics Some of the key metrics of EOSDIS for the period October 1, 2008 through 
September 30 2009 are shown in Figure 2.  Figure 2. Key Metrics of EOSDIS Figure 3 shows the growth 
in the number of products (digital data files) distributed to the user community over the period starting 
with Fiscal Year (FY) 2000 and ending in FY 2009.  4. ACCESS There are two aspects to the access to 
NASA s Earth science data policy and technical. These will be described in the following two subsections. 
4.1 Policy The data and information policy that applies to all funded activities in NASA s Earth Science 
Programs is described in detail in [2]. According to this policy, there is no period of exclusive access 
to the data. Except where agreed upon with international partners, data and derived scientific products 
are available at no cost to all users. Data are made available to users promptly after an initial checkout 
period, providing appropriate caveats about data quality. The data are distributed to users on a non-discriminatory 
basis. Any variation in access will result solely from user capability, equipment, and connectivity. 
All NASA-generated standard products are made available (upon request) along with the source code for 
algorithm software, coefficients, and ancillary data used to generate these products. Figure 3. Growth 
in Data Distribution to users 4.2 Technical There are several capabilities in EOSDIS for searching for 
data of interest, accessing the data and obtaining on-line services. The Global Change Master Directory 
(GCMD) provides information at the dataset level and points to data centers where the data are held. 
The GCMD covers data holdings that are much broader than NASA s Earth science data. It covers data from 
over 3000 organizations around the world. EOSDIS Data Centers are interoperable at the inventory level 
through the ECHO metadata repository. Using the Warehouse Inventory Search Tool (WIST), a user can search 
for the specific granules (or files) of interest that meets search criteria including spatio-temporal 
extents, parameters, and missions. Also, the ECHO metadata repository can be used for developing clients 
tailored to specific user communities or with some special capabilities. In addition, each of the Data 
Centers provides search tools specific to its holdings with some specialization to its Earth science 
disciplines. Most of the data in EOSDIS are held on-line and are accessible via ftp. The data are organized 
as granules, each granule pre­defined for a given data product to cover a known spatial extent and duration 
of acquisition. The metadata at the granule level indicate its spatio-temporal coverage. Normally, when 
a user requests data, data are provided as whole granules. However, for many datasets, on-line services 
are available, through which a user can subset the data to obtain just the desired part of a granule. 
There are several other on-line services available such as reprojection, mosaicing, and format conversion. 
In addition, several analysis and visualization tools are available at the EOSDIS Data Centers. Examples 
of these are the Goddard Earth Science Data and Information Services Center s (GES-DISC) Interactive 
Online Visualization ANd aNalysis Infrastructure (Giovanni) and the USGS Global Visualization Viewer 
(GloVis) provided by the Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (LP DAAC).  5. IMPACT The 
Earth science community needs EOS data to determine the state of and measure changes in Earth system 
components. The community is diverse, international and multi-disciplinary. It extends beyond the NASA 
sponsored researchers involved in the development, verification and validation the EOS science products. 
The EOSDIS data centers are driven by a broader user community to provide data access and services. EOSDIS 
has made EOS mission products and services available for new interdisciplinary research and applications 
not originally planned to be part of the program. The impact on Earth science research has been unprecedented. 
5.1 Earth Observations EOSDIS manages data from a large number of Earth Observing instruments onboard 
satellites. Because of the unique vantage point from space the data can be used to analyze phenomena 
at local through planetary scales. 5.1.1 Born Digital EOS is comprised of individual prioritized spaceflight 
missions. The missions are conceived years in advance of their launch and operation. The missions support 
Earth science research by incorporating leading edge technologies to explore new instrument capabilities 
for detecting physical properties not previously observed from space. All of the data are born digital 
in that they originate as bits from a remote sensing instrument onboard one of the EOS spacecraft, NASA 
aircraft, or an in-situ instrument in the case of data collected for validation or verification. Principal 
investigators lead the way by proposing instruments and methods to make the measurements that will answer 
key scientific questions about the Earth system. Often different instruments measure slightly different 
properties of the same physical phenomena, atmospheric substance and property, or feature on the surface. 
Sometimes a different version of an instrument on a different platform measures the property at a different 
time during the day. All these contribute to complexity of the products and require careful attention 
to when it is appropriate to use them in combination or for a particular research purpose. 5.1.2 Digital 
Data Archive and Distribution We realize the societal benefits of the EOS investment by reaching the 
discipline research and applications communities. Digital data archive and distribution are essential 
functions. The EOSDIS Data Centers are uniquely positioned between the Principal Investigator teams who 
focus on their instrument and product suite and the broader community who want to understand the products 
and how they relate to a particular Earth science area of research. The value of EOSDIS is in its captured 
knowledge and understanding of the PI s instrument and products and communication of this knowledge to 
the broader community in the context of the discipline s state-of-the-art. One of the key impacts of 
the EOSDIS Data Centers has been that the basis and content of the science products became understandable 
and useable by researchers and applications unforeseen at the outset. Users unfamiliar with the instrument 
and production could get enough information to understand the proper use of the products through the 
Data Centers. Tools and services created by the PI s for access and analysis of the products were transitioned 
to the Data Centers for use by other researchers. The data centers have acquired specialized knowledge 
of the products to be able to add services enabling research that incorporate independent observations 
from PIs into combined products. They are able to communicate instrument anomalies, geospatial and temporal 
artifacts in the global and local physical measurement fields, as well as general quality information 
to users in a timely and consistent manner, with assistance from PIs when needed.  5.2 Scientific and 
Applications Users EOSDIS data are used by a large number of researchers and applications communities. 
The communities are generally distinguished by discipline area (see Data Holdings section above). However, 
users are not evenly spread among the disciplines. MODIS, an instrument of which two identical copies 
fly on two of the EOS missions (Terra and Aqua), has the most popular products. Over 60% of EOSDIS users 
request and download MODIS products. ASTER, built by the Japanese for operation on Terra, is next in 
popularity, with approximately 15% of users. Third with 4% is Multi-Angle Imaging Spectro-Radiometer 
(MISR) on Terra. Even though users of products from the other EOS instruments represent a smaller portion 
of the EOSDIS user community as a whole, products from those instruments are no less popular or important 
within their respective disciplines, and require no less attention to maximize scientific and applications 
use. 5.2.1 Scientific Productivity EOS missions and EOSDIS have been delivering high quality Earth observation 
datasets to the research and applications communities for over 15 years. As mission life exceeds expectations 
and ongoing standard production adds to the collections, the value for climate modeling and change analysis 
increases. EOSDIS promotes the use of these long-term collections by the largest and broadest possible 
community. The impact to scientific productivity can be inferred from the number of scientific publications 
that cite publications that use EOS datasets. Products from the instruments on Terra and Aqua missions 
have the bulk of users. Figure 4 shows the literature referring to these datasets continues to increase 
every year. The exponential growth in the last four years is attributed to the increasing value of the 
collections as observations accumulate and the time-series grow. EOSDIS has responded to policy changes 
and technology directions to further enhance the use of EOS products and services by the research and 
applications community. One of the changes resulted in a significant impact to users, especially Geospatial 
Information System users who depend on accurate Digital Elevation Models for land cover analysis. ASTER, 
with the highest resolution instruments onboard EOS platforms at 15 m, has commercial applications similar 
to Landsat and a price is charged for access to ASTER products. Over the past several years NASA and 
Japan have collaborated to make high resolution Global Digital Elevation Model (GDEM) products from ASTER 
data. The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry of Japan and NASA agreed to make the ASTER GDEM available 
at no charge to users. As the policy took effect and Version 1 was released in 2009, product distribution 
increased dramatically. Rapid technology advances in the computer industry are also an important factor. 
Ongoing improvements in disk technology and network bandwidth have made online storage more affordable 
and network distribution practical with respect to the standard EOS instrument product sizes. Over the 
past 5 years EOSDIS has significantly increased the amount of data online from EOS instruments, and today 
most data is available online. This has contributed to significant increases in scientific productivity. 
 Figure 4. Publications and Citations Referencing Products from Instruments Onboard Terra and Aqua Missions 
 5.2.2 Model, Analysis and Response Applications Instruments onboard Terra, Aqua and Aura take global 
observations daily. EOSDIS was built to process observations into standard products and make them available 
to Earth science researchers within a few days. Soon after the successful launch of Terra and availability 
of its instrument data, applications users, operational agencies and researchers alike saw value and 
potential benefits in immediate use and application of the observations. Some observations have improved 
skill in Numerical Weather Prediction models and became valuable for use in monitoring and forecasting 
natural hazards, studying invasive species, disaster response applications and impact analyses. The DAACs 
and SIPS have set up services that process the instrument data in near-real­time so that products are 
available as fast as possible to modelers and practitioners. Observations from the Atmospheric Infrared 
Sounder (AIRS) data are used in Numerical Weather Prediction models to improve forecast skill. AIRS is 
a high resolution grating spectrometer with 2378 channels in the 3-15 um spectral interval. The radiance 
observations improve the representation of the temperature and humidity structures in the models. The 
data from AIRS must be sent to the NWP centers within three hours (near-real-time) of their observation 
time in order to be assimilated in time for the next forecast cycle. AIRS data from EOSDIS is sent through 
NOAA to the operational NWP centers around the world, including the U.S. National Centers for Environmental 
Prediction, the Canadian Meteorological Center, U.K MET Office, European Centre for Medium-Range Weather 
Forecasts Melbourne Australia and Tokyo Japan. 5.2.3 Data Integrity and Verifiability The use of EOS 
products in these applications and research activities make data integrity and verifiability very important. 
As scientists report research results, they often are building a case for global climate change leading 
to policy and economic consequences. EOSDIS plays a critical role in providing data integrity and provenance 
information to researchers who must defend their results and use of EOS data in the years to come.  
 6. LESSONS LEARNED There are several lessons learned over the last two decades of the life of NASA s 
ESDS that relate to data system development, data management, preservation and utilization. Many of these 
lessons relate to the way a diverse community of data providers and users interact. These should be considered 
in the development of a data preservation interoperability framework, which applies to an even broader 
community and time horizon than the NASA s ESDS discussed above. 6.1 Open Data Policy An open data policy 
with no period of exclusive access and free availability of data encourages use of data by a broad user 
community. This has worked successfully over the last two decades. Science teams responsible for the 
data products have supported this policy while ensuring that caveats about early versions of products 
are provided to users through data quality documentation. 6.2 Community Involvement Both core and community 
capabilities are essential to meet NASA s Earth Science program objectives. Core capabilities are needed 
for long-term stability and dependable capture, processing, and archiving of data and distribution of 
data to a broad and diverse communities of users, including value-added service providers. Community 
capabilities provide innovative, new scientific products as well as a path to technology infusion. NASA 
currently has four Earth Science Data System Working Groups (ESDSWG): Standards Processes Group, Technology 
Infusion Working Group, Reuse Working Group, and Metrics Planning and Reporting Working Group. These 
groups with representation from each of the NASA-funded community data system projects provide recommendations 
to NASA regarding data systems. These recommendations as well as those from EOSDIS Data Centers, annual 
user feedback through surveys, community conferences, interagency and international discussions influence 
NASA s programmatic direction. Community involvement in identification, adoption and evolution of standards 
works better than a top-down approach. The Standards Processes Group reviews standards in use in the 
Earth science community and recommends the appropriate ones for adoption by NASA. NASA-funded data providers 
are required to use standards recommended by the SPG and approved by NASA. 6.3 Discipline Expertise 
Science discipline expertise is required for management of data. Science data systems are most effective 
when collocated with expertise in the respective disciplines. Due the diversity of science disciplines 
covered in NASA s ESDS, it is essential to have a system of systems to serve the user community. In general, 
a one size fits all approach does not work. Scientific disciplines have different ways of looking at 
the data and different vocabularies. It is necessary to provide flexibility and tools to handle a variety 
of data and metadata formats while maintaining some consistency to facilitate search and access across 
datasets. It is also important to enable/facilitate development of different interfaces to support different 
communities. 6.4 Heterogeneity It was demonstrated early in the life of EOSDIS that loosely coupled, 
heterogeneous information systems can interoperate effectively as a system of systems. This version of 
EOSDIS, called Version 0, involved well-defined interfaces and a thin translation layer to spread queries 
to multiple databases and gather responses to present to users ( one-stop shopping ). This provided autonomy 
to each of the EOSDIS Data Centers to develop their discipline-specific data systems while maintaining 
interoperability at the granule level. In contrast, the development of EOSDIS Core System (ECS), originally 
intended to replace Version 0 with a strongly coupled system providing a common set of software to all 
the DAACs to process, archive and distribute all of NASA s Earth science data proved to be difficult. 
This was due to a large number of requirements and conflicting expectations from a diverse user community. 
It was eventually successful after reducing its scope to archiving and distribution of only the EOS mission 
data and allocating most of processing to SIPSs. With this more distributed approach, managing standards 
and interfaces including thorough interface tests and end-to-end testing was critical to mission success. 
 6.5 Preservation It is essential to plan for long-term preservation of data. This includes all the activities 
needed for near-term preservation to ensure that the data are available to an active user community. 
Further it includes planning for the time when the original data providers are no longer active. Preservation 
involves maintaining the bits with no loss (or loss within acceptable bounds) as they move across systems 
as well as over time, ensuring readability over time, and providing for long-term understandability. 
Bits are maintained with minimal loss as they move across systems by computing and storing checksums 
at every stage. The data are periodically copied onto newer media to ensure that neither the storage 
media nor the readers become obsolete. This was not the case with the older data such as those from NASA 
s Nimbus-2 (1970s era), which resulted in significant effort in restoring the original bits using highly 
specialized technologies. Ensuring readability involves not only the currency of storage and reader hardware 
as indicated above but also maintenance of the format dependent software tools for reading the data. 
A step in ensuring this is the HDF mapping effort discussed in section 3.2.3. This essentially provides 
machine- and human­understandable documentation of the internal details of the file structures, thus 
enabling users in the future to write read software without having to depend on HDF software libraries. 
To preserve understandability and usability, it is essential to maintain documentation as well as all 
the artifacts and ancillary data associated with the data products. It is useful to work out the details 
of these items with the principal investigators or other key individuals responsible for the data products 
well ahead of the time their projects or missions end. 6.6 Evolution Data systems in general, and those 
that need to be used for several years, must be designed for change and should evolve over time. As technology 
changes, new capabilities are available to the user community. The expectations on the data system change 
commensurately. New technology provides opportunities for better services as well as reductions in operational 
costs. As discussed in section 2, NASA s Earth science data systems have evolved from the initial centralized 
concepts to a highly distributed system of systems. Specifically, a concerted effort was made starting 
in 2006 to evolve EOSDIS components towards Vision 2015 , simplifying its architecture, employing commodity 
hardware, providing for better (on-line) access to data and enabling development of many on-line services, 
and reducing operations costs. Since EOSDIS serves a large user community that depends on high operational 
availability of data, it was critical to manage transitions to minimize negative impact on users.  7. 
CONCLUSIONS NASA has developed and operated over the last two decades a very successful system of systems 
for processing, archiving and distributing Earth science data. Lessons learned during this period have 
led to the present state, consisting of a distributed system of systems with core and community-developed 
capabilities. This system continues to evolve. The scientific user community and the community of data 
system developers have had significant inputs to the development and evolution of the system. NASA s 
open data policy and free availability of data, in addition to the effective data system capabilities, 
have resulted in significant beneficial impact on Earth science research and applications as evidenced 
by the metrics of data distribution and scientific productivity. The data in NASA s ESDS are a valuable 
resource that should be preserved for future generations. Three different aspects of preservation need 
to be considered: 1. maintaining the bits with no loss (or loss within acceptable bounds) as they move 
across systems as well as over time; 2. ensuring readability over time; and 3. providing for long-term 
understandability. We define temporal interoperability to be the ability to use data in the future along 
with similar data from the past and present. Clearly, all three aspects of preservation mentioned above 
are essential for temporal interoperability. In addition, standards are needed to ensure temporal interoperability. 
Cross-system interoperability or inter-usability of data from different sources and disciplines is desirable, 
but may not be essential in all cases. The standards needed to enable such cross­system interoperability 
should be demand-driven. It is impossible to predict how data will be used 50 years from now (or even 
10 years from now). Therefore, we need to make sure we do not lose essential information about data, 
preserve readability and understandability, and let the cross-system interoperability evolve as required. 
 8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Materials for this paper have evolved over many years of the authors work with NASA 
s Earth Science Data Systems and contain contributions from several people in the Earth Science Data 
and Information System Project, the Goddard Space Flight Center and NASA Headquarters. Encouragement 
and support from Martha Maiden (Program Executive for Earth Science Data Systems, NASA HQ) and Dawn Lowe 
(ESDIS Project Manager) are gratefully acknowledged. Data for Figure 4 were provided by the Marc Imhoff 
(Terra Project Scientist) and Claire Parkinson (Aqua Project Scientist). We thank Jeanne Behnke (ESDIS 
Deputy Project manager for Operations) for her review and comments on a draft of this paper.  9. REFERENCES 
[1] NASA 2006, 2006 NASA Strategic Plan , Page 8. [2] NASA 2006, Data and Information Policy , in Earth 
Science Reference Handbook, pp 35-36. [3] Ramapriyan, H. K. 2003, NASA s Earth Science Data Systems 
Past, Present and Future, IGARSS 2003, Toulouse, France (July 21-25). [4] Ramapriyan, H. K. 2009, EOS 
Data and Information System (EOSDIS): Where we were and where we are, in Earth Observer, July-August, 
Vol. 21 Issue 4, http://eospso.gsfc.nasa.gov/eos_homepage/for_scientists/eart h_observer.php. [5] H. 
K. Ramapriyan and G. R. McConaughy 1991, Version 0 EOSDIS -An Overview, Technical Papers, ACSM-ASPRS 
Annual Convention, Vol. 3, pp 352-362. [6] National Research Council 1995, A Review of the U.S. Global 
Change Research Program and NASA s Mission to Planet Earth/Earth Observing System, National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C. [7] M. E. Maiden et al 2000, NewDISS: A 6-to 10-year Approach to Data Systems and Services 
for NASA s Earth Science Enterprise, Draft Version 1.0, NASA, February 2000. [8] M. Esfandiari et al 
2006, Evolution of the Earth Observing System (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), IGARSS 2006, 
Denver (July 31 Aug 4). [9] H. K. Ramapriyan et al 2009, Evolution of the Earth Observing System (EOS) 
Data and Information System (EOSDIS) , in Standard-Based Data and Information Systems for Earth Observation, 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, L. Di and H. K. Ramapriyan eds. [10] FGDC 2002, Content Standard for 
Digital Geospatial Metadata: Extensions for Remote Sensing Metadata, FGDC­STD-012-2002. 10. GLOSSARY 
OF ACRONYMS Acronym Meaning ACCESS Advancing Collaborative Connections for Earth System Science AIRS 
Atmospheric Infrared Sounder API Application Program Interface ASTER Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission 
and Reflection Radiometer ATBD Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document DAAC Distributed Active Archive Center 
DMR Detailed Mission Requirements ECHO EOS Clearing House ECS EOSDIS Core System EDOS EOS Data and Operations 
System EOS Earth Observing System EOSDIS Earth Observing System Data and Information System ERS European 
Remote Sensing Satellite ESDSWG Earth Science Data System Working Groups ESDIS Earth Science Data and 
Information System ESDS Earth Science Data Systems ESE Earth Science Enterprise ESIP Earth Science Information 
Partner FGDC Federal Geographic Data Committee ftp File Transfer Protocol FY Fiscal Year GCMD Global 
Change Master Directory GDEM Global Digital Elevation Model GeoTIFF Geographic Tagged-Image File Format 
GES-DISC Goddard Earth Science Data and Information Services Center Giovanni GES-DISC Interactive Online 
Visualization ANd aNalysis Infrastructure GSFC Goddard Space Flight Center  Acronym Meaning GloVis Global 
Visualization Viewer HDF-EOS Hierarchical Data Format for EOS ICD Interface Control Document IMS Information 
Management System IRD Interface Requirements Document LP DAAC Land Processes Distributed Active Archive 
Center MEaSUREs Making Earth System data records for Use in Research Environments MISR Multi-Angle Imaging 
Spectro-Radiometer MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer NCSA National Center for Supercomputing 
Applications NewDISS New Data and Information Systems and Services NetCDF Network Common Data Form NWP 
Numerical Weather Prediction NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration OA Operations Agreement 
PI Principal Investigator REASoN Research, Education and Applications Solutions Network ROSES Research 
Opportunities in Space and Earth Science SEEDS Strategic Evolution of Earth Science Enterprise Data Systems 
SIPS Science Investigator-led Processing System SPG Standards Processes Group TRMM Tropical Rainfall 
Measuring Mission UARS Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite U.K MET United Kingdom Meteorological Office 
USGS United States Geological Survey WIST Warehouse Inventory Search Tool XML Extensible Markup Language 
  
			