
 New Method Using Wikis and Forums to Evaluate Individual Contributions in Cooperative Work while Promoting 
Experiential Learning: Results from Preliminary Experience Xavier de Pedro Puente Department of Ecology, 
University of Barcelona Avda. Diagonal 645 08028 Barcelona. Catalonia. Spain +34 93 4021508 xavier.depedro@ub.edu 
Abstract This paper shows a new method for using Wikis, forums, and other web-based productivity tools 
in blended learning strategies [20][22] to promote the acquisition of competences in Higher education 
[4] while enhancing experiential learning of students [16] in social collaborative knowledge building 
scenarios. This methodology also facilitated the grading of student individual contributions in cooperative 
work, helping to detect any shortcomings that may prevent student active involvement in their learning 
process, allowing to conduct not only product evaluation but also process evaluation. Based upon previous 
successful experiences, the free, on-line software platform, TikiWiki CMS/Groupware, was selected to 
achieve this methodology. [5][6][10][11]. Students had to think about What's the 'type of contribution' 
that I'm going to make right now? before submitting new contributions in forums, comments, or document 
editions (either text or spreadsheet based). Each student's contribution type and size (in bytes) was 
stored in a log on the website, and could be queried, filtered, and exported for further analyses. The 
method was tested on an Environmental Sciences course, and its strengths and weaknesses are discussed 
in the paper. The method description includes a suggested process to convert student contributions (type 
and size) into numerical grades. However, the main potential of this method is not just final assessment 
for student accreditation, but serving data for tutorships with students along the process of the learning 
activities, in order to detect and revert whatever handicaps that prevented some students improving their 
contributions to the group work or cooperative learning in time (much prior to assignment submission 
to teacher). This preliminary study resulted in a three-times greater time investment by teachers. Further 
data needs to be collected to better estimate the true costs of this new method. Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. WikiSym 07 October 21 23, 
2007, Montréal, Québec, Canada. Copyright &#38;#169; 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-861-9/07/0010 $5.00. Categories 
and Subject Descriptors D.2.2 [Design Tools and Techniques]: User interfaces. H.3.1 [Content Analysis 
and Indexing]: Indexing methods. H.4.1 [Office Automation]: Groupware, Spreadsheets, Word processing. 
I.7.1 [Document and Text Editing]: Document management. K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Collaborative 
learning. General Terms. Measurement, Human Factors, Design, Experimentation Keywords Experiential-reflective 
learning, Knowledge building, Assessment, Individual Contributions, Computer Supported Cooperative Learning 
(CSCL), Action log, Tikiwiki CMS / Groupware. 1. Introduction This paper describes using wikis, forums, 
and other computer tools to help teachers evaluate individual student contributions within groups or 
cooperative learning environments. This approach enhances the acquisition of competences in Higher education 
[4] and causes students to better think about the type of contributions they make (or planned to make) 
in groups, as part of blended learning scenarios [20][22]. 1.1 Conceptual framework The "experiential-reflective 
learning" pedagogical model underlies this project [16]. This model, initially designed at the University 
of Harvard, is not well known in higher education, despite its enormous potential. It allows for teaching 
with a student-centered approach, promoting each student's capacity to learn and enhancing the development 
of creative and critical thought abilities. The experiential-reflective learning occurs when a student 
observes and reflects on a prior experience, and then performs some type of abstraction, thereby integrating 
those reflections with prior knowledge. These abstraction are used as guides for subsequent actions. 
The experiential-reflective learning describes the acquisition of knowledge in a cycle of learning of 
four successive phases: (1) "Concrete Experience", (2) "Reflective Observation", (3) "Abstract Conceptualization", 
and (4) "Feedback or Active Experimentation". Kolb's model of these four phases is a simple description 
of the learning cycle that shows how the experience (1) is translated through the reflection (2) into 
concepts (3), that, in turn they are as guidelines for feedback or active experimentation, and ultimately 
to plan new experiences or create alternate actions(4). In this method, the processing of concepts, competences 
and acquiring of attitudes is understood from the point of view of the students. In the experiential-reflective 
cycle, students are asked to define the type of contribution they made (or are making), when they interact 
with their companions (when discussing or editing documents). Students agreed that the community does 
help them learn more and faster [2]. They were also more conscious of contributions they made (and of 
what type), since these contributions were the basis by which they were going to be evaluated. Additionally, 
they were required to be self-motivating in order to make significant contributions to the electronic 
discussions or when editing a group document. Our premise was, by helping students be more conscious 
of its own learning process, they can obtain better learning results [18]. Therefore, our objectives 
were to: (a) Stimulate the experiential-reflective learning of students by forcing them to answer the 
question "What type of contribution is the one that I am going to do or I am doing myself right now?"; 
and (b) Assist teachers in assessing the individual contributions of students, both individual and collaborative, 
when the teacher was not present during the contribution. 1.2 Computer tools to support the project 
Recent years have seen a significant increase in the use of computer tools for collaborative work in 
university educational environments [12][6][1]. In this process, the problem is used to be located at 
the learning of the tool, in a first instance. This comprises from forums usage to spaces like "Wikis" 
[3][8][9], including more complete environments as the corresponding to the e-portfolios [11]. And most 
students are not used to them at all yet. After introducing students to these computer tools, it becomes 
important to ensure that each student's contribution is not based upon simply copying and pasting information 
from other sources. Additionally, students should use the tools to explore and contrast opinions, not 
merely list them. Although computer tools can help students take a more active role in collaborative 
construction, simple participation by using these tools does not guarantee learning and the construction 
of knowledge [23]. Teachers also tend to miss the more elaborate contributions; those that involve complex 
interactions in which doubts are expressed, problems &#38; suggestions are proposed, and the participants 
use prior information to develop new hypothesis and alternatives. An additional, more difficult problem, 
may arise: monitoring and evaluating students' activities [14][21], beyond a simple log of students connections, 
which pages they have seen, or documents downloaded [17]. Indeed, the teacher that develops an activity 
of social knowledge building with these tools [10], can be found in a complex situation by the own nature 
of these tools which are not ready for such uses.  2. Methods 2.1 Teaching scenario This method was 
studied using the 2005/06 course, "Evaluation of Environmental Impact", from the 6th semester of Environmental 
Sciences degree at University of Barcelona, Spain (http://uniwiki.aia06.ourproject.org). The course contained 
52 registered students, divided into groups of 20, 19 and 13 students (groups T1, T3 and T4, respectively). 
The author of this paper served as the teacher for groups T3 and T4. Only results for group T3 are included 
in this paper, since there seemed to be no relevant differences between both groups. The project developed 
in the practical classes of this subject (3 credits out of 9 when including theory). Students were required 
to integrate knowledge obtained from prior university degrees or from their own experiences. The assignment 
for each group was to collaboratively create a document that relates to a system of environmental management, 
such as an environmental audit or a plan of environmental improvement (these examples were used by a 
previous course and this course, respectively). This work comprised 30% of each student's final grade 
for the class. The work shown here was from January until July 2006, and included some meetings in person 
with students (1 meeting in weeks 2, 5, 8 and 12) as well as days of autonomous work, from weeks 2 to 
11 (Figure 1). Figure 1. Action plan of the eyewitness sessions with students and faculty. For more 
information, see text. Students were requested to choose one or more contribution type, from a semi-closed 
lists (Table 1). They could also suggest new contribution types to be added to the list during the first 
weeks of the course, if teachers agreed. Table 1. List of contribution types used in the project. ("I" 
stands for Contribution importance in evaluation; the more asterisks, the greater relative importance) 
I Contribution type Description Others (report) Other contribution type not listed in the menu at present 
(report which one to teachers) * Organizational aspects Proposals and other questions related to the 
organization of the work team, scheduling,.... * Improvements in markup Improvements in markup, spelling, 
etc. (bear in mind that final document quality for printing (nicer tables, paginated table of contents, 
page markup...) will be performed at the end * Support requests Simple questions, help requests, etc. 
without too much making of previous information ** Help partners Help group or course mates who asked 
questions, requested support, formulated doubts, etc. (group or course forum) ** New information New 
information has been added to text or discussion *** New hypotheses New hypothesis has been prepared 
from preexisting information, and possibly, some new information (if so, mark option ' New information 
' also) *** Elaborated questions and new routes to advance Elaborated questions and new ways to move 
forward in the work which they were not taken into account previously (not just simple questions or elementary 
requests of support) *** Synthesis / making of information Synthesize or refine speech with preexisting 
information  2.2 Technology deployed Tikiwiki CMS/Groupware v1.10 (http://tikiwiki.org, from now onwards, 
Tiki ) was used as the Web platform to support not eyewitness group activity from students, following 
other previous successful experiences [5][6][8][9][10][11]. Tiki is feature rich and versatile enough 
to produce the desired learning environment. Main used features were Wikis [3] with their Plugins, Forums, 
Comments and Spreadsheets with Contribution feature activated on all of them, on the student side, and 
Action log, in addition, on the teacher side. Other authors have explored other ways of using Wikis in 
education [6][19] and in other fields [13], but the methodology used in this experience is a novel approach 
that had never been applied up to date. Because it would be difficult for such a large group to meet 
in person and fully discuss every single issue that may arise during the 10-week period, students were 
encouraged to use the web platform to create and edit the document they had to write, and to maintain 
discussions by using forums or comments on Wiki pages (Figure 1). For each new message that students 
made, they had to select the contribution type(s) (Table 1) from a form, that best identified their message. 
Similarly, when editing a Wiki page, Tiki spreadsheet or adding comments to any other object such as 
file galleries and image galleries, students were shown a similar form to identify the contribution type 
(Figure 2). Figure 2. Example of Wiki page at edition time, where a box with multiple selection of "Type 
of contribution is observed in the lower part, and a help icon on its right ( ) with an emerging explanatory 
pop up box. Information detailing each student's contribution (type/s and size), was recorded in the 
Tiki action log, and types could be re-associated by the teacher, if necessary. 2.3 Numerical measurement 
of individual contributions in cooperative group work Knowing both type and size of contributions provides 
an initial method of valuing each student's contribution. However, using size by itself has the limitation 
of not evaluating the quality of each student's contribution. Although two students can each include 
5 kilobytes of "synthesis of the information", (recorded as the same quantity and quality of contribution 
for both of them), one contribution could be more elaborate than the other. As in the use of any technology, 
this computer-mediated methodology should not be a substitution of evaluation by teachers. Rather, it 
can be used to assist teachers in their evaluation and grading of students. And if reflection of students 
is stimulated concerning their individual contribution types (and which ones are the most valued, according 
to the objectives of the course), as in this case, therefore it is more probable that students learn 
more and better, through their experiential-reflective learning cycle. They are more conscious about 
what they do know, or the abilities they already execute without difficulties, and about what they do 
not know or have not acquired yet. Each student's final grade was determined by multiplying the group 
grade by an individual weighting factor for each evaluation criterion (Table 2). This procedure allows 
teachers to have an extensive range of learning evidences, that include as much the process as the final 
product, with variety of focus, contents, methods and instruments, as it is recommended in the European 
Space of Higher Education. The group grade was determined by the overall quality of the final product 
delivered to the teacher a document with the printed version of the assignment --, as well as the teacher's 
impression of how well the group functioned. The weighting factor took into account the order of magnitude 
of the total bytes added and deleted by each student, respect the average on order of magnitude for the 
same criterion considering all the working group, so that it ranged from zero to 1. The order of magnitude 
was calculated from decimal logarithms, since the result indicates if contribution size was in terms 
of bytes, tenths of bytes, hundreds of bytes, kilobytes, ...  3. Results and discussion 3.1 Contributions 
in groups Students of group T3 carried out contributions, in general, for the entire 10 week period, 
in order to add new information, synthesize it and discuss organizing aspects, including some modifications 
to improve the presentation of the content along the process, by order of greater to smaller quantity 
of information contributed or suppressed. The average (± standard error) contribution size by student 
in the 10 weeks in total was 15.8 ± 3.0 kb for group T3, and 13.1 ± 3.9 kb for group T4. As for the suppressions 
of content, the averages were 4.8 ± 1.2 kb and 3.4 ± 1.2 kb, for groups T3 and T4, respectively. These 
numbers don't include information from the last edition work by the person with the editor-in-chief role. 
This person exported the final content from the Wiki into a word processing program, in order to paginate 
the final paper, including headers and footers, paginated table of contents, spelling and grammar checking, 
etc. This was taken into account manually by teacher, since it was not logged in database (Table 2). 
Table 2. Evaluation criteria, estimation methods and grading percentage. (P) (Process): information was 
obtained from discussion and document edition time; (FP) (Final Product): from printed final document 
(students wrote their names where they contributed) Criteria Estimation method % Teamwork (P): Sum of 
sizes of all contribution types 15 Synthesis &#38; clarity of information (P): Statement (corrected) 
of students, and sum of sizes of specific contribution type ( *** Synthesis / making of information ) 
30 Quantity &#38; quality of contributed information (a) (P): Statement (corrected) of students and sum 
of sizes of related contributions types ("** New Information", "*** New hypothesis", "*** Synthesis / 
making of information"), and (b) (FP): Revision by teachers of individual attribution statements of each 
section at final printed document 40 Formal quality of work (a) (P): Statement of the students and specific 
contribution size and type ("* Improvements of presentation"), and (b) (FP): Arbitrary scoring by teachers 
to last work by editors-in­chief to final document prior to printing 15  3.2 Individual contributions 
In general, the individual contribution from each student was very diverse, as expected in group works, 
oscillating from people that contributed with modifications from the order of magnitude of 50 kb of text 
(Figure 3, for group T3, which corresponds to more than 3 times the average of all the students), to 
others that were below 5 kb of content (a third of the average). However, few students formulated new 
hypothesis, or elaborated questions or comments which supposed new ways to move forward, or that supposed 
solutions to new situations that they did not know how to initially confront. Nearly all students contributed 
(either through discussions in forums or through document editions), but only between a third and the 
half of them (for the groups T3 and T4,  Figure 3. Contributions as additions of content, in bytes for 
group T3, for the whole period of 10 weeks. Same type of graph existed for deletions of content (not 
shown). respectively) contributed notably to the prior information added by themselves or their mates. 
This result is low, but satisfactory when compared to the earlier year: the same students made even fewer 
contributions according to their teacher [Pilar López, personal communication]  4. Conclusions 4.1 
Strengths and weaknesses 4.1.1 Strengths This methodology: (a) allows the students to participate in 
their own learning process, giving them greater opportunities for self-regulation of their effort invested 
to develop the specific and cross competences; (b) allows teachers to have quantitative data to characterize 
the contributions of each individual of a work group [15]; (c) means a substantial improvement respect 
to traditional methodologies in the ability to evaluate student learning when teachers are not eyewitness 
of the activities; (d) facilitates the personalized tutorship "in time" so each student can realize what 
aspects he/she has adequately developed, what other aspects have not been adequately developed (and remedy 
can be put in time); (e) allows teachers to distribute more homogeneously in time the task to supervise, 
validate or correct and feedback to students. 4.1.2 Weaknesses This methodology also released other 
aspects that may be considered weaknesses of the system. This methodology: (a) computes "quantity" of 
contributions (sum of bytes added, sum of bytes deleted) but it does not appreciate the intrinsic quality 
of the edited text. Therefore, the critical reading, validation and appraisal of students contributions 
by teachers is necessary; (b) can be inadequate if it is used to promote "police control" of students 
actions. The main potential of this method is not just in the final evaluation for student accreditation, 
but in serving data for tutorships with students along the process of the learning activities, in order 
to detect and revert whatever handicaps that prevented some students improving their contributions in 
time (prior to assignment submission to teacher); (c) could have some students who refuse to use it, 
if they previously have had a negative experience with Wikis. This may be, due to lack of adequate prior 
instruction about the best practices for using Wikis. [7]; (d) requires that teachers dedicate more time 
to the evaluation of the student contributions (type and sums of sizes). In our case, this required three 
times the amount of time to evaluate (only) the final product of a person or group without taking into 
account the whole process prior to printing [13]. This educational methodology might suppose between 
the two and three fold the time invested by the teacher in global for all the associated activities with 
the subject: preparation, development (eyewitness classes, tutorships, other duties), evaluation and 
trips. Further data from new study cases needs to be collected to better estimate the costs of this new 
information.   Acknowledgments Thanks to: Sylvie Greverend, for coding; Marc Laporte, for encouraging 
to attend this conference; Rick Sapir and other 3 anonymous reviewers for improvements to the text; all 
TikiWiki community for their great work and support with this powerful and versatile software; the Experiential­reflective 
learning workgroup in 2006 at the Institute of Education Sciences, University of Barcelona, for feedback, 
and Maria Rieradevall for Mentoring; Postgrade in University Teaching Specialization, for facilitating 
this work through its project; University of Barcelona Program of Improvement and Innovation in Teaching 
(Ref. 2005PID­ UB/27), for funding (http://gclub.ub.es/awikiforum/); and universityprevious projects 
for feedback. the related project mates in References [1] Alier, M. 2006. Lions and Tigers and Wikis, 
Oh My!. MoodleZine, July 2006. [2] Chang, C. C., 2003. Towards a Distributed Web-Based Learning Community. 
Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 40 1. [3] Cunningham, W., 1998. The wiki wiki web. 
WWW . http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WikiWikiWeb (Visited: September 15, 2004). [4] Confederation of European 
Union Rectors Conferences and the Association of European Universities (CRE).1999. The Bologna Declaration 
on the European space for higher education: an explanation http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/educ/bologna/bolo 
gna.pdf (Visited: May 2, 2007) [5] De Pedro, X., 2004. Dedicación temporal del alumnado a trabajos en 
grupo usando Wikis en entornos libres de aprendizaje colaborativo u Ofimática Web: análisis de un caso 
en ciencias experimentales. EDUTEC 2004, Educar con la Tecnologías: de lo excepcional a lo cotidiano: 
6. http://uniwiki.ourproject.org/dl70 (Visited: May 2, 2007) [6] De Pedro, X. &#38; Núñez, L., 2004. 
Redacción colaborativa de documentos para la enseñanza / aprendizaje semipresencial a través de herramientas 
libres: motivación, aplicaciones y experiencias concretas . 3rd Internacional Congress of University 
Teaching and Innovation (III CIDUI), II: 326. http://uniwiki.ourproject.org/dl32 (Visited: May 2, 2007) 
[7] De Pedro, X. 2006. Estimulación y evaluación del aprendizaje 'experiencial-reflexivo' del alumnado 
mediante la formulación explícita del tipo de contribuciones. Technical Report. Institute of Education 
Sciences, Experiential-reflective workgroup. University of Barcelona. http://gclub.ub.es/dl55 (Visited: 
May 2, 2007) [8] De Pedro, X., Rieradevall, M., López, P., Sant, D., Piñol, J., Núñez, L., Llobera, M., 
2006a. Writing documents collaboratively in Higher education using Traditional vs. Wiki methodology (I): 
QUALITATIVE results from a 2-year project study. 4th Internacional Congress of University Teaching and 
Innovation (IV CIDUI). http://uniwiki.ourproject.org/Article+Wikis (Visited: July 14, 2006) [9] De Pedro, 
X., Rieradevall, M., López, P., Sant, D., Piñol, J., Núñez, L., Llobera, M., 2006b. Writing documents 
collaboratively in Higher education using Traditional vs. Wiki methodology (II): QUANTITATIVE results 
from a 2-year project study. IV CIDUI. http://uniwiki.ourproject.org/Article+Wikis+2 (Visited: July 14, 
2006) [10] De Pedro, X. and Reyes, J. 2006a. TikiWiki en contextos educativos (I): las comunidades abiertas 
de aprendizaje cooperativo y reflexivo. V Jornadas de Software Libre, Polithecnic University of Catalonia 
http://gclub.ub.es/dl52 (Visited: June 20, 2006). [11] De Pedro, X. and Reyes, J. 2006b. TikiWiki en 
contextos educativos (II): Los sistemas de evaluación de los aprendizajes. V Jornadas de Software Libre, 
Polithecnic University of Catalonia http://gclub.ub.es/dl53 (Visited: June 20, 2006) [12] Godwin-Jones, 
R., 2003. Emerging Technologies: Blogs and Wikis: Environments for On-line Collaboration. Language Learning 
&#38; Technology 7 (3): 12-16 [13] Goodnoe, E., 2005. Wikis Make Collaboration Easier. InternetWeek (http://www.informationweek.com), 
Aug. 29, 2005 [14] Gunawardena, Ch., Lowe, C. &#38; Anderson, T., 1997. Analysis of a global online debate 
and the development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in 
computer conferencing. J. Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 395-429. [15] Johnson, R. T., &#38; 
Johnson, D. W., 1986. Action research: Cooperative learning in the science classroom. Science and Children, 
24, 31-32. [16] Kolb, D.A. 1984. Experiential learning: experience as the source of learning and development. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. [17] Milani, C. and Mazza, R. 2006. Have you got GISMO?. 
MoodleZine July 2. [18] Monereo, C. &#38; Barbera, E. 2000. Diseño instruccional de las estrategias de 
aprendizaje en entornos educativos no-formales. At Monereo et al. Estrategias de aprendizaje. Madrid, 
Visor/Ediciones de la Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. [19] Notari, M. How to Use a Wiki in Education: 
Wiki based Effective Constructive Learning . In Proceedings of the 2006 International Symposium on Wikis 
(WikiSym'06) (Odense, Denmark, August 21-23, 2006). ACM Press, New York, NY, 2006, 131-132 [20] Osguthorpe, 
R.T.; Graham, C.R. 2003. Blended Learning Environments: Definitions and Directions. Quarterly Review 
of Distance Education, 4(3), 227-233. [21] Scardamalia, M. 2004. CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In Education 
and technology: An Encyclopedia (pp. 183­192). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. [22] Thorne, K. 2004. Blended 
learning :how to integrate online &#38; traditional learning. London. Kogan Page. [23] Verdú, N. &#38; 
Sanuy, J. 2006. Análisis y comparativa cuantitativa y cualitativa de foros virtuales realizados en dos 
plataformas distintas (WebCT y Sakai) en los primeros cuatrimestres de los cursos 2004/05 y 2005/06 en 
la UdL (Universidad de Lleida). IV CIDUI. http://eprints.upc.es/cidui_2006/pag/eng/prop_llegir_pu blic.php?idioma=eng&#38;prop_id=219 
(Visited: July 14, 2006 
			