
 Nightmare on WebStreet ~ Lids L. Larsen Coordinator, On-1inebformation Resources and Web Services Academic 
Information Technology Services University of Maryland College Park MD 20742-2411 lida_larsen@umaiI.umd.edu 
301.405.2936 (W) 301.3 14.g220 (fax) David J. Henry Manager, Academic Sofiare Integration and Development 
Academic bformation Technology Services University of Maryland College Park MD 20742-2411 david_heq@umail.umd.edu 
301.405.6850 (W) 301.314.9220 (fax) Abstract The importance of eficient and eflective website maintenance 
must be stressed in all avenues of web support. The web sta~at the Universip of Ma~land has made this 
apriori~ in all of their web training e~orts andfollow-up web services. Critical issues for efective 
website maintenance must be dealt within thepolicy setting, construction and implementation stages of 
development and must be supported by appropriate training and tools for many shill levels. Specl~c issues 
as they relate to website maintenance that will be dkcussed in thk paper include: Identi~ing Information 
(who owns it and who neeh i~ . Organizing Information for the qected audience and others) Publishing 
Information @olicia, guidelines, trainin~ Maintaining Information (the @ to surviva~ Design and Implementation 
Tools (created for Dr. Average NonTechie) General Recommendations  Nightmare on WebStreet or Friday 
the 13th 365 days a year -a web SW perspective after four years experience in maintaining a major university 
website. There was a time when we spent significant time updating and reprinting annual publications. 
We could target specific publications for specific user groups. We akeady had more work to do than was 
humanly possible. Then we turned the corner and there was the Web. Welcome to Nightmare on WebStreet! 
 When we found WebStree~ we thought it was a great way to publish documents, keeping the on-line version 
rdways up-to-date. There would be no more expensive bills for printing because users could print items 
at their own expense whenever they needed a hard copy. Then we discovered how difficult it is to train 
information owners to think in electronic publication terms. They still wanted to start with paper and 
convert it to the Web. Once it was on-line, they forgot it needed to be maintained. We dso discovered 
that many documents still needed to be available in hardcopy formats for legal and user access reasons. 
Transitioning from print to web is detouring us through a myriad of back alley issues. When we found 
WebStree4 we thought it was a great way to publish information in a single on-line source to provide 
a coordinated one-stop-shop approach to providing information. Then we discovered how. difficult it was 
to identify the information, who actually . owned i~ where ownership overlapped, and then how to Permission 
to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or 
distributed for direct commercird advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the tide of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, rquires a fee antior specific permission. ~1 01998 ACM 
1-58113-066-6/98/0010...$5.00 I I 1 I 157 I Nightmare on WebStreet organize access to it so users could 
fmd the one tidbit they needed. When we found WebStreet we thought it was a great way to market our institution 
(fill ti departmen~ club, hobby, research, etc.) to the world. Then we discovered that every department 
and individual program and every other unit and person thought the same thiig. Everyone wanted to be 
on the homepage so they could be seen and our job became more political than fin. Gate keeping and filtering 
issum became paramount to our work. As we continued down WebStree4 we cotimed that critical issues for 
effective website maintenance must be dealt within the policy setting, construction and implementation 
stages of web design and development and must be supported by appropriate training and tools for many 
skill levels. There are websites for all ~es of purposes: product or organization marketing, seining 
as an information resource, publishing research results, publishing artistic creations and more. As the 
types vary, so do certain aspects of the site. Some sites are flashy while others are not. Some sites 
contain hundreds of pages while others contain ody a few. Some sites are focused more on the content 
while others are focused on appeamuce. Independent of all else, all of these sites require that attention 
be given to the following issues: . identi~ing information (who owns it and who needs it) organizing 
information (for the expected audience and others) . publishing information @olicies, guidelines, training) 
maintaining information (the key to survival) where help can be obtained The remainder of this paper 
addresses, in turn, each of these issues.  Ident~ng Information Planning where the street leads: zoning 
and pubtic hearings Both information owners and users can help you identi~ data for your website. It 
is critical to think 1 Larsen-Henry about the data from both perspectives in order to determine the data 
chk that can be provided as well as those needed by the user. The web developer must f~st of all bean 
information architect constructing a website where owner and user needs are both met. Owners. Once the 
information is identified it is necessary to ask Who owns it? It is important to think in terms of data 
chunks for this process. You may believe that you own the annurd orientation guide because you pubfish 
it in hardcopy every year. In reality, the data chunks that make up this document are obtained from units 
across the campus who are responsible for them. If you create an on-line orientation guide using tils 
information and then one of the units changes a data chunk, how will you be notified in a timely fashion 
in order to make the changes on your website? For example, procedures to activate a lib~ card may change 
at any time. It is far better to negotiate with the Library to provide a suitable webpage about library 
card activation procedures to which you can N than to duplicate this information on your own webpages. 
Whenever possible, information I . owners shodd be raponsible for maintaining their own data chunks on-line. 
. Users. Identi&#38;ing the potentird users of the information is also important for the web style and 
organization. Different audiences may have different objectives in their use of the information. fiowing 
who needs/wants data will also help in knowing how to I chti and organize it. It is also important to 
remember that you should not @to make your website < appropriate for everyone who might visit it. Prioritize 
your audiences and design appropriately. Some information may be specifically public and some may be 
private . This will also help determine how data is chunked. Format. The current format of the information 
may dictate how that data should be converted to viable and maintainable websites. Most campus information 
resides in bear fashion. For example, campus maps, catiogs, press releases, and MAC documentation were 
originally created for hardcopy publication. Placing these items on the web requires consideration of 
how they can be most effectively used. This is especially true if users will need to print the webpage. 
h some cases it may be preferable to provide multiple formats, one for ease of viewing, one for ease 
of printing, and potentially, one for dotioading to their own desktop. Multiple formats does mean multiple 
maintenance, therefore care should be taken to keep them to a minimum -using rdtematives only when necessary 
and appropriate. 15s I I I Larsen-Henry Nightiare on WebStreet I Database Access. A best solution in 
some cases is to house the information in a database that can be queried via a web form with webpages 
created and displayed on the fly. A database solution is nearly rdways best for directory information. 
It may answer the data needs for print publications as we~. Incorporating web form update capability 
for the database may dso help to keep it well maintained. Policies. Class projects, College websites, 
student theatre schedules, and athletic headlines all offer different challenges for policy. Three critical 
questions that must be answered are: . What policies are necessary to control who can publish wha~ and 
in what formats? ; . What policies are necwsary for information owners to accept responsibility for 
providing and maintaining their information on-line? What policies are necessary to identify information 
owners and protect their intellectual prope~? These policy decisions should be negotiated with information 
owners, web developers, and legal offlce~ and may be unique to each institution and even to each type 
ofwebsite.  Organtiing hformation Butiding the foundation, grading and Ia@ng the roadbed, planning 
the odoff ramps. Occasionally, organtiing information for the web may be as simple as breaking a linear 
document into the same headings/chapters as the original and providing navigation between sections. If 
the linear document is to be viewed in a linear fashion you may wish to include a dowrdoadable single 
file version. Often the organtition must be unique to the intended use of the information by the intended 
audience. Granularity. The best way to start is with each snotiake crystal of data and identi~ (with 
your users) whether they need the snotiake design, Frosty, the ski slope, the raging bltiard or some 
combination of these and (with your owners) both topical and administrative components. Paths and Alleys. 
Multiple paths, or filters, to the data may be needed. hformation can be orgtied topically (snowflakes, 
snow creatures, snow sports, snow pee@, snow storms), administratively (snow services, snow 1 information, 
snow academics) or filtered for specific user groups (snow watchers, snow players, snow haters, ,. Frosty 
Fan Club). Here s an exercise to try: List each data chunk on three separate 3X5 cards and ask users 
to orgtie one stack by topic, one by administration, and one by user ~oup. Provide paperstrips for linking 
within the organtied structure because some data chunks may be appropriate for more than one sub-filter. 
Archives. Data on the Web is always being updated. It is one of the blessings of working in web publication 
that you can update your site in the blink of an eye. In with the new and out with the old --well, sometimes! 
Some information changes are inclusive and need not be documented. Others may require that information, 
either in total or in chunks, be archived for fiture reference. Examples of tils are news sources, press 
releases, and undergraduate catiogs which, by the way, are legally binding documents. If the information 
will require archives, they should be planned in the initial website design. Road Maps and Signage: A 
website usually requires some mechanism to assist the browser in getting around in the site. These may 
include a TOC (table of contents), a navigation bar, an index or search engine, .ad a sitemap. Navigation. 
Most websites provide a TOC and use a standard navigation bar employing text or graphic links. The TOC 
provides the overview of the website. The Navigation Bar is displayed on each and every page withii the 
site to help users fmd the information they need. Minimally, it should reflect the orgtiation of the 
website and link to the home institution, the unit home, to subsequent starting points within the section, 
key filter headings, and the index or search tool. Index, Search Engine, Sitemap. A simple dataset , 
may not require an index. However, as websites grow, both sitemaps and search engines become more important 
for assisting users of the site navigate and fmd what they need. Whenever , possible, the indexing methodology 
to be used should be decided in the early stages of planning.  Limiting Access. If any of the data is 
sensitive, private, !. or has limited legal access rights, mechanisms for its protection must be implemented 
before it is placed on­line. Poticy. hformation org&#38;ers put significant work into producing a usable 
website. Policies to protect their work should be considered. This is in addition to protection for the 
content and its creator(s) which is Nightiare on WebStreet copyrighted whether or not it is explicitly 
stated. Policies on the permitted uses of particular information should be considered an~ where appropriate, 
the policies should be included at the website.   Publishing Information Mxing the asphalt, patig the 
road, putting in the sidewalk, installing the signs. Presuming that the necessary informational content 
for the website is actually available, the information owners are in support of development of the site, 
au copyright issues have been resolve~ and the appropriate site organbtion has been determined, the job 
is still not yet completed. Now it is time to construct the html files, or webpages, that will comprise 
the website. Questions that should be both asked and answered before implementation include: If multiple 
people are involved Who controls what is published and when? Depending on the organkation and political 
structure of the group, it may be appropriate to estabKsh a review committee for all changes and postings, 
or, alternatively, a single editor can be given authority to manage the website. Should there be style 
guide and publication standards? If so, who sets them and who polices them? Generally, any site which 
involves more than one person should establish guidelkes. There may bean approved set of icons, backgrounds, 
and the like, as well as a statement regarding the use of certain stylistic or structural elements (e.g. 
frames, tables, navigation bars, etc.) Further, templates may be established so as to maintain a common 
look and feel for the site. Who should provide needed training for designers, developers and users? Ofien, 
the best approach to keeping a site current is to involve those most closely associated with the content. 
The best solution is to tmin the actual Mormation owner or hisher designee to implement and maintain 
the content. Tratilng requirements maybe minimal, especially if the information owner is enthusiastic 
about the electronic publication of hisher content. However, it is important to note that content owners 
need not be technicians. Easy to use web Larsen-Henry publishing and editing tools should be used to 
level the playing field between techies and non-techies. Who will respond to web site generated questions 
and comments? It is necessary to establish an email address for the purpose of responding to website 
generated email. h most cases, the address should be generic, meaning it should not be an individud s 
address, but rather a generic address for the unit producing the website (e.g. chemweb­editor@ati.univ. 
edu). A fiequentiy asked questions @AQ) page should be implemented to help reduce the volume of questions 
received via email.  Maintaining Information Street cleaning, repating, and repainting the lines Maintenance 
must be considered the key issue in web development even before the examination of the dat~ its owners 
goals or its users needs and the organimtion and publication of the information. Anyone who has been 
on the Web can attest to the fact that an munaintained website can be worse than no website at roll. 
h 1997, AltaVista noted that of the then 30 million webpages, five million of them had not changed since 
early in 1996 and nearly 500 thousand had not been updated since early 1995. Owner Authority. The person, 
or group, who owns the information is always the best person, or group, to maintain it. Whenever possible 
they should be designated as the maintainer. This may require that tools be provided to facilitate input 
by non-technical individuals or that webstaff is hired to work under their direction. Frequency. How 
often updates are required depends upon the information itself Data from the weather semice may need 
to be refreshed minute by minute while some information, like an electronic text of= and Prediudice, 
may never need to be touched again. If the information owner is responsible for the on-line information, 
he/she can make this determination. If someone else is responsible, a mechanism to have the page reviewed 
on a regular basis by the owner is critical. Note that archived data should be clearly identified and 
labeled to avoid inappropriate changes. For example: the University of M~land was once The University 
of Maryland at College Park. Most webpages on our system should reflect this change, 160 , { t I I 
I t , ,, , I (. I ! J ,, \ ,! ! , ,. T* ,... .V-z . . ....... Larsen-Hemy Nightmare on WebSkeet 
however, official university documents and reports react to problems and issues later. Who wfll maintain 
from the at College Park days must remah so noted. the pages and how ofien? What can be changed or updated 
and what not? Design. The website should be designed with maintenance in mind. Headers that frequently 
change should be text as opposed to graphics that will require technicrd expertise to update. For fiequentiy 
changing da% programs to display database queries, or the most current information, in web format should 
be used. The use of style sheets and templates can be helpful as well. Links. There are three kinds of 
links relative to a given website. Minks -references to pages or resources on your site by other sites 
 crosslinks -references to your site from within your site outlinks -references to otier sites from 
your site Procedures can be established to keep rdl crosslinks working. As the site is in your control, 
every effort should be made to avoid ever having broken crosslinks. The web changes every day. Any given 
webpage may be moved or removed at any time. As such, it is very likely that these references can go 
bad at any time as well. Fortunately a number of tools are available which can check a page or website 
for broken links @r. Watson (watson.addy.tom) and NetMechanic (www.netrnechanic.tom)). So long as you 
never remove a page or reorganke your website, you do not need to worry about broken Minks. If you do 
move, reorgantie or othewise change the Rs withii your website, you should noti~ sites who have linked 
to them if at dl possible. k addition, a redirect webpage that points browsers to anew location or notifies 
them of a deletion should be placed at the original ~ for a period of 6 to 12 months. hdinks are the 
most troublesome type of link to maintain as they are typically not under your control. Fortunately, 
it is possible to discover where the Minks are by using an htemet search (e.g. search Moseek for Iti 
<w). Of course, once you fmd these references to your site, you must still contact each maintainer to 
have the inlink reference corrected or deleted. Policies Again. What policies are necessary to keep your 
website from becoming a cobweb? It sbest to set guidelines before you implement your website than to 
 Design and Implementation Tools  Sbdard templates and style sheets are important for maintaining 
the integrity of the site and for ease of maintenance. If needed a graphic can be quicMy replaced if 
needed across the site by a quick substitution. New pages can be quic~y integrated with the same look 
and feel.  Planning and Organtiing Websites is the title of one of our most popular on-line tutorials. 
It is used as an element of nearly all of our Web Designer and Developer Programs. @ttp://www.inform.umd.edtiweb/plannin~ 
 Style guides should be implemented so everyone knows which fonts and graphics can or should be used 
within a document. h many cases, it is appropriate to consider the inclusion of publication manurd information 
and accessibility issues. ~ttp:llwww.infom.umd.edtistyleguide~  Mormation literacy guides help train 
users to evaluate both websites and the itiormation within them. fiowing evaluation criteria helps web 
developers critique their own work. @ttp://www.inform.umd.edtiiteracy9  Guides for citing electronic 
resources should be available in every academic community. @ttp://www.inform.umd.edtiib~o/cite9 Web 
postin~submittal tools maybe necessary to allow non-technical information owners to maintain their information 
efficiently. At Maryland we have implemented WebSpinner, a posting and editing tool, which is web forms 
driven. No W training is required to maintin websites on our centi web sewer. @ttp://www.umd.edticgi-b~ebSpinner9 
 Web publishing tools can be very helpful if the user has some basic knowledge of HTML and it is used 
correctly. Not rdl publishing tools are created equal and therefore, we provide a set of reviews for 
the Maryland community. It should be noted that this is a very difficult section for us to maintain appropriately 
since there are always new tools and i, 161 Nightmare on WebStreet Larsen-Henry changes in the old ones. 
@ttp://www.inform.umd.edtiweb~eviews~ Expiration tools can be helpful. Our WebSpinner tool allows web 
developers to set expiration dates for their files. Two months, one month, two weeks, one week two day, 
and one day before the expiration date, reminders are sent electronically to the file owner. If no expiration 
date has been se~ our system will electronically notifi file owners when their files are 1,2,3, and 4 
or more years old. While we d like to brag at our efficiency in providing this information to our WebSpinners, 
it must be said that they have not shown gratitude at being reminded when their files are old. Quality 
assurance tools are available. Some are: Syntax Checkers valsvc.webtechs.com validator.w3 .org Spell 
Checkers Dr. Watson -watson.addy.com Link Checkers Dr. Watson -watson.addy.com NeMechanic ­ www.netmechanic.com 
ADA Checker Bobby -www.cast.orflobby Security tools are important to many web developers today. Most 
websewers provide mechanisms to ltilt access to particular populations. The two most often used approaches 
to tils include access through useritipassword and access based on the intemet domain or address. The 
approach used in a given situation depends primarily on the intended set of users of the website. For 
instance, if the intended user population is widely distributed across the inteme~ the only viable approach 
is to use useridpassword pairs to grant access. If the entire user population is locrdtied to a particular 
intemet domain, this would be the best approach. Unfortunately, as more people are using commercial ISPS 
for access to the inteme~ restricting by domain does not always work. It is important to note that information 
for which restricted access is important should never be placed on the web until the necess~ protection 
mechanisms are in place.  General Recommendations Who owns the itiormation? ~ey should be We web developers 
and maintainers. Encourage self-sufficiency in tie information owners/web developers. Build a cohesive 
set of policies and follow them. Solicit input from users. The for maintenance should be estimated for 
all webprojects and built into the staffing. Replace inactive information owners/web developers. Email 
feedback mechanisms should be functioned email addresses or mail reflectors, not individual user names 
and addresses. Evolve Frequently Asked Questions (and Answers) for the website. Thank your information 
owners/web developers re@arly. 162 
			