
 ON THE HOT SEAT: PREVENTING STAFF BURNOUT BY ROTATING CONSULTING RESPONSIBILITIES Pat McGre or sB~~~~i~~$ 
ist Ann Arbor, Ml 48109 (.31.3)764-94.30 .---, -- - -­ %%%!%%(?%%%%n.bifnet ABSTRACT In the spring of1990, 
the MichNet sfaffof 4.5 full-time consultants werefacingcrificalconsulting burnout. The MichNet consulfanfs 
handled a large number ofconsulting phonecalls perpersonper day,answeredapproximately 1200electronic 
consulting messagesper monfh, and were having trouble geffing ofher fhings done,including new markefing 
responsibilities mandatedby fheMerit BoardofDirectors. Obstaclesincluded imbalanceof alla forwarded (becausethe 
recepfionisfs never knewwhoshouldgef fhecalls), notime fo spendon otherprojwfs duefoconstantinferrupfion, 
andlack ofcoverage during meetings,vacation, efc., duetoa lackofformal procedures. This paper shows 
the evolufion of fhe red dof sysfemfor providing consulting coveragein a changing and challenging environment, 
as well as providing inner space for thosenot on call af any prficular fime. INTRODUCTION Life as a 
consultant in the 90 s seems to be a case of too much work and too few bodies. At MichNet, Michigan s 
computer network, life is no different. We have a staff of four full-time and one half-time consultants, 
and handle consulting calls from users at nine state universities and many other affiliated organizations. 
In the spring of 1990, (just before we started taking statistics), we estimated that we handled approximately 
200 phone calls per month and some~:ng over 1100 electronic mail consulting messages. (Although 200 calls 
per month, something between 10 and 16 calls per work day, may not seem like a lot, our calls range n 
length from three to twenty minutes. Many calls require lengthy followup with our technical and network 
operations staff. Sixteen 20-minute calls ends up being something over five hours per day on the phone.) 
In the spring of 1990, we found ourselves on the verge of burnout. Symptoms included a loss of productivity, 
which we partly blamed on the constant interruptions from consulting phone calls. On top of our traditional 
consulting and documentation work, a new, expanded marketing push for the network would be adding additional 
responsibilities. Something had to be done. Our old, ad hoc method of handling phone calls simply wasn 
t working any more. We had always had a small staff, and rotated calls among the three or four consultants 
who were in the office. We had also always shared a large office among several consultants, so it was 
easy to tell who was there, to pass calls back and forth, and to keep the workload balanced. However, 
we had recently expanded our staff to 4.5 FTE, and moved to larger quarters, and so it was harder to 
tell where people were and who was willing and able to take calls. For the greater part of 1989 a;d early 
1990, over 80% of the;alls w&#38;t to two consultants, because they were easiest to pin Permissionfocopywithouf 
f~all orpart ofthismaterial isgranfedprovided fhat fhecopiesarenotmadeor disfribufedfordirecfcommerctiladvantage,theACM 
copyrightnoticeandthetitleoffhepublicafion andifsdate appear,and notice is given that copyhg k by permission 
of the Association ofComputing Machinery. To copy otherwise,ortorepublish,requiresafeeandjor specificpermission. 
Copyright 1991 ACM 0-89791 -454-6/91 /0010/0229...$1.50 Lookingfor Answers  s. . c.  o  ACM SIGUCCSXIX1991 
 229 9.49% Mark c1 68.35% Figure 1-Consultant Calls down at any given moment. Whichever consultant 
our administrative support staff found first, that person got the calls. There were several urgent problems 
to solve: . Productivity on other projects was low o There was an imbalance of calls to a few consultants 
 o There was no organized way to cover meetings, planned absences  o There was no organized way to return 
consulting calls which came to the office when no one was there, such as during staff meetings  s Staff 
morale was low, because of reduced productivity and feelings that phone responsibilities weren t distributed 
fairly 230* ACM SICUCCSXIX1991* 600***..0000O 1.27% Laura n Total Calls by Consultant, June 1990 - 
LOOKING FOR SOLUTIONS In our attempt to find a solution to these problems we came up with some pretty 
wild ideas. At one time we were seriously considering solving our sociological problem with a technological 
method using our electronic phone system where calls were automatically rotated to the next available 
line, consultants would have headsets, the administrative support staff would have flashing status lights 
to show who was on what line, and we would take advantage of every bit of technology we could find. Then 
one of our number, who tends to be able to make a diagram of anything, suddenly stood and started drawing 
a chart of the week on the board. Look, he says, there are five days in the week we . Looking for Answers 
 Name INOUTCONF 9101112 12 345 Notes (&#38;J@ @ @~ Laura B @ @@ Noc Conf, Room MarkD o @@ teaching 
at CRC Sarah G o all day Pat McG o @ @ 6?)@ RickS o @@ . BlackDotinticateslmatio. inoffice @ RedDotti&#38;catespnm,qphoneconsultat 
@ GreenDotinticatesback-.pphon.consultmt Figure 2-The Red Dot and five of us. What if we broke the week 
into shifts, one person taking two shifts per week, 9-1 or 1.5y Sometimes something is so simple you 
just don t see it. As we discussed the idea we elaborated it further: During the time that a person was 
on shift, he or she would be the first person in line to receive any consulting phone calls that came 
in. If we had a staff meeting during that time, the person on shift would be responsible for making call­backs. 
Other consultants would serve as backups for the principal person, but if someone was working on something 
and didn t want to be disturbed, he or she could tell the Administrative Support Team No consulting calls, 
please! And so the Red Dot system was born.  WHAT ARE THE RED DOTS ? At first we simply handed a piece 
of paper with our weekly schedule to our administrative support team, but they found that hunting for 
a scrap of System in Action paper when unworkable. consultant whiteboard all the phones were ringing 
to be We then began marking the on duty in red marker on the which acted as our locator, and which was 
easily visible from the central rweption area. Backup consultants were indicated with green marker. We 
discussed having colored plastic magnetic bars which would be a tidier way to indicate our shifts. During 
the very first week our system was in use, while we were trying to find a source for the bar magnets, 
One of our ingenious administrative support team discovered that Purchasing sold little red and green 
circular magnets, and she ordered in a supply of them. Soon we had all adopted the physical symbol of 
our shifts into our vocabulary Who s red today? was a common question, and red dots, became a weekly 
agenda item (sometimes drawn in on the conference room white board literally in red ink and round circles) 
during our staff meetings, when we would discuss changes in the schedule ~or the coming week. Looking 
for Answem . .  4)  ACM SIGUCCS XIX 1991 231 Using the little round magnets had a lot of advantages 
over marker or a bar magnet. People could show part-shifts easily. If, for example, one consultant was 
going to be red from nine a.m.to11 a.m., and someone else take over for her, the red dots and the grid 
system on our locator board could show this easily. If a consultant wanted to be green for only a few 
hours during the day, the locator board and the magnets could show that easily and neatly.  THE SYSTEM 
AND HOW IT GREW Over the ensuing months, we developed some rules for our new system. 1) Each consultant 
had a shift which lasted four hours. Consultants could freely trade hours or parts of shifts, but the 
basic unit was a four­hour block, and the consultant who was on duty was the primary person to answer 
calls during that time. This handled the problem of how to answer calls that came in while we were in 
meetings: the consultant who had the duty for that time was responsible for callbacks. 2) Anyone who 
wasn t urgently busy was expected to act as a backup for the person on duty. This would give the administrative 
support team someone else to hand calls off to if the on­duty person already had a call. Being backup 
was not nearly as onerous as being on-duty. Officially, the rotation was supposed to go to the next person 
in the alphabet after the person on-duty, but in practice the calls went to the other consultants based 
on whoever the administrative support team. 3) If you were working on a project and didn t want to be 
disturbed, you could bow out of backup duty. This was particularly helpful for people with writing projects 
or who had meetings to attend. However, continually avoiding backup duty was a major social faux pas, 
and could earn negative brownie points from your co­ workers. 4) We began to schedule exceptions to 
the shifts to account for vacations, meetings we didn t control, and soon one or two weeks in advance, 
at our Friday weekly staff meetings. HOW WELL DID IT WORK? After a year on the new system, we find that 
there are some substantial advantages to the system, as well as some bugs to be ironed out. Are the Problems 
Solved? When I asked my co-workers if they felt that the system helped with productivity, I got generally 
positive responses. Being able to structure their work week into times when the phone must be answered 
and times when it doesn t have to be has allowed people more time to work on other projects. Some folks 
felt they were still overworked, but that their work time was better structured and thus less stressful. 
Our mamger feels the system has worked very well in terms of effectively structuring work time and fairly 
allotting responsibilities. He also likes that the system is sdf-mamging  we work out scheduling difficulties 
without his intervention. He does attempt to keep track of how evenly the system is being balanced between 
consultants. Phone statistics help us keep track of how evenly our calls are being divided on a monthly 
basis. Someof us use our Red time to structure other tasks as well. For example, when I am red , I tend 
to concentrate on answering consultant e­rnail, because that is a task that can be done in small chunks 
and which doesn t suffer if interrupted. Editing the newsletter, on the other hand, needs a block of 
time in which I m consistently free of random interruptions. The imbalance of calls has been substantially 
reduced. As you can see in Figure 3, our load is much more balanced. The consultant who had been getting 
over 60% of the calls now gets approximate y 20%. He, in particular, feels that his time for working 
on other projects has been enhanced. With advance planning, we can now cover each other s meeting times, 
planned absences, and vacations so that there is nearly always a consultant on duty. If for some reason 
no-one can be in the office, such as during our staff meetings, we have an organizd method for ensuring 
call-backs to users. With advance planning, we can now cover each other s meeting times, Staff morale 
has improved as stress has been reduced and the phone load has been distributed more fairly. 0 Answers 
 232 ACM SICUCCSXlX1991 *   .. o e . l.od.ingfor With advance planning, we can now cover each other 
s meeting times, Our administrative support team is also in favor of the new system. They can locate 
the consultant on duty quickly and easily, there is always someone scheduled to take calls, and they 
no longer feel they are unfairly burdening one consultant or the other. They also very much like the 
visual system of indicating who s on , and like knowing who can and will take backup calls if the red 
person is busy. Are New Problems Created? The major negative drawback to this system is vacations and 
sick time. We have no organized way of paying back time when someone is out for an extended period. If 
one staffer has a consistent string of illnesses, her co-workers pickup the slack by taking over the 
red dot shifts, and we have no organized way to makeup that time. This can and has resulted in some resentment 
on the part of those who seldom take vacations or are seldom ill. There is also a problem in creating 
equity for our half-time consultant. She takes two shifts per week, just like the rest of us, but her 
time spent on the phone is proportionately higher than the rest cjf us. Since the other consultants act 
as electronic Postmasters for the University of Michigan, (answering online questions about electronic 
mail and troubleshooting problems with the electronic mail system) and thus have a large number of consulting 
messages to be handled on a weekIy basis, similar amounts of work need to be done, but our half-time 
staffer feels that she spends an unfair amount of time on the phone. We have also had some problems with 
ragged beginning and ending times. When polled about the new system, the administrative support staff 
were uniformly positive, but nearly all of them mentioned that people coming in late for their shifts, 
either in the morning or af ter lunch, created confusion. And, as one of our secretaries pointed out, 
there are unfairness in the system that are beyonci our control. As she said, The only problem is that 
users do not spread their calls out; one morning it could be very busy and that afternoon it could be 
very slow. Monday could be more busier than Friday, and so on. However, we ve found that over the month 
these inequities tend to even themselves out. Luokingfor Answers*@**** e~.....e.o  WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED? 
On the surface, the Red Dot system seems so simple it s hard to see how it can have made such a change 
in our lives. However, we learned some important principles that apply generally in preventing burnout 
and easing the work load. People Need Blocks of Time to Concentrate on Projects In a recent seminar on 
procrastination, Patricia Materka (author of Time In, Time Out, Time Enough ) pointed out that most people 
who procrastinate do so because they don t feel they have enough time to tackle a given project. Particularly 
with large or complex projects, staff need time to think about how to approach a project as well as time 
to work on it. Without a block of time free from interruption, staffers may not be able to forma mental 
plan for approaching a given task, and thus may not be able to make progress in completing it. In addition, 
people s work styles vary according to their personality types. Some people do not function well in interruptdriven 
mode, because once their concentration is broken from a particular task it may take many minutes for 
them to be able to focus in on it. In Type Talk , a book which explains the Meyer-Briggs Personality 
Index, we learn that some people cannot work productively without large blocks of time which are free 
from interruptions, and thus may experience extreme stress when their environment is chaotic. Even those 
who thrive on interruptions (such as myself) find that more can be accomplished in a more structured 
situation, even if the majority of the time is given to accomplishing several small tasks in a row, or 
by breaking larger tasks up into smaller units that can be picked up or set aside at will. Morale is 
Higher on a Level Playing Field Even if everyone is over-worked, staff morale will be higher if everyone 
feels that no one is more overworked than anyone else. As simple as it sounds, people respond well to 
fairness. In every response I got to my question about How well do you think the Red Dots are working? 
the word fair came up. We may not be able to solve the problem of too much work-and too few bodies, but 
everyone will accept the overwork e ACM SIGUCCS XIX 1991 . 233 with less complaining and less stress 
if the perception is that no one is getting an easy ride. In an unequal situation, the folks who are 
swamped will resent those who are not, and frequently the staffer who feels he or she is getting off 
easy maybe stressed by his or her own guilt feelings, as well as by the hostility which comes from his 
or her co­workers. A System Which is Easy to Understand Works Best The Red Dots, with their quick visual 
cueing for both our administrative support team and co­workers, is easy to explain and easy to put into 
practice. Thus, there are few mistakes in implementation and few times when calls get sent to the wrong 
person or lost because no one was responsible for them. A more complex situation would unnecessarily 
complicate our lives. According to Materka, Clutter leads to procrastination. Emotional clutter, as in 
an environment which is complex, not organized very well, or which is unfair or otherwise unsatisfactory, 
reduces productivity and increases stress and burnout. An easily understood system, and the resulting 
organization of the work week, helps keep psychological clutter down. A System Which is Easy to Manage 
Succeeds Best The nicest thing about our system is that we manage it ourselves. If someone is going to 
be out unexpectedly, we can use email and quickly rearrange the schedule so that coverage is maintained, 
swapping shifts or even hours, without having to wait for a manager to handle it. In a professional environment, 
it s important that staff feel they have some measure of independence and control of their own lives. 
In addition, our manager feels confident that the office is running well even when he is away on recruiting 
trips, and his confidence in us helps build team confidence and morale. In evaluating our Red Dots for 
this paper, we ve discovered that everyone feels there is a problem in the area of making up sick time 
or frequent absences. I suspect that we will soon work out a method to deal with this time eauitablv. 
,.  CONCLUSION Our Red Dot system may not work for everyone, but we found it to be an effective way 
of moving from a very informal office organization to one with enough structure to handle an increasing 
work load and more staffers. Within its simple organization we found that there were side benefits in 
morale, increased productivity and job satisfaction, and better relations with other working groups within 
our organization. There is a principal in time management which states that 20% of the effort produces 
80% of the product. In our case, we found that getting 20% percent of our workload under control resulted 
in a marked improvement in our worklives. . Looking for Answers 234 ACM SICUCCSXIX1991 ~ Q   s 
 
			