
 Organizational Ontologies to Support Semantic Business Process Management Agata Filipowska Department 
of Information Systems Poznan University of Economics a.filipowska@kie.ue.poznan.pl Ivan Markovic SAP 
Research ivan.markovic@sap.com  Monika Kaczmarek Department of Information Systems Poznan University 
of Economics m.kaczmarek@kie.ue.poznan,pl Xuan Zhou SAP Research xuan.zhou@sap.com Marek Kowalkiewicz 
SAP Research marek.kowalkiewicz@sap.com ABSTRACT The Semantic Business Process Management (SBPM) aims 
at automation of the Business Process Management life cycle with use of semantics and Semantic Web services 
technology. The key issue to fulfil this aim is to provide an adequate machine­processable representation 
of processes. In this article we present one of the most important elements of process description, namely 
organizational ontologies. Moreover, we discuss their role in the early phases of SBPM and illustrate 
it with a set of application scenarios. Categories and Subject Descriptors I.2.4 Knowledge Representation 
Formalisms and Methods: Representations. General Terms Design, Economics, Languages  Keywords Semantic 
Business Process Management, organisational ontologies, application scenarios 1. Introduction Business 
Process Management (BPM) includes methods, techniques and tools to support modelling, implementation, 
execution and analysis of business processes [23]. Nowadays, BPM is often combined with the Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) paradigm, as together these two approaches offer additional benefits. While BPM specifies 
business directions, goals and processes that define how the organizational resources (including IT resources) 
are used to achieve business goals, SOA offers a flexible IT architecture that may be easily adapted 
to changing business requirements and helps to leverage IT investments through provision of reusable 
components [19]. Although BPM together with SOA are believed to provide a comprehensive approach to manage 
business processes in an enterprise, currently the duet offers only little support for automation of 
the BPM lifecycle. It is especially apparent when it comes to smooth (automatic) transition from one 
phase of the lifecycle to another. For instance, the automatic transition from Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SBPM 2009, June, 2009, Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece. Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-513-0/09/0006.$10.00. the modelling to implementation 
is impossible due to insufficient technical description of a process provided by a business analyst, 
resulting from different perceptions of a process held by a business expert and an IT engineer. Similar 
problems may be also observed in other transitions, e.g. when the execution data (low level technical 
data) needs to be presented to a business analyst in order to allow for process re-engineering. Another 
important issue in business process modelling is caused by the freedom that business analysts have to 
name and describe process artefacts. Current business process modelling tools support neither restricting 
names nor using ontologies to describe process artefacts. Business experts when modelling processes often: 
use the same term with a different meaning (homonym); use different terms for the same concept (synonym) 
or use inappropriate expressions. In addition, different definitions of the same term may be used by 
various business analysts i.e. process creators. This leads to the fact that the modelled business process 
is fully understandable only to its creator. Furthermore, if multiple roles are involved in process modelling, 
they often use terms at different abstraction levels what results in non-consistent process models that 
are difficult to compare. In addition, if one would like to translate a business process model into another 
language, for instance from English to German, more problems would appear. Some terms are recognized 
as synonyms and the proper meaning of homonyms cannot be identified. Also, subtle differences in wording 
are very hard to translate. The research community postulates that an unambiguous and technically-sufficient 
description of processes modelled by business analysts could allow not only for assuring its common understandability 
and comparability, but also for their automated implementation which could decrease the effort of IT 
engineers required to implement the process, and in consequence lower costs of implementation of processes 
in general. This issue motivates further research in the area of the BPM lifecycle automation. The research 
on combining BPM and SOA, and ensuring the appropriate level of automation, is conducted by several research 
groups working in a European consortium SUPER1. The main aim of SUPER is to bridge the gap between business 
and IT worlds and enable at least semi-automation of the BPM lifecycle. The automation would enable shortening 
the implementation time and allow increasing the flexibility of enterprises understood as a quick adaptation 
to changes in business environment as well as customers preferences. In order to fulfil this aim, the 
use of semantic technologies within the BPM lifecycle, namely a concept of Semantic Business Process 
Management (SBPM), was proposed [11]. In order to implement SBPM, a few requirements need to be met. 
First of all, the main artefacts used within the BPM and SOA life cycle need to be semantically annotated 
and adequate interactions operating on these artefacts need to be defined. Therefore, as the main concept 
of SOA is a service, the Semantic Web services technology is utilised. Similarly, as a process is the 
core concept of BPM, the main semantic enhancements of BPM concern the description of processes, i.e. 
the description of a control flow of a process as well as description of its content. By process content 
we understand all artefacts that a process definition may refer to and that specify the business environment 
and organizational context of the process. The main goal of this article is twofold. First, the goal 
is to present the notion of organizational ontologies being a part of the semantic process representation 
for the needs of SBPM and aiming at providing vocabulary and constraints for describing the environment 
in which processes are carried out from the organizations perspective. Second, the goal is to demonstrate 
how the organizational ontologies may be used to support SBPM. In order to fulfil the defined aims, the 
article is structured as follows. Firstly, the related work in the area of representation of a process 
and process artefacts is discussed. In the following section the idea of SBPM is presented. Then, the 
description of ontology stack for the needs of SBPM based on the example of SUPER follows. Finally, organizational 
ontologies are presented, along with scenarios showing their possible application. In the last section, 
conclusions and insight into the future work are given.  2. Related work The process content depends 
on an organisation and its characteristics. Many researchers focused on development of models cataloguing 
an appropriate scope of information on companies that should be considered when describing organizations 
or their processes e.g. [4, 13, 24]. The mentioned initiatives focused not only on the scope of information 
to be considered, but also on how it should be represented. In the last few years there have been numerous 
initiatives attempting to capture the process-related, and in consequence also organization-related, 
information in a machine­friendly manner. Most of them focused on possible application of semantics, 
as ontologies were, and still are, perceived as a good way to capture the domain along with its relations, 
and in consequence bridge the gap between business and IT worlds [6, 1 http://ip-super.org 10, 5, 22, 
3, 2]. These various initiatives differ when it comes to the scope of the process description they intend 
to cover, the level of details of the ontology created, as well as the formalism used. One of the earliest 
initiatives was the TOVE project [7] that aimed at development of a set of integrated ontologies for 
modelling all kinds of enterprises (i.e. commercial and public ones) [6]. TOVE Common Sense Model of 
Enterprise included three levels: reference model with typical business functions (finance, sales, distribution, 
and administration), generic model (with such concepts as time, causality, space, resources), and concept 
model (e.g. role, property, structure). However, the granularity of developed ontologies may be perceived 
inconsistent and that hampers their potential application. The REA enterprise ontology [8], based on 
elements of the REA (Resource-Event-Actor) model, theoretical background of which comes from the field 
of microeconomics [18], is a specification of the semantics involved in a business process. The REA concepts 
and definitions are applied to the collaborative space between enterprises where the market exchange 
among two or more trading partners occurs. Although this ontology is considered to be one of the most 
promising business domain ontologies, a lack of a commonly accepted formal representation makes it useless 
for practice. Moreover, it is criticized for the lack of clarity and inconsistencies [14]. The main aim 
of the e3-value project [9] was to propose the methodology to help in eliciting, analyzing, and evaluating 
ecommerce ideas. Therefore, the e3-value ontology was introduced as a tool to help explaining the concepts 
used to represent e-commerce ideas. The ontology provides concepts for describing economic exchange among 
partners. Other e3-value extensions like e3forces, e3competences should be of particular attention as 
they intend to model more advanced organizational aspects. In another work [15] a contextual approach 
to ensure high flexibility of the enterprise ontology was proposed. The context involves seven domains: 
purpose, actor, action, object, facility, location, and time. The enterprise ontology provides a unified 
view of the enterprise as an aggregate of these domains. This ontology can be specialized into task ontologies 
or domain ontologies to meet particular needs of the enterprises. Although much work and effort was devoted 
to the creation of business and enterprise ontologies and the abovementioned initiatives may definitely 
provide an inspiration and foundation for developing organizational ontologies, to the best of our knowledge, 
there is no commonly accepted model that could be reusable in various domains. The development of a single 
organizational ontology describing all kinds of company s activities is difficult, if at all possible. 
Therefore, there exists a need for creation of a coherent ontology stack that would provide necessary 
semantics and, as organizational domain is subject to changes, also provide required flexibility. In 
consequence, it is better to apply modular approach to ontology development rather than to develop a 
single organizational ontology. Such an organizational ontology stack should be designed in such a way 
that there would always be a possibility to extend it, should a need for applying it in another domain 
emerge. Moreover, the ontologies should be developed bearing in mind their future application.  3. Semantic 
Business Process Management and the process representation 3.1 The notion of SBPM and the targeted lifecycle 
The aim of SBPM is to increase the level of automation within the BPM lifecycle and to provide support 
for both business users as well as IT engineers. These aims may be fulfilled taking advantage of the 
Semantic Web technologies (ontologies and reasoning mechanisms) and using Semantic Web services (SWS). 
As already mentioned, four phases of BPM may be identified, namely: modelling, implementation, execution 
and analysis. As the usage of semantic technologies does not affect these stages but rather increases 
the level of their automation and provides new functionalities, the division into the above mentioned 
phases applies to SBPM as well [25]. In order to fulfil its aims, SBPM needs a semantic representation 
of various artefacts used within all four phases. Within the first phase of SBPM, i.e. Semantic Business 
Process Modelling, ontologies are used to annotate business process models. The goal of semantic annotation 
is to specify semantics of tasks and decision points in the process flow. Within Semantic Business Process 
Configuration phase, semantic business process models are transformed in order to be deployed to a process 
engine. The ontological representation of a model provides a complex description of a process that allows 
for automated assignment of a composition of Semantic Web services able to fulfil the goal of each task. 
After this operation the executable process model is created and may be deployed to the process engine. 
Then, within Semantic Business Process Execution phase, the process model becomes ready for instantiation 
(i.e. execution). Taking advantage of its semantic description, it is externalized as SWS and made accessible 
to clients. Finally, Semantic Business Process Analysis phase involves the monitoring of processes aiming 
at providing relevant information on running process instances as well as process mining analysing already 
executed process instances in order to enable improvement of existing process models. The semantic annotation 
of the process and its space ensures that the process description is machine-readable and enables utilization 
of reasoning in order to query the process space on the higher level. In this paper, we primarily focus 
on the first two phases of SBPM and the scope of the semantic description of a process content that is 
required by them, as it is further discussed within the next section.  3.2 Ontology stack for the needs 
of SBPM The required semantic representation of a process, utilized during all phases of SBPM, mentioned 
in the previous subsection, may be divided into three main groups: process, organization-related and 
domain-specific ontologies. Process ontologies are created in order to describe the structure of a process 
(i.e. its control flow), whereas organisation related ontologies provide a description of artefacts that 
are utilised by or involved in the process (i.e. description of actors, resources, systems etc.). The 
domain ontologies provide additional information specific to an organization from a given domain. Thus, 
the domain ontologies extend the organisation related ones. Such an approach allows for future reusability 
of the developed solutions. The high-level view on the process description for the needs of the Semantic 
Business Process Management is depicted in Figure 1. In order to define more detailed dependencies between 
these general layers, the specific ontology stack defined for the needs of SUPER is considered. The SUPER 
modelling ontology stack, depicted in Figure 2, clearly indicates dependencies between process and organization-related 
ontologies. For the sake of clarity, the domain ontologies that extend the concepts of organization related 
ontologies are not depicted in the figure. Figure 1. SBPM Ontology Stack Within the ontology stack, 
each of the ontologies may be used in at least one of the SBPM phases. The modelling phase is supported 
by the ontologised version of popular modelling notations, namely sEPC of Event driven Process Chain 
[20] and sBPMN [1] of BPMN. The modelling and implementation phases are supported by the BPMO (Business 
Process Modelling Ontology) [20], being the core SUPER ontology, providing abstraction over ontologies 
describing popular modelling notations (i.e. sECP, sBPMN).  engine. The Process Mining Ontology and 
Events Ontology were developed in order to support the analysis phase of the entire cycle. Moreover, 
the UPO (Upper Level Ontology), being the upper ontology to the all mentioned ontologies, provides general 
concepts for description of processes, such as Business Domain, Business Goal, Business Function that 
are to be extended by organisation-related ontologies. The BPMO, sEPC, sBPMN and Events Ontology, in 
order to describe processes, are to use the concepts/instances defined within organization-related ontologies. 
Exemplary concepts/properties from the process modelling ontologies that currently point to the elements 
of organisation-related ontologies are shown in Table 1. Table 1. Exemplary concepts/properties from 
the process modelling ontologies that currently point to elements of organization-related ontologies. 
BPMO sEPC sBPMN hasBusinessGoal (a property of a Process and task, etc.); hasBusinessDomain (a property 
of a Process, task, etc.); hasBusinessFunction (as above); Resource (InformationResource, Document, 
ElectronicDocument, PhysicalDocument, MaterialResource, ITSystemOrApplication , Material, Physical-Asset, 
DataRepository); Swimlane; Lane; Participant; Role. hasBusinessResource (as above); OrganizationalUnit. 
hasPartnerRole (a property of GoalTask). They provide an additional inspiration and requirements to 
the organizational ontology layer defined in the next section.  4. Organizational ontologies layer 
The organizational ontologies should provide a basic vocabulary and structure for describing organizations 
and resources, define common types of divisions, roles and tasks, and define common types of business 
resources [12]. Therefore, they aim at providing vocabulary and constraints for describing the environment 
in which processes are carried out from an organization s perspective. As this environment is quite complex 
and encompasses various areas and different points of view on the organization, taking into account other 
approaches described in section 2, the organizational ontologies layer has been divided into a few subontologies. 
Each of the subontologies focuses on and describes different parts of the process space and may be easily 
extended if such a need occurs. In order to make sure that we create a consistent network of ontologies 
reflecting various spheres of enterprise structure and operations, the subontologies are based on compatible 
paradigms, have compatible degree of details, and include sets of alignment relations which allow data 
interoperability. The following subontologies were developed: 1. Organizational Structure Ontology (OSO). 
This ontology focuses on organizational structure of a company at the same time aiming at achieving domain 
independency. The OSO shows how elements of organization s structure work together in order to achieve 
organization s goals. It encompasses such information as: departments, employees, their responsibilities, 
resources used etc. as well as defines relations among them. 2. Organizational Units Ontology (OUO). 
This ontology provides a specification of typical units that may be found in a company. Along with the 
other ontologies (Business Functions, Business Roles and Business Resources Ontology) it provides extension 
to OSO. 3. Business Roles Ontology (BROnt). This ontology provides a common meaning of concepts related 
to roles featured by organizational members (i.e. actors). Each actor may play more than one role and 
these roles may change depending on the context. It also allows modelling both internal as well as external 
roles fulfilled by various actors. 4. Business Functions Ontology (BFO). This ontology provides a hierarchy 
of different functions that may be carried out within the company. It is supposed to enable vendor and 
domain independent classification of company processes and process fragments providing abstraction over 
single tasks constituting processes. 5. Business Resources Ontology (BRO). This ontology describes applications 
and resources that should be involved when carrying out certain processes or that may be results of certain 
task within a process. 6. Business Goals Ontology (BGO). Goals may explain why the processes exist in 
the organization; examples include customer satisfaction, growth, etc. BGO models a hierarchy of business 
goals and provides a set of relations between them to enable goal-based reasoning. We distinguish between 
a strategic goal, which tend to be long term and defined qualitatively rather than quantitatively, and 
an operational goal which is a step along the way (a milestone) towards a strategic goal. Goals can conflict 
with each other (if they cannot be satisfied simultaneously) and can positively or negatively influence 
other goals. There can be different levels of influence between goals.  We use WSML [26] as the representation 
language for the ontologies2. It offers a variety of language variants to be used depending on the desired 
application scenario. In particular, we have utilized WSML-Flight language variant as the most appropriate 
choice to meet our representation requirements. 2 Organizational ontologies can be found at http://www.ip­super.org/ontologies 
 Figure 3. Organizational Ontologies Stack [21] The dependencies between ontologies within the Organizational 
ontologies are depicted in Figure 3. Organizational Structure Ontology is imported by other ontologies 
constituting the organization ontology. In that, the Business Roles Ontology refers to the Role concept 
of OSO, Organizational Units Ontology extends OSO Org. Unit concept, Resource Ontology details the Resources 
used by the organization. Other ontologies, i.e. Business Functions and Business Goals Ontology directly 
import and extend UPO as shown in Figure 2.  5. Application scenarios This section provides examples 
of application and benefits that can be obtained by using organizational ontologies within the Business 
Process Management. 5.1 Use Case description Let us consider an example of a Digital Asset Management 
scenario presented in Figure 4. The aim of this process is the provision of digital content to end users. 
The entities collaborating in this scenario are as follows: i) DRM provider responsible for management 
of content rights; ii) Content provider, providing interested parties with relevant digital content; 
iii) Service provider responsible for storing the offer of the available content and distributing it 
via a service portal. iv) Content distributor, providing a final user with an access to digital content; 
v) Customer, representing the final user of the digital content. The service provider, based on a customer 
query on the digital content specifying among others the type of digital rights license the user is interested 
in, searches for the relevant digital content from several content providers. The search results are 
then presented to the user, who selects the content to preview or purchase. When modelling a process 
within SUPER Modelling Tool, its ontological description in the BPMO is automatically created. However, 
as it was already mentioned, BPMO describes mainly process structure and in order to obtain a full business 
process description also functions, resources, roles etc. need to be properly described. While annotating 
the process, a business analyst takes advantage of the organizational ontologies and the following aspects 
of the scenario are described using the proposed ontologies set:  Figure 4. Product Delivery Business 
Process . each actor in the scenario is defined by pointing to a concept from the Business Roles Ontology 
e.g. instance DRMProvider memberOf bront#Supplier . to each process the following attributes are attached 
(this information is further used when reasoning about the process): o a business function pointing 
to a functional area of an organization and activities performed e.g. bpmo#hasBusinessFunction hasValue 
bfo#Delivery; o a business domain pointing to relevant products and area of organization activities 
 e.g. bpmo#hasBusinessDomain hasValue bfo#DigitalAssetManagement; o a business goal defining the aim 
of the process and the KPI to be achieved or business policy to be obeyed as defined within the ontology 
e.g. bpmo#hasBusinessGoal hasValue goals#orderDelivered;  . to each task resources required by it in 
order to realize its goal are specified e.g. bpmo#hasResource hasValue breo#CRMSystem.  The organizational 
ontologies used during the modelling phase to annotate processes are utilized by several functionalities 
of SBPM (cf. Figure 5), which: i) support decision making, ii) facilitate reuse of modelling artefacts, 
iii) help ensuring compliance of process models to relevant regulations, iv) enable advanced analysis 
of process models, as further described. Figure 5. Application scenarios of the annotated business process 
models  5.2 Scenario 1: Decision making support The key challenge in decision making is having access 
to relevant information which is to be assessed in a particular situation. Such information is scattered 
in organizational processes and has to be manually collected from diverse sources for each individual 
case. By using the information and reasoning capabilities provided by the organizational ontologies used 
during annotation process, we enable business experts to quickly and expressively query the process artefact 
repository of their organization (cf. Figure 5, top). Some example queries for this scenario include: 
List all processes in the fulfilment area , Which processes use system x? , What resources are needed 
for running process y? , List all processes with conflicting goals. , How many transactions are carried 
out with a partner z on a monthly basis? [11].  5.3 Scenario 2: Reuse of process artefacts This scenario 
describes how the business expert can more effectively and efficiently query the process artefact repository 
in order to reuse the process patterns, models and fragments in process design (cf. Figure 5, centre). 
By using the machine processable representation of already modelled processes, when designing a new process 
the business expert can first query for existing business process patterns, generic high level process 
designs emphasizing business goals [16, 17], in search for the best modelling practices in the given 
domain. An example query for business patterns can be: Give me all business patterns related to Fulfilment 
Business Function where Business Goals involved are profileObtained and serviceActivated . An example 
business pattern that matches the query is shown in Figure 6. Annotations (denoted by circles) represent 
business goals that mark different milestones of the end-to-end process.  Figure 6. Service provisioning 
business process pattern The business expert can also query in the same way for existing models or process 
fragments - self-contained, coherent building blocks of a process model with a clear business meaning. 
In case there are existing process models or fragments that are similar to the desired end design, business 
experts can use them in their design in order to achieve a higher degree of reuse, compared to reuse 
of patterns. Based on the annotations from Figure 6, the user can perform further queries for finding 
existing process fragments that refine specified business goals. For instance, when selecting the task 
Provision Order for refinement, the query looks for models or fragments annotated by the goal Order Provisioned, 
enabling the user to embed the Digital Asset Provision: Download Process in the model, as shown in Figure 
7.  5.4 Scenario 3: Autocompletion of business process models In our work, we define autocompletion 
as a technique for finding and proposing subsequent process activities or process fragments to the modeller 
on the fly, during modelling. While the modeller creates the model, new activities are suggested to him 
by the modelling tool - based on the semantic process context information. Process context is comprised 
of Business Function and Business Goal annotations of the process model. All process activities or fragments 
matching the process context of the modelled process are suggested to the user during modelling in form 
of a list. The modeller can select an activity/fragment from the list which best matches his intention 
and include it in the current model. In this way, we provide modelling guidance to the modeller which 
leads to process models of higher quality and organization related content so as to improve the automation 
reduction of the actual modelling time. within the BPM lifecycle. In this paper, we have presented an 
organizational ontology  framework for SBPM which integrates different views of an enterprise. It consists 
of six ontologies describing different aspects of an organization. They are as follows: functions, structure, 
roles, units, resources and goals. Our ontology framework, in contrast to other approaches discussed 
in the related work section, Figure 7. Digital asset provision: download process  5.5 Scenario 4: Querying 
business policies This scenario covers querying for business policies defined according to the company 
strategy, which apply orthogonally to all processes of an organization (cf. Figure 5). Queries involved 
in this scenario retrieve all business policies (both mandatory and conditional) which match context 
annotations of the model being checked. This reduces the manual effort of creating an inventory of such 
policies for any given model. For checking which policies are relevant in a digital content provisioning 
process, the example query can be: Give me all business policies for Digital Asset Management Business 
Function where clients are minors and Business Goal associated belongs to Fulfilment . 5.6 Scenario 
5: Goal-based business process analysis Explicit modelling of organizational business goals allows us 
to assign one or more business goals to each defined business process [17]. The Business Goal Ontology 
provides relevant properties and relations required for creating business goal specifications. BGO defines 
the following goal properties: description, measure, deadline, priority, and goal relations: subgoal_of, 
supports, hinders, conflicts. In this scenario we utilize the concepts, properties and relations provided 
by the BGO in order to detect conflicts, redundancies, perform queries and gap analysis on process models. 
Example queries that can be answered using the business goal ontology include: Show me all processes 
that support a specific goal. Filter goals on the basis of a given deadline and/or priority. Show me 
all goals that have no business process linked (gap analysis). Show me all processes that hinder the 
achievement of a specific goal. Show me all conflicting/redundant goals . In this way we i) make sure 
that the conceptual business process models are consistent with the organizational business goals and 
ii) enable top-down traceability and bottom up linkage from processes to business goals.  6. Summary 
The challenge of combining BPM and SOA has attracted a lot attention both from the academia and the industry. 
One critical requirement is to build machine-readable and machine­interpretable representation of the 
processes and their is consistent and operational. Consistent in this case means that we have made sure 
that the ontologies are based on compatible paradigms, have a compatible degree of detail, and finally 
include at least partial sets of alignment relations which allow data interoperability. Operational means 
that the ontology specifications are available in a single, current ontology formalism (i.e. WSML notation) 
for which scalable repositories, reasoning support, APIs, and tools are available. By fulfilling the 
criteria of being consistent and operational network of ontologies reflecting various spheres of enterprise 
structures and operations, the described framework has been successfully applied in the Semantic Business 
Process Management field. By providing a use case on collaborative Digital Asset Management in the telecommunication 
sector, we illustrated the process of applying the organizational ontology stack and demonstrated the 
potential benefits of using the proposed ontology framework for modelling, reusing and querying tasks 
in BPM. By utilizing the organizational ontologies we have achieved better readability and consistency 
of process models, provided guidance to the design of domain specific ontologies, enabled improved management 
support and facilitated the design of process models of higher quality in less time. Our future work 
considers further alignment between the proposed ontologies as well as their extension in order to allow 
for their application also in more specialized domains requiring some specific description of the organization 
related aspects. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work published in this article was partially supported by the 
SUPER project (http://www.ip-super.org) under the EC 6th Framework Programme Information Society Technologies 
Objective (contract no. FP6-026850).  8. References [1] Witold Abramowicz, Agata Filipowska, Monika 
Kaczmarek, Tomasz Kaczmarek: Semantically enhanced Business Process Modelling Notation, SBPM Workshop, 
Vol-251, CEUR-WS, June 2007, ISSN 1613-0073 [2] P. Bertolazzi, C. Krusisch, M. Missikoff (2001) An approach 
to the definition of a core enterprise ontology: CEO. In: Int. Workshop on Open Enterprise Solutions: 
Systems, Experiences, and Organizations (OES-SEO 2001), Rome). [3] A. Burton-Jones, V. Storey, V. Sugumaran, 
P. Ahluwalia, A semiotic metric suite for assessing the quality of ontologies. Data &#38; Knowledge Engineering 
55(1), 2005. [4] B. Curtis, M.I. Kellner, J. Over, Process Modeling . In Communications of the ACM, 35(9), 
Sep. 1992; pages 75­ 90. [5] Jan L.G. Dietz, Enterprise Ontology. Springer, 2006. [6] Marc S. Fox, Mihai 
Barbuceanu, Michael Gruninger, Jinxin Lin, An Organisation Ontology for Enterprise Modeling. In: M. Prietula; 
K. Carley; L. Gasser (Hrsg.): Simulating Organizations: Computational Models of Institutions and Groups. 
AAAI/MIT Press, Menlo Park CA 1998. [7] Marc S. Fox, The TOVE Project: A common-sense model of the enterprise. 
In: F. Belli, F. Radermacher (eds.) Industrial and Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
and Expert Systems. LNAI 604, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 25­34, 1992. [8] G. Geerts, W.E. McCarthy, 
An Accounting Object Infrastructure For Knowledge-Based Enterprise Models. IEEE Intelligent Systems &#38; 
Their Applications (July-August 1999), [9] Jaap Gordijn. E3value in a Nutshell. Technical report, HEC 
University Lausanne, 2002. [10] Michael Gruninger, Katy Atefi, Mark S. Fox: Ontologies to Support Process 
Integration in Enterprise Engineering. In: Computational &#38; Mathematical Organization Theory 6 (2000) 
[11] Martin Hepp, Frank Leymann, John Domingue, Alexander Wahler, Dieter Fensel, Semantic Business Process 
Management: A Vision Towards Using Semantic Web Services for Business Process Management. Proceedings 
of the IEEE ICEBE 2005, October 18-20, Beijing, China, pp. 535-540 [12] Martin Hepp, Dumitru Roman: An 
Ontology Framework for Semantic Business Process Management, Proceedings of Wirtschaftsinformatik 2007, 
Karlsruhe, February 28 - March 2, 2007. [13] St. Jablonski, Ch. Bussler, Workflow Management - Modeling 
Concepts, Architecture and Implementation. International Thomson Computer Press, London, 1996. [14] J.C. 
Lampe, Discussion of an ontological analysis of the economic primitives of the extended-REA enterprise 
information architecture. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 3, 1 (March 2002). 
[15] Mauri Leppänen (2007) A Context-Based Enterprise Ontology. Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Business Information Systems, Apr 25-27, Poznan, Poland, 2007 [16] Ivan Markovic, Alessandro Costa 
Pereira, David de Francisco, and Henar Munoz. Querying in Business Process Modeling. SeMSoC Workshop, 
Sep 17-20, Vienna, Austria, 2007. [17] Ivan Markovic, Marek Kowalkiewicz, Linking Business Goals to Process 
Models in Semantic Business Process Modeling, Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International EDOC Conference, 
Munich, Germany, September 2008. [18] W.E. McCarthy, The REA Accounting Model: A Generalized Framework 
for Accounting Systems in a Shared Data Environment , The Accounting Review 1982. [19] Michael P. Papazoglou, 
Paolo Traverso, Schahram Dustdar, Frank Leymann: Service-Oriented Computing: State of the Art and Research 
Challenges. Computer, 2007. 40(11): p. 38-45. [20] D.1.1. Business Process Ontology Framework, SUPER 
Deliverable, April 2007. [21] D.1.2. Business Process Oriented Organizational Ontology, SUPER Deliverable, 
September 2007. [22] M. Uschold, M. King, S. Moralee, Y. Zorgios, The Enterprise Ontology. The Knowledge 
Engineer Review 13(1), 1998. [23] W.M.P. van der Aalst, A.H. M. ter Hofstede, M. Weske, "Business Process 
Management: A Survey" in proceedings of the International conference of Business Process Management, 
2003. Eidhoven, The Netherlands, June 26-27. [24] W.M.P. van der Aalst and M. Weske and G. Wirtz, Advanced 
Topics in Workflow Management: Issues, Requirements, and Solutions, Journal of Integrated Design and 
Process Science, 7(3), pp. 49-77, 2003. [25] Branimir Wetzstein, Zhilei Ma, Agata Filipowska, Monika 
Kaczmarek, Sami Bhiri, Silvestre Losada, Jose-Manuel Lopez-Cob, Laurent Cicurel: Semantic Business Process 
Management: A Lifecycle Based Requirements Analysis, SBPM Workshop, Vol-251, CEUR-WS, June 2007, ISSN 
1613-0073. [26] Web Service Modelling Language (WSML), WSMO Working Group Final Draft, 2005.  
			