
 OtoMushi: Touching Sound Alexis Andre* Interaction Laboratory Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Inc. 
 Figure 1: The basic principle behind OtoMushi: the user creates sounds that are represented by insects 
; stroking the bodies of the insects reproduces the sound. Abstract OtoMushi (sound insect in Japanese) 
is a new platform for interact­ing with sound samples. Each sample is represented as an insect where 
the body of the insect shows the waveform of the sample: stroking a part of the body plays the correspond 
part of the sample back, with the speci.ed speed and direction. Using living insects as a representation 
of sounds, operations such as mixing and cutting have their natural equivalent: when two in­sects mate, 
they give birth to a new sound-insect that represents a mix of the two parents. Similarly, cutting a 
sound to trim some parts can be done by slashing the body of the insect. We applied this concept to three 
differents systems: a tabletop sur­face designed to record everyday s sound environment, a phone sys­tem 
to get the insects to speak on your behalf and a portable appli­cation to collect interesting sounds 
on the go. Finally we discuss the relevant interface issues. CR Categories: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces 
and Presentation]: User Interfaces; H.5.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Sound and Music 
Computing Keywords: tactile interfaces, sound visualization, sound playback 1 Introduction Interacting 
with sound has always been a trade-off between the vi­sual representation of sounds where everything 
can be seen at once and the temporal nature of the sound. The traditional representa­tions of a sound 
sample aim to show its contents in an ef.cient manner: waveforms or sonograms indeed allow the users 
to get an idea of the actual sound but they do not encourage interaction. We focus here on the problem 
of exploring new sounds, of creating new sounds and of interacting with sound. We propose a platform 
called OtoMushi for sound interaction where users get in touch with the samples. *e-mail: alexis@csl.sony.co.jp 
 2 Representation The .rst key idea behind OtoMushi is that each sample is repre­sented as a living insect 
inside a virtual environment. The body of the insect is showing the waveform of the sound to indicate 
the length of the sample and to distinguish the parts with higher energy. The second key point is that 
the user can play back any sample by just stroking or scratching an sound-insect (OtoMushi requires a 
tactile device). The speed and direction of the stroke in.uence the produced sound, as if the user were 
scratching on a vinyl record. Figure 1 summarizes the above two points. The last point is that the insects 
have their own will: they roam around freely in the environ­ment and when they .nd a suitable partner, 
they mate and create a new insect that holds a mix of the parents sounds. And to compen­sate the birth 
of new insects, they also die eventually. This creates a complex environment where the user can create 
new samples through a microphone, listen to what they produced by touching the insects, and explore various 
combinations of sounds as the insects are randomly creating new samples. In the past, the use of living 
animals as representations of sounds has already been proposed by Iwai Toshio with Electroplank­ton [Iwai 
2005]. While the samples were represented as .shes, they were just a placeholder and no further interaction 
was possible. In OtoMushi, the user needs to touch the insects to produce sound. 3 Insect Model Each 
insect holds the PCM representation of its sound as an array of values. The body of the insect is constructed 
by shifting a skele­ton according to the values of the sound data. A bug with a high energy sound will 
then take more space on the display and look bigger . Depending on the application, it might be nice 
to distin­guish between two different insects. For that purpose we can also change the color of the body 
according to the pitch of the sample at that particular moment (we used the Harmonic Power Spectrum technique 
to compute the pitch). Mating consists then in the following operation: child[i]= amother[i] + (1 - a)father[i0 
+ i], (1) Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH Asia 2010, Seoul, South Korea, December 
15 18, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4503-0439-9/10/0012 where a represents a bias value towards one of the parents 
and i0 shifts the second parent in time, both chosen randomly. When receiving touch events, the system 
computes the time elapsed since the last known contact point and interpolates the sound values to create 
slow or fast version of the original sound. As it is dif.­cult to actually follow the shape of the insect 
at the constant speed needed to playback the original data, tapping and holding the head of the insect 
plays the whole sample at the original speed.  4 System Implementations The .rst implementation of OtoMushi 
we created consists of a SmartSkin-enabled surface [Rekimoto 2002], a projector, a micro­phone and a 
set of speakers. The microphone is used to create new insects by recording the ambient sounds. This setup 
was on display in two exhibitions where it gave room for three people to interact with the system at 
the same time. Figure 2 (a) shows the system in use.  (a) (b) Figure 2: (a) OtoMushi during one exhibition. 
(b) Phone version. While the system is usable and would bene.t from such huge tactile devices, the speed 
and resolution of the device could not satisfy our expectations. OtoMushi was also implemented in a phone 
device, where the sound input and output were directly linked to the input and out­put of the phone line. 
This particular setting of the platform let the user record some generic sentences as they spoke to reuse 
later when they got bored of the conversation. The virtual environment was split into .ve boxes: one 
for yes -like samples, one for no ­like samples, one for surprise, one for connecting samples ( hum , 
well , etc...) and one to hold the current sample as the user is talking. Each box is labelled with an 
icon and tapping the icon moves the current sample to the corresponding box. See the video for more details. 
Figure 2 (b) shows one example of setting. For that particular case, mating was disabled and we use color-coding 
to help distinguishing the bugs. Finally OtoMushi was also implemented in a portable device, such as 
Apple s iPad. The reaction time and resolution of the device allowed us to reach a level of interactivity 
that is close to that of an analog system (a vinyl record). The system encourages exploration and the 
collection of interesting sounds on the go. The goal of this version is to create a ecosystem of sound 
insects, where people get to record interesting sounds and trade them with their friends to create new 
sounds and new possibilities.  5 Discussion OtoMushi is a complete system with various interactions 
with sound. Figure 3 shows how the system interacts with the audience. The most interesting aspect of 
OtoMushi is the immediate interac­tion with the sounds you can produce. During the exhibitions, peo­ple 
were getting creative, trying to create new input as they got used to the system. Some people used their 
phone s ringtone, some sang and other used bells. The use of touch to interact with the sound was very 
intuitive with people enjoying the actual touching of the sound. Most people also wanted to feel the 
limits of the system by creating the biggest insect possible by singing a long tune, or creating the 
most powerful one by blowing into the microphone. Finally, as the system got crowded with insects (mostly 
far descen­dants of the original sounds) a surprizing effect occured. As the user cannot know for sure 
which insect contains which sound, they actually have to reach for the insect to play the current generation 
of sounds. While the user was the source of most of the sound samples that are in the environment, after 
a while it becomes impossible to know which sounds the bugs are representing now. On the contrary, being 
able to differenciate the bugs is a plus for the phone version so we used pitch-based coloring in that 
case. OtoMushi stands out as an interactive sound application as it wel­comes the unexpected while other 
entertainment platforms often require the full attention of the user. Noises become insects but the user 
has the choice to play them or not. Figure 3: Interactions within OtoMushi. 6 Conclusion OtoMushi proposes 
a new sandbox for sound exploration by mixing virtual creatures and scratching techniques. The feedback 
so far has been very supportive and we are working towards a more complete system, with the possibility 
to exchange samples and to manage a sample library. We also hope to be able to replace text messages 
in the future by sending instead bug messages for the recipient to enjoy.  Acknowledgements Thanks 
to Shigeru Owada and Jun Fujiki, members of AFO, for their support and feedback. References IWAI, T., 
2005. Electroplankton http://electroplankton.com. REKIMOTO, J. 2002. Smartskin: an infrastructure for 
freehand manipulation on in­ teractive surfaces. In CHI 02: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 113 120.  
			