
 Perceptual Evaluation of Human Animation Timewarping Martin Praz.´Rachel McDonnell ak Carol O Sullivan 
Graphics, Vision and Visualisation Group, Trinity College Dublin Figure 1: (a) screenshot from running 
experiment (side view, stick .gure); (b) stick .gure and geometrical model used in the study; (c) experiment 
results in absolute differences in speed of the locomotion, showing that speeding up the motion produces 
severe perceptual artifacts while event signi.cant slow down is perceptually acceptable. Abstract Understanding 
the perception of humanoid character motion can provide insights that will enable realism, accuracy, 
computational cost and data storage space to be optimally balanced. In this sketch we describe a preliminary 
perceptual evaluation of human motion timewarping, a common editing method for motion capture data. During 
the experiment, participants were shown pairs of walking motion clips, both timewarped and at their original 
speed, and asked to identify the real animation. We found a statistically signi.cant difference between 
speeding up and slowing down, which shows that displaying clips at higher speeds produces obvious artifacts, 
whereas even signi.cant reductions in speed were perceptually ac­ceptable. 1 Computer Animation and Perception 
Computer animation and motion perception are closely related .elds, as the result of motion synthesis 
is always presented to a live observer. In this study, we focus on motion timewarping, a method used 
in both parametric models and state machines for matching and transitioning between clips of the same 
type with different tim­ing or speed. Timewarping, and particularly dynamic timewarping, originates in 
speech recognition and was succesfully used, along­side other signal processing techniques, on animation 
data (e.g., Bruderlin and Williams [1995]). However the perceptual implica­tions of such manipulations 
have not been extensively studied and are hard to predict. Our evaluation approach is closely related 
to the work of Reitsma and Pollard [2003], but we focus on human locomotions rather than generic ballistic 
motion. 2 Experiment Design Five motion captured clips of a walking animation served as the stimuli 
for our experiment. These .ve animation speeds covered a normal range of human walking, ranging from 
0.8 m/s to 2.4 m/s with 0.4 m/s increments. For each clip, we created 4 other versions using timewarping 
to match the speed of the other clips, leading to a total of 25 clips (e.g., the 1.2 m/s motion was slowed 
down to 0.8 m/s and speeded up to 1.6, 2.0 and 2.4 m/s). We hypothesised that timewarping would be less 
noticeable if the timewarped speed is close to the original speed of the clip. The experiment consisted 
of sequences depicting two animated characters side-by-side (Figure 1). Both characters (Figure 1b) were 
either stick .gures or geometric models (the model s realism was found to affect perceptual sensitivity 
to errors in motion [Hod­gins et al. 1998]), facing forward or sideways (to test if motion error sensitivity 
is affected by viewpoint), with each simultaneously dis­played pair using the same setup. One character 
s animation con­sisted of the original motion, randomly placed on the left or right side of the screen, 
while the other was timewarped to match its speed. We also tested the real animation against itself as 
a control case. Sixty naive participants from the general public (64% male and 36% female) volunteered 
for this experiment. The instruction sheet indicated that one of the motions was a real captured motion 
and the other one was synthetically edited. The task was to indicate which of the two animations was 
the real motion by clicking the left or right mouse button. Each participant completed 100 trials in 
randomized order (25 motion clips, 2 models, 2 viewpoints). 3 Results Using a 3-factor repeated measures 
ANalysis Of VAriance (ANOVA) with factors model type (stick or geometric), viewpoint (front or side), 
and speed (speed up or slow down), we found a main effect of model type (F1,59 =8.09,p < 0.007). Post-hoc 
analy­sis using Newman-Keuls comparison of means showed that partici­pants were more sensitive to timewarping 
on the geometric models than on the stick-.gure. This implies that the effect of timewarp­ing is more 
noticeable on more realistic characters, consistent with previous results [Hodgins et al. 1998]. No main 
effect of viewpoint was found, which implies that side and front views did not affect sensitivity to 
timewarping artifacts. A main effect of speed was found (F1,59 = 133,p < 0.000001), where participants 
were able to notice speeded up motions on av­erage 80% of the time vs. 47% of the time for slowed down 
an­imations. These results were consistent across conditions. Since we used a 2AFC (2 alternative forced 
choice) paradigm, this sug­gests that participants were simply guessing when they viewed a slowed down 
animation beside a real one. Therefore, consistent Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 
Asia 2010, Seoul, South Korea, December 15 18, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4503-0439-9/10/0012 with Reitsma and 
Pollard [2003], the effect of timewarping is much more noticeable when speeding up motions than when 
slowing them down. In order to investigate the speed factor further, we averaged the accuracy of participants 
ratings for each timewarp level (-1.6 to +1.6 m/s with 0.4 m/s steps) and each timewarp ratio (0.33 to 
3.0). A single factor repeated measures ANOVA showed a main effect of timewarp level (F8,952 = 104.4,p 
< 0.00001). Figure 1c shows that, as expected, performance was at chance (i.e., 50% accuracy) for the 
real animation compared with itself. Furthermore, for all slowed down animations, performance was also 
at chance, showing that participants did not prefer the real animations more than even signi.cantly slowed 
down ones. However, when the animations were speeded up, participants were much more sensitive to the 
dif­ferent levels of timewarping up to almost 100% for a 0.8 m/s ani­mation speeded up to 2.4 m/s. This 
implies that signi.cantly slowed down walking animations are perceived as real, whereas even small increments 
in speed will be noticed. The results of our experiments can be expressed as a more general relative 
timewarping ratio (see Figure 2), which also con.rms the previous conclusions. Figure 2: Expressing 
the experiment results as a relative time­warping ratio. The stated conclusions, i.e., that the slowed 
down motions are perceptually more acceptable that speeded up clips, holds for this case as well. 4 
Conclusion The results of our perceptual experiment have implications for both motion compression and 
data-driven parametrization models. They suggest that, in motion compression, the underlying databases 
do not have to contain densely sampled low speed locomotions, as they can be reconstructed from the higher 
speeds without producing per­ceptual artifacts. Similarly, the indications are that motion synthe­sis 
methods should avoid timewarping a source motion to create a faster movement. Rather, interpolation between 
slowed down lo­comotion clips would be preferable to the traditional combination of speeded up and slowed 
down animations. However, our conclu­sions are directly applicable to locomotion only and further studies 
are now needed to con.rm and generalize our results.  References ARIKAN, O. 2006. Compression of motion 
capture databases. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 25, 3, 890. BRUDERLIN, A., AND WILLIAMS, L. 1995. 
Motion signal pro­cessing. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Com­puter graphics and interactive 
techniques, ACM, 104. HODGINS, J., O BRIEN, J., AND TUMBLIN, J. 1998. Perception of human motion with 
different geometric models. IEEE Trans­actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 4, 4, 307 316. 
REITSMA, P. S. A., AND POLLARD, N. S. 2003. Perceptual met­rics for character animation: sensitivity 
to errors in ballistic mo­tion. International Conference on Computer Graphics and In­teractive Techniques 
22, 3, 537.  
			