
 Perception-based High De.nition Haptic Rendering Ikumi Susa* Yuto Ikeda * Takashi Tokizaki * University 
of Electro-Communications * Keywords: haptic redering, force feedback, rigid-body simulation 1 Perception-based 
Haptic Rendering Haptic perception is essential for dexterous object manipulation in both real and virtual 
world. Recently, haptic interaction is being researched for manipulation in virtual environment. Conventional 
haptic rendering employs penalty method which cal­culates feedback forces using only spring-damper model 
[Ruspini et al. 1997]. High frequency (1 kHz-) simulation is required for stable control over haptic 
interfaces for meaningful haptic interac­tions. However, high frequency simulation tends to cause over.ow 
of computational quantity and make simulation for virtual worlds in large scale dif.cult. Perception-based 
High De.nition Haptic Rendering(Perception­based HDHR) calculates feedback forces regarding not only 
phys­ical law but also nature of human perception. This rendering is make possible using haptic interfaces 
whose frequencies are around 1 kHz and physical simulators based on analytical methods. Con­sequently, 
Perception-based HDHR presents rich haptic perception for large scale virtual worlds (Fig.1). Figure 
1: Perception-based HDHR  2 Innovation Perception-based HDHR displays properties of objects such as 
ma­terial, viscosity and elasticity respecting the nature of human per­ception and cognition under the 
constraints of controls and compu­tational quantity. Humans perceive objects shape via normal forces, 
dynamics (inertia and visco-elasticy) from the relations of applied forces and motions of objects, and 
material properties from vibra­tion forces caused by contact between objects. First, let us consider 
perception of material. Vibrations are one of the major cues for perception of material and simulation 
of such kind requires high resolution deformable models and high fre­quency update. However, humans seem 
to perceive only spectrum and envelope of vibration or precise waveform of vibration seem not to be very 
important. Therefore, waveform of the vibration *e-mail:{ susa,ikeda,tokizaki,mitake,hase} @hi.mce.uec.ac.jp 
e-mail: msato@pi.titech.ac.jp Hironori Mitake * Makoto Sato Shoichi Hasegawa * P &#38; I lab. Tokyo 
Institute of Technology could be generated from spectrum and envelope model from ex­perimental data aside 
from feedback force which represents object shapes[Okamura et al. 2001]. Another example is perception 
of inertial and visco-elastic proper­ties. Humans perceive dynamics of objects from the relation be­tween 
applied forces and motion of objects which are touched by hands. Simulations of this relation require 
high frequency update and consideration to effects of all objects that are in contact with the users 
hands. Therefore, we propose a linear model for the rela­tion as an approximation and calculate the parameter 
of the model in the low frequency simulation for the whole virtual world. Then, the high frequency simulator 
calculates only the linear model whose computational cost is far small than the original simulation. 
The lin­ear model cannot account for collision impulses given from objects not belonging to the contact 
group. Impulsive forces should be ap­plied to the user s hand for consistency involving visual and haptic 
cues. Because visual cues have low time precision, these forces are easily achieved by simple transmission 
of impulsive forces. Figure 2: The System Overview  3 Vision Perception-based HDHR is an application 
of psychophysical knowledge of haptics. It brings high .delity haptic sensation to low cost virtual environments 
with ordinary haptic devices. Thanks to psychophysical knowledge of haptics, Perception-based HDHR en­ables 
rich haptic interactions along with human perception without special devices. Recent remarkable progress 
on haptics have been opened by insep­arable developments of psychophysics and interface devices. We hope 
to involve haptic rendering into this revolution. References OKAMURA, A. M., DENNERLEIN, J. T., AND 
CUTKOSKY, M. R. 2001. Reality-based models for vibration feedback in virtual en­vironments. ASME/IEEE 
Transactions on Mechatronics 6, 3. RUSPINI, D. C., KOLAROV, K., AND KHATIB, O. 1997. The haptic display 
of complex graphical environments. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 97 Computer Graphics, ACM SIGGRAPH, 345 352. 
 Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2008, Los Angeles, California, August 11 15, 2008. 
ISBN 978-1-60558-466-9/08/0008  
			