
 PERSONIFICATION OF THE COMPUTER A PATHOLOGICAL METAPHOR IN IS Nanene Monin Department of Management 
Systems Massey University New Zealand D. John Monin Department of Management Systems Massey University 
New Zealand ADSTRACT Semantic and syntactic aspects of metaphor are explored and explained as a preface 
to an exposition of the impact on Information Systems (IS) persomel of a popular root metaphor the personification 
of the computer. It is suggested that since action metaphors determine attitudes and future directions, 
this personifkation may be responsible for confusing both end-user and researcher that if the potential 
of computers is to be more iidly realised and utilis@ our perceptions of the language in which we describe 
them should be illuminated. There is a danger, it is argued that if human attributes are ascribed to 
the mmputer, personnel in IS begin to act out tie metaphor pathologically. INTRODUCTION Metaphors in 
Information Systems are ubiquitous. They have been sourccd to provide directions for systems development 
methodologies; mined to create a vocabula~, and even harnessed into service as the title of a journal. 
Popular usage is provoking semantic shift so that what a metaphor is may yet become whatever it is thought 
to be. Yet vague understandings of this most sophisticated of arutlogues, seem to be blurring the very 
communication its users seek to illuminate. At the same time ignorance of the emotive power generated 
by its forged comections may lead to undesirable outcomes. In particular. the personification of computers 
would seem to be influencing the relationship of users to PCS and the attitudes of professionals to potentialities 
for applications and research. Permission to copv without fse OH or pert of this materiel is granted 
provided that the copiee aro not made or distributed for direct commercial edventage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and ite dote sppoer, and notico ie given thet copying ia by permission 
of the Aesocietion for Computing Mechine~. To copv otherwise, or to republish, requires e fee and/or 
specific permiaaion. SIGCPR 94-394 Atexandr@ ~in~ USA Q 1994 ACM O-89791~2-~..s.$jO This paper will 
attempt to explain what a metaphor is, how it affects those who employ ig and to illustrate this with 
an analysis of metaphors popular in IS. Walsham (1993), in a chapter on metaphor in organisational life, 
has related the percePtioIIs of Morgan (1986) to the IS fiel~ and has Sign­posted the general route taken 
by those with a similar approach. Here we wiil examine metaphors used in IS. rather than those used in 
thinking about IS (WalshaW p. 28). Our approach is similar to that of Kendall and Kendall (1993) who 
have begun resmrching the metaphors used by IS personnel in systems development methodologies. We believe 
we break new groun4 however, in that we have explored the potential dangers presented by an action metaphor 
which may lead to a pathological persuasion of IS persomel. When our focus arrives at a particular discussion 
of the action metaphors which influence the relationship between computers and computer personnel, the 
position taken will rest firmly on the widely cited work of Lakoff and Johnson (1980) who established 
the role of metaphor in defining reality and thus determining action (p. 158). A final brief suggestion 
that metaphor, treated as an analytical tool. may supply an impetus for the implementation of change, 
is again supported by Morgan s seminal work (pp. 382-3). As yet there has been little comment ut IS literature 
on the inherent threat to objectivity posed by metaphor, although Pindar and Bourgeois (1982) have debated 
this with Morgan t?om an Administrative Science perspective. Thus in aiming to substantiate the claim 
that action metaphors can lead the individual into a pathologkxd state, the theory of metaphor explored 
here will be related back to the pioneering work of Richards (1936). It is on the theory which has evolved 
from his notions of dispartty and transference thatour conclusion rests: that the language we use to 
describe and explain computers. and what they do. can intluence the efficiency and effectiveness of our 
use of them. In an organisational context. much anention has been paid to the machine metaphor (WaishaQ 
p. 29-30). Morgan (1986) for e.xarnple. renmds us that classical management theory expects people to 
perform like inanimate cogs and wheels (p. 29) and demonstrates that Tavlor s ideas. built into the technology 
itself, make the workers savants or adjuncts to machines that are in control of the organisation and 
pace of work (p. 31). But Solomon (1992) points out that in the contemporary world an extension of this 
root metaphor has taken place as people have begun to speak of themselves as machines Every human relation 
becomes an interiltce, and we begin to describe the workings of our own minds in the computer language 
of memory banks, downtime, glitches, data searches and so on. (p. 29). Our analysis will suggest that 
a more significant metaphor is the inversion of this image: that Compntem have been personitkd, and as 
a consequent our expectations of their performance is modified by this linkage: that furthermore, it 
is because we are largely unaware of the emotional persuasion of this metaphor that we are so easily 
influenced by it. It is the submerged reality lurking in this action metaphor which we believe should 
be ballasted to the surface of IS language, for words can be treacherous. When I use a wort said Humpty 
in a much quoted pronouncement, it means just what I chose it to mean . (Carroll, p. 269) Most of us 
would like to think that we share his conildencc, though Hnmpty of course didn t assume that his understanding 
of a word would be shared by anyone else! Even when we consciously speak ambiguously, we assume that 
our multi-dimensional meanings will be clear, so it seems timely, given the direction which the use and 
analysis of metaphor has taken us in recent years, to look more closely at interpreted rather than intended 
communication. WHAT IS METAPHOR? Although traditionally metaphor is taken to be the most iimdamental 
form of figurative language, since it has no pristine form. its role is much debated. Initiatly imported 
into the literature of IS (perhaps via other disciplines), and from thence into popular IS usage, from 
the critical idiom of English Literature, the word metaphor comes from the Greek wwx meaning over and 
@pctv to carry . It refers to a particular set of linguistic processes whereby aspects of one object 
are carried over or transferred to another object so that the second object is spoken of as if it were 
the first. (Hawke, 1972, p. 1.) Followers of the Aristotelian interpretation regard metaphor as a deparfure 
from ordina~ modes of language. as a fanciful embroidery of the facts, while those who believe themselves 
to be followers of Plato, see metaphor as a way of experiencing the facts (Hawkes, p. 38). This latter 
holistic, or Gestalt, view is the one which has most influenced evolving theories of metaphor in linguistics, 
psychology, and more lately, IS. In order to clearly substantiate the processes by which metaphors achieve 
their efkct upon IS personnel, the terms coined by LA. Richards (1936) for the two main components of 
metaphor -vehicle and tenor -will be utilised. When comparing the ditTerent relations which, in dMerent 
cases, the two members of a metaphor hold to one another (p. 96), Richards denoted the underlying idea, 
or principle subject as the tenor, and that part of the metaphor which describes or @tiles the tenor, 
as the vehicle. INTERACTION THEORY Richiids, whose theories were later develo@ in tie more widely read 
work of Max Black (1962, pp. 38-9) argued that meaning in metaphor is the result of a two-way interaction 
between tenor and vehicle: that it is in transference, in the effect that the linking of tenor and vehicle 
has, each on the other that meaning is created. Indurkhya ( 1988), in a formal theory of metaphor which 
he describes as Constrained Semantic Transfer. elaborates on this process (pp. 129-135). He suggests 
that although Black finally concluded that the two distinct subjects of metaphor should be regarded as 
primary (tenor) and secondary (vehicle), interaction is equally vitat from either direction; and it would 
therefore be more appropriate to discuss the primary subject or tenor as the target domain, and the secondruy 
subject or vehicle as the sourct domain. His claim is that both must together be regarded as a system, 
rather than as individual things, and that each domain has an associated implicative complex (y. 131), 
a set of inferences that can be drawn about that domain, and from which a metaphor selects, emphasises, 
suppresses, and organises features in order to effect a particular interaction between domains. TRANSFERENCE 
AND DISPARITY Interaction may folly result in a total transference of meaning. even if the original metaphor 
was built upon a connection between very distinctively different domains. Richards, when he returns to 
this thesis in a later lecture. highlights an attribute of metaphor which is of crucial signitlcance 
in any discussion of the use of metaphor in scientific discourse. He reminds us of the very broad division 
that can be made between metaphors which work through some direct resemblance between two things, the 
tenor and the vehicle. and those which work through some common attitude which we may (often through 
accidental and extraneous reasons) trike up towards them both. (p. 118). Thus when a mechanical obje@ 
small, roun~ and sporting a long tail slips across the desk top, its memblance to a mouse is a spontaneous 
mental association; but when readers are expected to accept that lovers are like a compass, as in Donne 
s famous metaphysical conceit or indeed that the organisd anarchy of a university organisation is like 
a garbage can (Cohen et al, 1976) they might, with Dr Johnson, object that the most heterogeneous ideas 
have been yoked by violence together and that such a reader, though S/he sometimes admires, is seldom 
pleased. (1906, p. 14) It is from his theory of interaction that Richards moves on to discuss the role 
of disparity in the connections which a metaphor forges in the rnin&#38; As well as the more central 
experience of the holistic, the organic entity which is the completed metaphor, Richards explains that 
it is the disparity (between vehicle and tenor) which presents potential dangers. When vital metaphors 
evolve into dead metaphors, they yet continue to direct the subconscious into channeled modes of thinking 
and experiencing. Although, for example, our rational faculties may contldently reject the notion that 
a computer has human attributes, metaphor s power is such that an emotional response to a computer described 
in this way, may still live on. It is the context of this understanding that the root metaphor of the 
personified computer gives cause for concern. In such a radical perception, one which insists that metaphor 
entails acceptance of a seemingly impossible meaning, (rather than being just a way of describing or 
explaining something) metaphor becomes an autonomous trick. or trope, of language which insists that 
all things are possible . Such a reading Parker ( 1982) concludes, makes it more repugnant to reason 
than more distanced and mediated tropes (p. 139). Morgan suggests that we think of corporate culture 
as -an iceberg, -an onion, -an umbrella, -sticky glue (1989, p. 157) and then advises that in the more 
novel, or even shocking juxtapositions, when two things belonging to very different orders of experience 
are put together in a sudden and striking fashion the mental energy expended in an effort to make connections, 
leaves an indelible impression. And significantly the mind is a connecting organ ... it can connect any 
two things in an indefinitely large number of tierent ways . (p. 125). LIFE CYCLE OF A METAPHOR Ironically 
though, as Wheelwright remarks, the more powerful, and therefore effective, the original metaphor, the 
more likely it is to survive, be taken up into popular usage, become cliched, and finrdly, one dimensional 
as cognizance of the tenor fhdes. As metaphors become fossilised , they enter into our everyday speech 
as steno-symbols which have lost their one-time colour and allusiveness and power to stir. (1962, p. 
118) Examples of such fossilised metaphors abound in the language of 1S. where computers are persistently 
personified with the computer as the tenor and a human as the vehicle. In popular parlance computers 
are said to be of a certain generation, to be user-friendly, and to communicate with each other. They 
are said to talk to each other if not incompatible, though this may be said to require a welldefined 
protocol. While their procedural languages are becoming more sophisticated, like natural languages, many 
have evolved into particular dialects. Computers are said to have memories, to read and write data, and 
to be number-crunchers. Simple noise words are an integral part of language syntax; and house-keeping 
software is a more comprehensible name for an operating system. If the hardware is not operating it is 
waiting for someone to boot itinto action, or if it fails, it is said to dre. If a user corrupts it, 
it can be purged, but should primary memo~ be lost it must &#38;flushed. In keeping with the many ironies 
of language, a computer lacking all software is said to be a naked machine. Itis vulnerable to worms 
and wruses, which infect the memo~. Aborting is a practice of last resom and nowadays of course, a disk 
doctor may be available. lnfotech Weekly, a New Zealand newspaper, reports comments made by politicians 
on an aging computer system bought for Parliament in 1985: A revamp of the system is drastically overdue 
because it is not user frlerzdly. Maurice Williamson, Cabinet MinisteL and It has a mind of its own and 
not many members bother with it, says Geoff Braybrooke, Backbencher. (October 11, 1993p. 2). interestingly, 
this artificially intelligent person , with expert systems is controlled by a mouse. As already noted, 
this is a small. arttidly rounded object, with a tail . It grows warm within the hand of the user -who 
must intimately hold it! While they may no longer evoke a response at a conscious level, dead metaphors 
such as these, betray attitudes and values, and may also expose the archetypal experience from which 
they were formed. This process is described by Indurkhya when discussing the role that metaphors play 
in semantic shift: a new and vital metaphor may, through repeated use, evolve into a new literal meaning, 
or polysemy (p. 135), as in Figure 1. If we pause long enough to think abo@ and research, the mouse, 
for example, is in the experience of both visual and metaphoric origins of words, the evolutionary process 
just tactile senses, a metaphoric little animal. But the English outlined may reveal more than the obvious 
links between word muscle is derived from the diminutive of the Latin disparate domaim, and in computer/user 
relationships (or mus , a mouse. interfaces! ) may reveal jusl how intimate the link is. Our Diagram 
of a metaphor s life cycle i Venn diagram shows that while transference (as described by Richards) takes 
place in the shaded area, the extent of this haded are% this synthetic commonality, is infinitely variable. 
A@ equally significrm~ both tenor and vehicle retain a tistinct and quite individual otherness. The vehicle 
images (derived from the Latin imago a shadow) the tenor and the more uccessfhlly it does this, the more 
readily it will be taken up into constant use. Over time the metaphoric understanding of the vord is 
lost to view. At first the roles of tenor and vehicle merge, &#38;s, and work in tandeq but gradually 
the vehicle ;merges as the denoter of an additional primary meaning, or polysemy, now shadowing the old 
tenor. When this eclipse is omplete, when the original tenor is completely shaded, a dead metaphor becomes 
a literal word with additional meaning -Metaphor - Dead Metaphor r e .T -Xlgure 1 Perhaps the Roman perception 
of that analogous vehicle, have seen a further extension of their ideas relationship, is now being ~lived 
by the operator who developed in the work of L&#38;off and Johnson. In their experiences control of the 
personified computer through an descriptions of action metaphors we see revealed yet extension of the 
arm muscle! another step in the evolution of the lifeflanguage relationship. They argue that as it is 
in language, so it is in This is a linguistic process which may have a powerful role life. INtially, 
in order to interpret aspects of what we do, in dictating evolving attitudes, values and intellectual 
we make connections between one activity and another: we positioning in applied fields such as IS, and 
it is into this describe one activity in terms of another. Thus business is dichotomous picture of the 
relationship between life and descrhd as warfare, or as a game; a game is described in language that 
the IS theorist, practitioner and end-user the terms of warfare; a VDU is described as if it were a have 
wandered, or perhaps stumbled. One of the powers of desktop; and a personal computer is described as 
if it had metaphor is the emotive strength of the connection which it human attributes and skilis such 
as intellect (thinking, forges -justitled or not, and herein rages the debate which reading. writing) 
and a body (prone to disease!). so often surrounds it!. Even when there is initially an instinctive recoil 
from a seemingly unnatural or unjustifkd Over time the original activity, which equates with the compariso% 
if the emotional shock of the initial connection tenor and which we will term the action target, is combines 
with intellectual logic to force an acceptance of subsumed into the vehicle , the action source. Ultimately 
the Comparison an indelible imprint is often left in the we are left only with the image of the action 
source, and mind. understanding is compromised. As has already been demonstrated. the original metaphor 
gained its impact from novelty: even as the justice of forging some attributes was ACTION METAPHORS conceded, 
intellectual tension resulted from a recognition of the disparity of other attributes. As the image of 
the action Propments of Gestatt theories of metaphor: the view that source blots out the action target 
the perception of disparity meaning is created through the interaction of tenor and fades away. IMPLICATIONS 
FOR PERSONNEL IN IS So wherein lies the danger? As has been demonstrate@ metaphors in popular use in 
IS often personi~ the computer. Computer users everywhere may have been pas-through the language of applications, 
architects and end-users to think of computers as having the powers, potentialities, and personalities 
of humankind. The metaphom which convey this perception also suggest that it is possible for humankind 
to relate to a computer. Should such a relationship (given the degree of quality time, the dependence, 
and the attachment that some computer personnel commit to a PC) be seen as pathological? This too could 
be seen to be one kind of outcome of action metaphor. Although the impact of action metaphors on everyday 
activity and thought patterns is widely associated with the work of Lakoff and Johnson, their work is 
predated by more than four decades by Wchards (1936) who speaks more particularly of the impact that 
response to metaphor can have on behaviour. While Ari%otle reserved his deepest respect for those who 
have a command of metaphor , Richards explains (p. 135) that where this command is invert~ where metaphor 
commands the person, rather than the person commanding the metaphor, the mind so commanded is, as psychologists 
now also point out in a pathological state. Morgan s conclusions (1986, pp. 33-38) indicate that if individuals 
from an organisation moulded by Taylorism (and communicating its activities through machine metaphors), 
move into a flatter, versatile entity (one more inclined to describe itself in organic images), but are 
unable to discard the old vehicle for the new (the mental vocabulary of the machine for the language 
of the biological age ), then they would inevitably act inappropriately. Such a person would be allowing 
the metaphor to control the mind rather than conversely, mastering the metaphor . While to suggest that 
such a person could therefore be said to be in a pathological state would be an extravagant claim, such 
a scenario does link normal bchaviour with its pathological equivalent. As is often the case in the examination 
of psychological states, the pathological extreme, causing dystimction, provides an exaggerated example 
of the normal pattern. In an IS context we have only to substitute relationship for the organisationat 
situation above (the person with a PC, for the person in an organisation) to see revealed the pathological 
state that personification of the computer may initiate. Richarda concluded that the person shoukl [our 
italics] control the metaphor. Lakoff and Johnson did not become prescriptive. They simply maintained 
that their evidence demonstrates that metaphor pervades our normal conceptual system (p. 115), that not 
only do metaphors make coherent certain aspects of our experience (p. 156), they also create realities 
for us, especially social realities. A metaphor may thus be a guide for future action. Such action will, 
of course, fit the metaphor. This will, in tw reinforce the power of the metaphor to make experience 
coherent. (p. 156) But they do also admit that in this sense metaphors can be self-fidfWing prophecies. 
Empson (1930) demonstrates what it could well be salutary for IS theorists to note: that metaphors should 
be respected as much for their seductive danger as for their excitement and challenge: Statements are 
made as if they were connected, and the reader is forced to consider thew relation for himself. The reason 
why these statements should have been selected is left for him to uweu~ he will invent a variety of reasms 
and order them in his own mind. (p. 32) Herein lies the possibility of the distortion that IS language 
may breed. Computers are tools. albeit very sophisticated tools, which can neither think nor feel. Their 
every function is dependent upon the human technicia% programmer and user. The metaphors by %ich they 
are described and explained tend to hide this reality, am+ given the power of the action metaphor, may 
well persuade people to ascribe to them human attributes which they do not have. Such a distortion of 
reality, may hamper efficient use and inspire misdirected research It is a distortion which Karlqvist 
and Svedin (1993) describe as the ultimate hubris: The attempt to transform Man s own technical artificial 
creations mto something similar to life is considered the ultimate hubris. (p 1). They also remind us 
of the balie~ Coppeha in which an old doll maker works unsuccessfully to give life to the doll that he 
has elaborately created: The lesson is that the aspiration of transcending the borderline horn man-made 
artefacts to living things is not only pathological but also futile Ltie is seen as a quahtatively different 
type of phenomenon from artefacts [such as] self-instructing programming machmes (p. 2) CONCLUSION Words 
do not (in defiance of Humpty Dumpty!) always mean what we intend them to mean: interpreted meaning may 
differ radically from intended meaning, for meaning is inextricably bound to social environment and linguistic 
context. When words are metaphorical, transference as seen in action metaphors, may result in what you 
imagine yourself to be doing, becoming what you actually do. Thus if we would have end-users, professional 
and researchers focus on technology as technology rather than as a pseudo­person, then we must consider 
adapting the language in which we describe our relationships to that technology. FURTHER RESEARCH Our 
current research is progressing in two distinct directions: the first is fxusing on possible confusions 
of meaning resulting ffom indiscriminate use of the terms model, metaphor and analogy; and the second 
is an analysis of the intluence of popular metaphors in the determination of action outcome. A literary 
search to establish distinct understandings of the terminology of analogies is complete. and the findings 
are being applied to the literature of IS in order to discover possible confusions in current usage. 
As one example, we will suggest that the so-called desktop metaphor is in fact not a metaphor, but a 
model. A number of the metaphors which contribute to the personifkation of the computer are being researched, 
and the possibility that these images may convey a gender bias is being explored. A further group of 
action metaphors being analysed are those of %zwfare and of games , and the intention is to establish 
the intluence that such discourse has upon IS personnel working in organisations where such metaphors 
feature in popular communication. REFERENCES Black M. Models and metaphors: studies in language and phdosophy. 
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1962. Black, M. More about metaphor, in Metaphor and Thought, A. 
Ortony (cd.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Engtand, 1977. Carroll, L. Alice through the looking 
glass, in The Annotated hce, M. Gardner (cd.), Anthony Blond, London, 1960. Cohen, M.D., James, G.M. 
&#38; Olsen, J.P. A garbage can model of organisational choice. Administrative Science Quarterly, (17), 
1972, pp. 1-25. Karlqvix A. and Svedin, U. Introduction, in The Machine as Metaphor and Tool, H. Haken, 
, A. Karlqvist and U, Svedin (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993, pp. 1-8. Hawkes, T. A4elaphor. Routledge, 
London, Englank 1972. Indurkhy~ B. Constrained semantic transferenm: A formal theory of metaphors , . 
in Analogica, A. Prieditis (cd.), Pitman, London, EnglanL 1988. Johnson, S. Cowley, in Lives of the Poets, 
Oxford University Press, Londo% England, 1906. Kendall, J.E, &#38; Kendall, K.E. (1993). Metaphors and 
methodologies: Living beyond the systems machine, MXS Quarterly, June, 1993, pp. 149-171. Lakoff, G. 
&#38; Johnson, M. Metaphors We Live by, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1980. Morgan, G. 
Images of Organisations, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA, 1986. Morgan, G. Creative Organisation 
Theo~: a Resourcebook, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA 1989. Parker, P.A. The metaphorical plo~ in 
Metaphor: problems andperspectwes, D. S. Miall, (cd.), Harvester Press, Sussex, England, 1982. Pinder, 
C. C., &#38; Bourgeois, V. W. Controlling Tropes in Administrative Science, Administrate Sctence Quarterly 
(27), 1982, pp. 641-652. Richards, 1. A. The Philosophy of Rhetoric, Oxford University Press. Ox&#38;orL 
EnglanL 1936. Solomon, R.C. Ethics m Excellence: Cooperation and Integrity in Business, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1992. Walsham.G. Interpreting Information Systems. John Wiley, Chichester, Engtand, 
1993. Wheelwright, P. Metaphor and Reahty. Indiana Univ. Press, Bloomington, 1962.
			