
 Phrasal Translation and Query Expansion Techniques for Cross-Language Information Retrieval Lisa Ballestems 
and W. Bruce Croft balleste@cs. umass. edu, crof t@cs .umass. edu Centerfor Intelligent Information Retrieval 
Computer Science Department University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA 01003-4610 USA Abstract Dictionary 
methods for cross-language information retrieval give performance below that for mono-lingual retrieval. 
Failure to translate multi-term phrases has km shown to be one of the factors responsible for the errors 
associated with dictionary methods. First, we study the importance of phrasaI translation for this approach. 
Second, we explore the role of phrases in query expansion via local context analysis and local feedback 
and show how they can be used to signif­icantly reduce the error associated with automatic dictionary 
translation. Introduction The development of IR systems for languages other than English has focused 
on building mono-lingual systems. In­creased availabMy of on-line text in languages other than English 
and increased multi-national collaboration have motivated research in cross-language information retrieval 
(CLIR) -the development of systems to perform retrieval across languages. There have been three main 
approaches to CLIR: transla­tion via machine translation tectilques ~ad94]; parallel or comparable corpora-based 
methods lJX195aj LL90, SB96], and dictionary-based methods [Sa172,Pev72, HG96, BC96]. Each of the approaches 
has shown promise, but also has disadvantages associated with it. Results suggest that im­provements 
gained via machine translation techniques may not outweigh the cost of linguistic analysis. One disadvan­tage 
of methods based on the use of parallel and aligned corpora is lack of resources: parallel corpora are 
not al­ways readily available and those that are available tend to be relatively small or to cover only 
a small number of sub­jects. Performance is also &#38;pendent on how well the cor- Permission to meke 
digitalhard mpiea of all or pat of tbk meterkd for personal or Ctawoom uscisxwitboutfee~ti~ thatlhecopies 
rutnotmade ordi*Wforpfitw eummemial adwnkge, the cqy­ rigbt IKA@ the title of the publication and its 
date appcsr, snd notice is si~ ti qyrigM m by pennksion oftheACM, he. To copy otbewk, to repubti~ to 
@ en .wvem or 10 distribute to lists, requires specific ti=i~ anchr f- SIGIR 97 Philadelphia PA, USA 
copyf i@t1997 ACM O-8979 1-836-3/97/7.. $3.50 pora are aligned. Our work takes the third approach and 
applies dictiomuy-bttaed methods. Automatic machine readable dictionary (MRD) query translation leads 
to a drop in effectiveness of 40-60% below that of mono-lingual retriewd ~G%, BC96J. This is due primarily 
to three factors. First specialized vocabulary not contained in the dictionary will not be translated 
Second, dictionary translations are inherently ambiguous and add ex­traneous terms to the query. Third, 
failure to translate multi­term concepts as phrases reduces effectiveness. We are developing strategies 
for reducing the errors as­sociated with dictionary-based methods and focus on strate­gies which have 
a low processing cost and do not require scarce resources. This paper explores the identification of 
phrases in queries and the effectiveness of simple phrasal translation. In addition, we investigate the 
role of phrases in query expansion by comparing two approaches, local feed­back [AF77] and Local Context 
Analysis [XC96], to ex­panding queries at various stages of the translation pro­cess. 2 previous Work 
Effective systems for mono-lingual information retrieval have been available for several years. ~pically, 
research in the area of multi-lingual information retrieval has focused on incorporating new languages 
into existing systems to al­low them to nut in several mono-language retrieval modes. Recently, greater 
interest in retrieval across languages has motivated more work to study the factors involved in build­ing 
a CUR system. Salton [Sa172] showed early on that with carefully con­structed thesauri, cross-language 
retrieval was nearly as ef­fective as mono-lingual retrieval. Thisstudy was gc@ how­ever the test collection 
was very small by current stdards and it is unrealistic to manuaily index larger datakea. Landauer and 
Littman ~90] have also proposed a method for cross-language retrieval. Latent Semantic Mex­ing (MI) [FDD+88] 
was used to create a multidimensional indexing space for a parallel corpus of English documents and their 
French translations. Their method has been suc­cessful at the task of retrieving a query s translation, 
in re­sponse to that query. However the collection used was small, containing 2482 paragraph-length documents 
fivm Caha­dian Parliamentary proceedings and no results of its effec­tiveness on the traditional retrieval 
task have been reported. The method also relies on the use of padel corpora which are not always readily 
available. Another method that relies on parallel and aligned cor­pora has been suggested by Dunning 
and Davis PX393]. Their method is baaed on the vector space model and in­volves the linear transformation 
of the representation of a query in one language to its corresponding representation in another language. 
The transformation is done by reduction of the document space to generate a translation matrix. They 
have had some success in efficiently estimating the trans­lation matrix and results of tests to estimate 
its quality are premising, Further tests of the effectiveness of the method have been limited by its 
computational complexity. Davis and DunningmD95&#38; DD95b] have also devel­oped several other approaches 
to query translation, which they tested on the TREC ISM Spanish queries and collec­tion. Two of these 
rely on the use of a Spanish-English parallel corpus and one uses evolutionary programming for query 
optimization. In the tit of the parallel COIPUSap preaches English queries were translated by replacing 
the original query terms with the 100 most frequent terns in the top 100 retrieved documents from the 
Spanish side of the parallel corpus. The second approach replaces the original query terms with terms 
found to be statistically significant. The evolutionary programming method starts with a query generated 
by the high fiquency approach. It then modifies queries by randomly adding or deleting query terms. Opti­mization 
is done by evaluating query fimess after each round of mutations and selecting the most fit to continue 
to the next generation. The evolutionary programming approach was the most effective, but results were 
disappointing, with each of the methods performing well below the word-by­word translation baseline. 
More recently, Davis [Dav96] uses part-of-speech tag­ging to select the best Spanish translations for 
English query terms. A parallel corpus is then used to further disambiguate the translated queries by 
choosing the Spanish terms that re­trieve documents most like those retrieved for the English query. 
This approach is more effective than previous ones, achieving up to 73.5% of monolingual performance. 
Sheridan and Ballerini [SB96] performed translations using co-occunence thesauri generated from a comparable 
corpus. Cross-language experiments suggest that using co­occurrence thesauri generated with thk type 
of data yields a translation effect. However, performmce measured by aver­age precision is still considerably 
below that of mono-lingual retrieval. Disadvantages to the approach are that it relies on time-sensitive 
documents, queries are constrained to refer­encing specific events, and a strict definition of the notion 
of relevance. This is a side effect of the way in which the test data was constructed and in themryshould 
not be a prob­lem inherent to the approach, but this has yet to be shown experimentally. Previous work 
has been done to recognize and translate phrases in text for example [SWH96, Kup93]. These ap­proaches 
identify source language phrases and rely upon the use of #araUel corpora to i&#38;ntify the context 
in which target language translations should be found. Although these ap­proach@ work well, we use simple 
dictionary translation b cause we are interested in exploring what can be done when scarce resources 
such as parallel corpora are unavailable. 3 DictionaryTranslationand Chary Expana&#38;n Previous studies 
[HG96, BC96] have shown that automatic word-by-word (WBW) translation of queries via MRD re­sults in 
a 060% loss in effectiveness below that of mono­lingual retrieval. One of the factors causing this drop 
in ef­fectiveness is ambiguity causad by the transfer of extraneous terms. What may be more important 
however, is the failure to translate multi-term concepts as phrasa. We have shown PC96] that, despite 
the loss of phrases, query expansion via local feedback could reduce the errors such an approach normally 
makes. Relevance feedback [SB90] is a method by which a query is rnodiied by the addition of terms found 
in documents known to be relevant to the query. Local feed­back [AF77] differs from classic relevance 
feedback in that it ussurnes the top retrieved documents are relevant. Local feedback modification before 
or after automatic query translation via MRD significantly improves per­formance. Pr-translation feedback 
expansion creates a stronger base for translationand improves precision. Lo­cal feedback after MRD translation 
introduces terms which de-emphasize irrelevant translations to reduce ambiguity and improve recall. Combining 
pre-and post-translation feed­back is most effective, and reduces translation error by up to 36%. Improvement 
appears to be due to the removal of error caused by the addition of extraneous terms via the transla­tion 
process. In t.tdspaper, we look at another method of query expan­sion known as local context analysis 
(IJ2A)[XC96J to tind words and phrases dated to each query. LCA is a query expansion method that uses 
both global and local document analysis, and has been shown to be more effective than sim­ple local feedback. 
The reason for this study is two-fold. First, we are interested in exploring the effectiveness of sim­ple 
phrasal translation. Second, we want to compare these two methods of query expansion, local feedback 
and local context analysis (LCA), for addressing the error associated with dictionary translation of 
words and phrases. 4 Experiments The experiments in this study were limited to two languages: Spanish 
and English. The Spanish queries consisted of TREC topics SP26-45. Evaluation was performed on the 208 
MB TREC ISM (E1Norte) Spanish collection with provided  P!!!!l==m relevance judgments. Training data 
for the pm-translation LCA experiments consisted of the documents in the 301 ME San Jose Mercury News 
(SJMN) database from the TREC collection. Each Spanish query has relevance judgments. In order d:=-i 
to use these judgments, we need to test the effectiveness of MRD translations to Spanish. To do this, 
we created base queries by manually translating the Spanish queries to En­glish (herein referred to as 
BASE). The automatic transla­tions of the base queries could then be evaluated using the relevance judgments 
of the original queries. The manual translation of the Spanish queries was performed by a bilin­gual 
graduate student whose native language is English. Phrases were identified in BASE queries in the following 
way. Firs6 queries were tagged with th BBN part-of-speech tagger. Sequences of nouns and adjective-noun 
pairs were taken to be phrases. Automatic translations were performed by translating individual terms 
word-by-word and phrases as multi-term concepts. The word-by-word translations were done by replacing 
query terms in the source language with the dictionary definition of those terms in the target lan­guage. 
Words that were not found in the dictionary were added to the new query without translation. The Collins 
English-Spanish bilingual MRD was used for the transla­tions. For a more detailed description of this 
process, see [BC96]. Phrasal translations were performed using infor­mation on phrases and word usage 
contained in the Collins MRD. This allowed the replacement of a source phrase with its multi-term representation 
in the target language. When a phrase could not be defined using this information, it was translated 
word-by-word as described above. Stop words and stop phrases such as A relevant document will were also 
removed. Non-interpolated average precision on the top 1000 re­trieved documents is used as the basis 
of evaluation for all experiments.CLIRwould beuseful forpeople who canonly affordtohaveasmallnumberof 
documentstranslatedor who do not speak a foreign language well enough to for­mulate a good query, but 
who can read it well enough to judge a document s relevance. However it is unrealistic to expect the 
userto readmanyretrievedforeign documentsto find a relevantone, so in some cases we also reportpreci­sion 
at low recall levels. The following sections describe our experiments. In section 5 we analyze and discuss 
the impor­tance of phrasal translation. Next we present a comparison of LCA and local feedback expansion. 
Sections 6.1,6.2, and 6.3 describe how pm-translation, post-translation, and com­ bined pre-and post-translationexpansion 
methods help to improveperformance(see Fig. 1 for a flow chartof query processing for the experiments). 
Finally, section 7 presents conclusions and future work. All work in this study was performed using the 
IN-QUERYinformationretrievalsystem. INQUERYis based  iii!&#38; v +i I I m-y F@re 1: Flow chartof queryprocessing. 
 on the Bayesian inference net model and is described elsewhere~C9 lb, TC91A CCB95]. 5 PhrasalTranslation 
Failure to translate multi-term concepts as phrases greatly reduces the effectiveness of dictionary translation. 
In ex­ *ents where query phrases were IIUWally tIWISkitd @296J, performanccimprovedby up to 25% overautomatic 
word-by-word(WEW) querytranslation.Ourhypothesisis that automatically identifying phrases and &#38;fining 
them as such would improve effectiveness. To test this hypothesis, we compare performance of au­tomatically 
translatedqueries both with and without phrasal identification and translation. Phrasaltranslationsare 
based on a database of phrasal and word usage information ex­tracted from the Collins Spanish-English 
MRD. Dining phrase translation, the database is searched for English phrases. A bit returnsthe Spauish 
translationof the English phrase.Ifmorethanonetranslationisfound,eachof themis added to the query. Table 
1 gives some examples of phrasal translations. Phrase I Translation united nations I Naciones Unidas 
0rganizaci6n de Ias Naciones Unidas tradeagreement I convenio comercial south africa I Uni6n Sudafricana 
I 10sp&#38;esparticipantes I 10s@es pertenecientea Table 1: Phrasal translations. The results in Table 
2 suggest that in this case, phrasal translation does not improve effectiveness. It gives average precision 
values for a baseline of automatic WBW transla­tion vs automatic WBW with phrasal translation. A closer 
look at individual queries reveals that phrasal translation is not ineffective, but that remdta are sensitive 
to poor trans­lations. Average precision drops 40% below a baseline of automatic WBW translation for 
TREC [Har95] query SP30 when phrasal translations are included. However, the prob­lem for this query 
is that sports program is translated as emisibn dcportiva meaning televised sporta program. When the 
poor phrasal translation is replaced with a WBW translation, results impmve considerably (+150% over 
the baseline). Table 3 shows 5 representations of SP30 Origi­nal, BASE, automatic WBW translation, automatic 
phrasal+ WBW translation, and automatic WBW translation + good phrasal translations. Parentheses enclose 
recognized phrases and brackets enclose phrasal translations. Results for the last three queries are 
given in Table 4. WBw Phrasal Avg 0.0823 0.0826 Table 2: Average precision of WBW vs phrasal translation. 
programas y intercambios deportivos entre M4xico y 10S&#38;tadoS Unidos (Sports programs) and (exchange 
programs) between Mexico and the (United States) deporte can deporte juego diversi6n victims juguete 
programs canje intercambio programs M6jico Mt5xico  states [emisi6n deportiva] cambio canje intercambio 
programs @3stadosUnidos][el CO1OSO de] norte] DMados Unidos de Am&#38;ical M4iico M6xico deporte cam 
deporte juego diversi6n v[ctima juguete programs cambio canje intercambio programs @stados Unidos] [cl 
CO1OSO del norte] IEstados Unidos de Am&#38;ical M6iico M&#38;ico  Table 3: Five query representations 
for SP30 original, BASE, MRD translation of BASE, MRD WBW + phrasal translation of BASE, MRD WBW + good 
phrasal transla­tions of BASE WBw Phrasal Good Phrasal Avg 0.0244 0.0148 0.0610 %change: -39.3 150.3 
 Table 4: Average precision for WBW vs two different phrasal translations for query SP30. These results 
suggest that well-translated phrases can tpdy improve effectiveness, but that poorly translated phrases 
may negate the improvements. Translation accuracy may be more important for phrases than for terms. 6 
Local Contaxt Anatysis va Local Faadback In experiments similar to those ffom our earlier work, we translated 
queries automatically via MRD. Query expansion via LCA was performed either prior to or after translation 
in the following way. A query set is evahated and the top ranked passages for each query are retrieved. 
Queries are then expanded by the addition of the top ranked concepts from the top passages. Recall that 
concepts may be single or muk.i-terrn. 6.1 Pra-translation In this first set of experiments, we wanted 
to compare the ef­fectiveness of query expansion prior to automatic translation via LCA to previous results 
using local feedbaek. Recall that the queries were manually translated into English, so the Spanish ISM 
database cannot be used for pm-translation expansion. We chose to use the SJMN database, described above, 
as a training corpus fimm which to choose English expansion concepts. Multi-term concepts are translated 
as phrases. In the event that no phrasal translation is found, phrases are translated WBW. Table 5 shows 
4 representa­tions of TREC query SP29. Fmt is the original query, sec­ond is the manual translation (BASE) 
including automati­cally identified phrases, third is the LCA expanded query, and fourth is the automatic 
translation of the third. Paren­theses surround LCA expansion phrasea and phrases auto­matically identified 
in the BASE query. Brackets surround the translation of each term or phrase. [ his relaciones econc%rticasy 
comerciales entre M&#38;ico y I Canadd the economic and (commercial relations) between mexico and canada 
economic (commercial relations) mexico canada mexico (trade agreement) (trade zone) Cubasahas [econ6mico 
equitativo][comercio negocio Wco industria] [namci6n relate relaci6n]M6jico M6xico] Canad4 lJMjico Mt%ico] 
[convenio cornercial] [comercio negocio trdfico industria] zona cubs salinas Table 5: Four query representations: 
original, BASE (with identified phrases), LCA expanded BASE, WBW + phrasal transition of LCA expanded 
BASE. First, we look at the effects of LCA expansion with­out phrasal recognition in the base query and 
compare a straight WBW translation of all concepts with a comb]­nation of phrasal and WBW translation. 
We then com­bine phrasal recognition in BASE with LCA expansion fol­lowed by both WBW and phrasal translation. 
fkanslations of multi-term LCA concepts were wrapped in the INQUERY #passage25 and #phrase operators. 
For example, #pas­sage25(#phrase(Nofth Arrmican Free Trade Agreement)). Terms within a#phrase operator 
are evaluated to see whether they co-occur frequently in the collection. If they do, co­occurrences within 
3 terms of each other are considered when calculating bdief. If nok the terms are treated as hav­ing 
equal influence on the final result in order to allow for the possibility individual occurrences are 
evidence of rele­vance. The #passage25 operator looks for the elements to occur within a window of 25. 
This operator ensures that terms which do not co-occur frequently be found a limited distance apart. 
The best results for automatic translations to Spanish are shown in Table 6. Descriptions of query processing 
for rows 2-7 follow. Row 2 (MRD) is the automatic word-by­word translation of BASE (original TREC queries 
manu­ally translated). For row 3, phrases were identified in the BASE queries and then WBW translation 
was augmented by phrasal translation (MRD + Phr). Row 4 shows re­sults for pre-translation LCA expanded 
BASE queries trans­lated word-by-word (MRD + LCA-WBW). Row 5 repre­sents pre-translation LCA expanded 
BASE queries trans­lated word-by-word with phrasal translation where possible (MRI) + LCA-Phr). In Row 
6, after phrase identification in BASE queries, they were expanded via LCA prior to trans­lation. The 
expanded queries were then translated word-by­word with phrasal translation where possible. Finally, 
row 7 shows results for pre-translation local feedback expanded BASE queries after word-by-word translation 
(LF). Method Avg %Change 0,0823 MRD+Phr 0.0826 0.3 MRD+LCA-WBW 0.0969 17.7 MRD+LCA-phr 0.1009 22.7 MRD+Phr+LCA-phr 
0.1053 27.9 LF 0.1099 33.5 Table 6: Average precision for pre-translation expansion re­sults. The best 
results were gained after adding the top 30 con­cepts fi-om the top 20 documents. They show that LCA 
ex­pansion is effective, but WBW translation of LCA concepts yields only a 17% increase. This is probably 
due to the am­biguity introduced through the loss of multi-term concepts. Further improvements are given 
when phrases are i&#38;nti­fied in the BASE queries and when multi-term concepts are translated as phrases. 
If multi-term concepts are translated as phrases, effectiveness goes up by 5%. The addition of phrasal 
recognition in the BASE queries boosts effcztive­ness by an additional 5%. These results show that the 
use of phrasal translation can indeed improve effectiveness. Pm-translation LCA expansion results are 
still not as good as those for pm-translation local feedback. This is sur­prising since comparisons of 
local feedback and LCA in the mono-lingual environment lJK296] have shown LCA to be more robust for query 
expansion. We hypothesized that although most phrases added by LCA appear to be good phrases, they may 
lose their effec­tiveness when taken as individual terms. This happens when a phrasal translation fails 
and we are forced to translate the phrase word-by-word. In addition, poor phrases will also tend to be 
ineffective when translated word-by-word. To test this, we performed LCA expansion returning only the 
best single-term concepts. Results in section 5 show that query effectiveness is highly sensitive to 
the accuracy of phrasai translation. Expansion by individual terms eliminates the negative effects of 
poor phrasal translations. We found that in some cases, our hypothesis is supported. However, it is 
not consistent. Table 7 gives a few exam­ples of LCA expansion with single-and multi-term concepts compared 
to expansion with only singleterm concepts. In this table, each of the expansions was done using the 
top 20 passages and the top 5 or 30 concepts. Automatic translation is given as a baseline. We believe 
the inconsistency is related to the types of multi-term concepts that are included in the expansion and 
on translation accuracy. Method Avg prec %Change 0.0823 LCA5-Phrasal 0.0819 -0.5 LCA5-Single 0.1051 27.7 
LCA30-Phrasal 0.1053 27.9 LCA30-Single 0.1010 22.7 Table 7: Average precision for multi-term and single-term 
concept expansion. Table 8 shows the best pre-translation results for expan­sion via local feedback and 
for single-term expansion via LCA. This shows that LCA can be more effective than local feedback when 
used prior to translation, however the choice of expansion concepts is critical. MRDLF LCAIO-Single Avg 
plW 0.0823 0.1099 0.1139 % Change: 33.5 38.5 Precision: 5 dcxx 0.2000 0.2500 0.3100 10 dots: 0.2100 0.2300 
0.2750 15 dots: 0.1867 0.2400 0.26W 20 dots: 0.1975 0.2375 0.2350 Table 8: Best pre-translation local 
feedback and single-term LCA expansion results.  6.2 Post-translation Expansion In experiments where 
post-translation LCA expansion was performed, muki-termconcepts wew wrapped in INQUERY #PHRASE OpC1 StOX 
S. The top rankedconcept was addedto a query with a weight of 1.0. Each additional concept was down-weighted 
by 1/100 with respect to the weight given its prcxtecessor. This weighting scheme was shown to be effec­tive 
in LCA experimentaforthe TREC5 evaluations [Har96]. Table 10 shows the best rewks for post-translation 
expan­sion via local feedback and LCA. In this table, local fed­back expansion was done by addition of 
the top 20 terms tim the top 50 documents. LCA expansion was done by addition of the top 100 concepts 
from the top 20 passages. Table 9 shows 2 representations of one of these queries. First is the BASE 
and second the automatic translation of BASE. The last row gives the top 20 expansion concepts that were 
added to this query, with multi-term concepts in parentheses. Note that all terms are stemmed. economic 
commercial relations mexico european 1 countries comerc nam relat rel econom equit rentabl psi patri 
camp region tierr mej mex europ (eat un) canada psi europ franci (diversific comerc) mex polit pais alemani 
rentabl opomm product apoy austrJl (mere europ) agricultor bancarrot region (comun econom europ) hMe 
9: ho query representations for TRW query SP26: BASE and MRD translation of BASE. Row 3 gives the top 
20 post-translation LCA expansion concepts for this query. MRDLF LCA20 Avg prec 0.0823 0.0916 0.1022 
% Change: 11.3 24.1 Preckion: 5docs: 0.2000 0.1800 0.2200 10 dots: 0.2100 0.1850 0.2100 15 dots: 0.1867 
0.1800 0.2167 20 dots: 0.1975 0.1575 0.2050 Table 10: Best post-translation local feedback and LCA ex­pansion 
results.  The bat post-translation LCA expansion is 11.6% more efhtive than the best post-translation 
local feedback expan­sion. Eleven of 20 queries do better with LCA as compared to 7 which do better with 
LF. A paired sign test shows this difference to be significant at p = .01. This supports earlier wxk 
by Xu which showed LCA to be a more etYectivequery expansion technique than local feedback. 6.3 Combined 
Pra-and Post-translation Expansion The combination experiments start with the pm-translation LCA expansion 
of the BASE queries. After the expanded queries are translated automatically, they are expanded again 
via LCA multi-term expansion. The base query set for the post-translation expansion phase in these experiments, 
is the best pre-translation, single-term concept LCA expanded query set, as described in Section 6.1. 
Table 11 shows 4 representations of one of these queries. F~ is the original query, second is the manual 
translation (BASE) including automatically identified phrases, third is the pre-translation LCA single-term 
expanded query, and fourth is the auto­matic translation of the thhd. The last row gives the top 20 expansion 
concepts that were added to this query, with multi-term concepts in panm~. Note that all terms are stemmed. 
Parentheses surround LCA expansion phrases and phrases automatically identified in the BASE query. Brack­ets 
surround the translation of each term or phrase. Ias relaciones econhicas y comerciales entre M4xico 
Y Can* &#38;e economic and (commercial relations) between mexico and canada economic (commercial relations) 
mexico canada mexico free-trade canada trade mexican aalinas cubs pact economies barriers [econ6mico 
equitativo][comercio negocio trtifico industria] [namaci6n relato relaci6n] w~jico M&#38;ico] Canad4 
Mtfjico M&#38;ico][convenio comercial] [comercio negocio trfico industria] zona cubs salinas canada (libr 
comerci) trat ottaw dosm (awed paralel) norteamer (eat un) (tres pais) import eu (vit ec&#38;om) comerci 
(centr econom) (barrer comerc) (increment subit) superpot rel acuerd negoci Table 11: Four query representations: 
original, BASE (with identified phrases), LCA expanded BASE, WBW + phrasal translation of LCA expanded 
BASE. The combined approach is more effective than either pre­or post-translation LCA expansion alone. 
This was aiso shown to be the case for local feedback expansion. lhble 12 gives results for automatic 
translation, the ht combined pre-and post-translation local feedback expansion, and the best combined 
LCA expansion. In this experimen~ queries were expanded by the top 50 terms fium the top 20 passages 
in the post-translation LCA phase. Fourteen and eleven queries show improvement over MRD translation 
aIone for LCA and LF, respectively. The LCA approach shows a 9% greater improvement than the local feedback 
approach, but thk difference is not statistically significant. When the two methods are compared 9 queries 
do better with LCA expan­sion as compared to 10 that do better with I-X expansion. However, it is interesting 
to compare the effects of LCA and local fkedback expansion on precision. h LCA expansion has higher precision 
at low recall levels. This is importmt in a CLIR environment. The user may not be proficient at reading 
a foreign language, so could not be expected to look through more than the top retrieved documents. 7 
Conclusions and Futura Work Automatic dictionarytranslationsareattractivebecause they are cost effective 
and easy to perform, resources are read­ MRD LF LCA20-50 Avg prec 0.0823 0.1242 0.1358 % Chanfzc 51.0 
65.0 Precision: 5 does 0.2000 0.2600 0.3700 10 does: 0.2100 0.2200 0.2850 15 does: 0.1867 0.2000 0.2767 
20 does: 0.1975 0.2125 0.2600 Table 12 Best combined pre-and post-translation local feedback and LCA 
expansion results.  ily available, and performance is similar to that of other CLIR methods. Ambiguity 
from failure to translate phrases is largely responsible for the large drops in effectiveness be­low 
monolingual performance. Phrasal translation can greatly improve effectiveness, however improvements 
are sensitive to the quality of the translations. The effect of one poor tmmslation can coun­teract any 
improvement gained by the correct translation of several phrases and may cause additional drops ineffective­ness. 
Certain types of multi-term concepts, such as proper noun phrases, are easily translated via MRD. However, 
dic­tionaries do not provide enough context for accurate phrasal translation in other cases. Query expansion 
via local feedback and LCA can be used to significantly reduce the error associated with dic­tionary 
translation. LCA expansion gives higher precision at low recall levels, which is important in a CLIR 
environ­ment. Table 13 shows the performance of each method as measured by average precision and percentage 
of monolin­gual performance, LCA, which typically expands queries with muki-term phrases, is more sensitive 
to translation ef­fects when pm-translation expansion is performed. This is because phrases that must 
be translated WBW, are not as ef­fective when separated into individual terms. Pm-translation LCA expansion 
with single-term concepts can reduce this problem. Pm-translation LCA expansion with single terms is 
rdso more effective than pm-translation local feedback and improves both precision end recall. Post-translation 
LCA is more effective then post-translation local feedback and tends to improve precision. Combming pre-and 
post­translation expansion is most effective and improves preci­sion and recall. It can reduce translation 
error by 45% over automatic translation bringing CLIR performance up from 42% to 68% of monolingual performance. 
This is still well below a monolingual baseline, but irnprovedphrasrd transla­tions should help to narrow 
the gap. In this study, we have shown that query expansion tech­niques can significantly reduce the error 
associated with dic­tionary translation. Dictionaries do not provide enough con­text for accurate translations 
on a wide range of phrase types, so an alternative must be found. A better phrase transla­tor should 
not alter our conclusion that query expansion can ameliorate the errors that occur in word-by-word or 
phrase Comb-LCA I 0.1358 Method Precision I % Monolingual Monolingual 0.1998 j - 0.0823 i 41.2 Pre-LF 
I 0.1099 I 55.0 68.0 1 Ttile 13: Average precision for all methods. translation, however tbrther improvements 
am dependent upon accurate phrasal translation. INFINDER [JC94] is a tool for generating a coxpus-based 
association thesaurus. We are currently exploring its potential for generating a cross-Ianguage association 
thesaurus that would provi&#38; enough context for more accurate phrasal translations. Acknowledgments 
We d like to thank Mark Davis end others at the CRL lab at New Mexico State University for the use of 
tools such as Norm, which facilitated access to the Collins b-al MRDs. This material is baaed on work 
supported by the National Science Foundation, Library of Congress, and Department of Commerce under cooperative 
agreement number EEC­9209623 and by a NASA GSRP grantj #NGT-70358. References [AF77] R. Attar and A. 
S. Fraenkel. Local feedback in full-text retrieval systems. Journal of the Asso­ciation for Computing 
Machinery, 24397417, 1977. PC96] Lisa Bdksteros and W. Bruce Croft. Dictionary-based methods for cross-lingual 
information retrieval. In Pnweedings @ the 7th International DEXA Co@mwe on Database and Experr Systems 
Applications, pages 791-801,1996. [CCB95J J.P. Calkm, W.B. Croft.j end J. Broglio. llee and tipster experiments 
with inquery. fn@ma­tion Processing and Management, 31(3):327­343,1995. ~av96] Mark Davis. New expeaimenta 
in croes­lenguagetext retrievalat nmsu scomputingre­searchIab. In ToAppear in: Pnxeedings af the Fl@hRetrieval 
Co#ewnce (TREC-5)Gaithers­bu~, MD: N&#38;Ml Institute of Standwdr and Technology, 1996. [DD93] Ted Dunning 
and Mark Davis. Multi-lingual information retrieval. Technical report MCCS­93-252, Computing Research 
Laboratory, New Mexico State University, 1993. ~94] [DD95a] [DD95b] Mark Davis and Ted Dunning. Query 
transla­tion using evolutionary programming for multi­lingual information retrieval. In Proceedings of 
the FourthAnnual Conference on Evolutionmy Pmgmnuning, 1995. Mark Davis and Ted Dunning. A tree evaluation 
of query translation methods for multi-lingual text retrieval. In In Proceedings of theFourth Rem eval 
Confetwwe (TREC-4) Gaithembwg, MD: National Institute of Stana%Jm%and Tech­ [Sa172] [SB90] [SB96] nology, 
Special Publication 500-236, 1995. pWD+88] G.W. Fumas, S. Deerwester, S.T. Dumais, T.K. Landauer anmd 
R.A. Harshman, L.A. Streeter, and K.E. Lochbaum. Information re­trieval using a singular value decomposition 
model of latent semantic stNcture. In Procee­ [SWH%] dingsof the 1lth International Confetwme on Research 
and Development in Information Re­trieval, pages 465480,1988. ~ax95] Donna Harman, editor. Proceedings 
of the 4th T@ Retdeval Conference (TREC-4). 1995. [TC91a] (%%] Donna Harman,editor. Proceedings of the 
5th T-Retrieval Conference (TREC-5). 1996. [HG96] [JC94] David A. Hull and GregoV Grefenstette. Query­ing 
twross languages: A dictionary-based ap­proach to multilingual information retrieval. In Proceedings 
of the 19th International Confer­ence on Research and Development in Informa­tion Retrieval, pages 49-57, 
1996. Y.Jing and W.B. Croft, An association thesaurus for information retrieval. In RIAO 94 Confer­ [TC91b] 
[XC96] ence Proceedings, pages 146-160, 1994. [Kup93] Julian M. Kupiec. An algorithm for finding noun 
phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In Proceedings, 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 17-22,1993. 
W90] Thomas K. blldMleI and Michael L. Littman. Fully automatic cross-language document re­trieval. In 
Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Electronic T&#38; Research, pages 31-38,1990. -72] B. Pevzner. 
Comparative evaluation of the op­eration of the russian and english variants of the pusto-nepusto-2 system. 
Automatic Docunaen­tation and Mathematical Linguistics, 6:71-74, 1972. K. Radwan. Vers l Acc&#38; Muhilingue 
en &#38;an­gage Natwvl aux Bases de Donndes Tmelles. PhD thesis, Universit4 &#38; Pdris-S@ Centn? d Omy. 
1994. Gerard SaltOn. Experiments in multi-lingual in­formation retrieval. Technical report TR 72-154, 
Computer Science Departmen4 Cornell Univer­sity, 1972, Gerard Salton and Chris Buckley. Improv­ing retrieval 
performance by relevance feedback. Journal of the American Socie@for Information Science, 41:288-297,1990. 
paraic Sheridan and Jean PSld Ballerini. Experi­ments in multilingual information retrieval using thespidersystem.In 
Proceedings of the 19th Zn­temational Confenmce on Reseamh and Devel­opment in Information Retrieval, 
pages 58-65, 1996. Frank Smadja, Kathleen R. WmKeown, and %sileios Hatzivassiloglou. lkanslating collo­cations 
fo bilingual lexicons: A statistical ap­proach. (k~ldtltio?ld Linguistics, 22(l): 1-38, 1996. Howard 
R. Turtle and W. Bmce Croft. Efii­cient probabilistic inference for text retrieval. In RIAO 3 Confetmce 
Proceedings, pages 664­661,1991. Howard R. Iiutle and W. Bruce Croft. Infer­ence networks for document 
retrieval. Ih Pr­oceedingsof the 19th International Conference on Reseaxh and Development in Information 
Rem eval,pages 1-24,1991. Jinxi Xu and W. Bmce Croft. Querying expan­sion using local and global document 
analysis. In Proceedings of the 19th Inwnatii?nid Con­ference on Reseaxh and Development in Infor­mation 
Retrieval, pages 4-11,1996.   
			