
 Physics for Animation Artists Alejandro L. Garcia* Alice A. Carter Dept. Physics, San Jose State University 
J. Courtney Granner David Chai§ School of Art &#38; Design, San Jose State University Abstract Physics 
for Animation Artists is a joint project by the Department of Physics and the Animation/Illustration 
Program at San Jose State University to develop a physics curriculum speci.cally for art ma­jors planning 
to enter the animation industry. CR Categories: K.3.0 [COMPUTERS AND EDUCATION]: General Keywords: art 
education, physics education 1 Motivation Though animators may bend, stretch, even break the laws of 
physics for comic or dramatic effect, they are keen observers of the physi­cal world. Animation artists 
carefully study the motion of objects, the appearance of light and shadow, and the properties of materi­als. 
They .ll their sketchbooks with these observations, in the same fashion as their predecessors, going 
back to Leonardo da Vinci. Unfortunately, artists sometimes develop the same false notions as pre-Renaissance 
scientists, such as believing that heavy objects fall faster than lighter ones. This occurs because their 
training within the standard art curriculum does not include physics. Physics in animation has further 
gained importance since com­puter programs now contain sophisticated simulation algorithms for rigid 
body dynamics, .uid mechanics, optical ray-tracing, and other physical modeling. These CGI tools are 
developed by computer scientists, yet often must be used by artists without the bene.t of physics training. 
Furthermore artists and designers are increasingly working alongside computer graphics engineers and 
the disparity in their educational backgrounds makes it dif.cult for the two com­munities to interact 
because they lack a common background and speak different languages. 2 Physics of Animation Project 
With the support of the National Science Foundation, the De­partment of Physics and the Animation/Illustration 
program in the School of Art &#38; Design at San Jose State University have teamed up to develop curriculum 
materials to teach physics to art majors planning to work in the animation industry. Initially these 
materials were embedded as special topic lectures within existing art courses. Speci.cally, in the Spring 
2008, Fall 2008, and Spring 2009 semesters a series of weekly, one-hour physics lectures were presented 
in Art 114 (upper-division Animation) on topics relevant to the students animation exercises (i.e., pencil 
tests). Speci.cally, the students completed seven animation exercises: a bouncing ball; a falling brick; 
a falling .our sack; a .oating leaf; a falling and bouncing water balloon; a human jumping; and a human 
walking. Two of the lectures (Balance and Effects Animation) *e-mail: algarcia@algarcia.org e-mail:alicecarter@stanfordalumni.org 
e-mail:grannerc@earthlink.net §e-mail:davechai@earthlink.net were not linked to a speci.c exercise but 
were of general interest and applicable to more advanced animation work. The titles of the physics lectures 
(and some of the relevant topics discussed) were: 1. Physics of the Ball Drop (Slowing In/Out, Acceleration, 
Squash &#38; Stretch) 2. Physics of the Brick Drop (Path of Action, Anticipation, Impact &#38; Bouncing) 
 3. Physics of the Sack Drop (Follow-through, Secondary Action, Inertia, Soft Matter) 4. Physics of 
the Leaf Drop (Air resistance, Lift, Addition of Forces, Ground Effect) 5. Physics of the Water Balloon 
Drop (Liquids, Pressure, Vibration and Harmonic Motion) 6. Physics of Balance (Statics, Center of Gravity) 
 7. Physics of Jumping (Action/Reaction Forces, Work/Energy principles) 8. Physics of Walking (Gait 
analysis, Pendulums) 9. Physics of Effects Animation  In addition, a single 90 minute physics lecture 
was given in all sec­tions of Art 28 (lower-division Introduction to Animation/ Illustra­tion); that 
lecture was a highly condensed version of the .rst four lectures from Art 114. Finally, during summer 
2008 a series of half­day master classes were offered at San Jose State University and De Anza community 
college. These Master Classes included high school teachers and their students and were featured on National 
Public Radio s All Things Considered. Student surveys collected in all of these classes indicate that 
the students found the physics lectures to be very helpful and instructors report that the animation 
work of these students has improved. We have also launched a website (www.AnimationPhysics.com) for the 
distribution of information and materials. We are converting the Art 114 lectures and master classes 
into a series of tutorials and several are already available on the website. Starting Fall 2009, Physics 
of Animation will be offered as a stand­alone, cross-listed Art/Physics course. The course will be a 
combi­nation of lecture, small group discussion (e.g., critiques of anima­tion clips), in-class demonstrations, 
and mini-experiments; it has been certi.ed for upper-division General Education credit in sci­ence at 
San Jose State.  Acknowledgements Supported by the National Science Foundation s Course, Curricu­lum, 
and Laboratory Improvement program. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2009, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, August 3 7, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-726-4/09/0008  
			