
 Polyrepresentation of Information Needs and Semantic Entities Elements of a Cognitive Theory for Information 
Retrieval Interaction Peter Ingwersen Royal School of Librarianship Copenhagen Denmark Abstract The 
paper outlines the principles underlying the theory of polyrepresentation applied to the user s cognitive 
space and the information space of IR systems, set in a cognitive framework. By means of polyrepresentation 
it is suggested to represent the current user s information need, problem state, and domain work task 
or interest in a structure of causality as well as to embody semantic full-text entities by means of 
the principle of intentional redundancy . In IR systems this principle implies simultaneously to apply 
different methods of representation and a variety of IR techniques of different cognitive origin to each 
entity. The objective is to approximate as close as possible text retrieval to retrieval of information 
in a cognitive sense. I. Introduction The aim of this paper is to apply the cognitive point of view to 
IR theory which, by application of the cognitive structures of different origin involved in IR, may improve 
the intellectual access to information sources and provide an enriched contextual platform to be applied 
by IR systems to support the users information seeking [1]. The objective is to point to the potential 
value of matching the multidimensional variety of representations inherently existing in or extracted 
from information objects and from the cognitive space of a user. Further, it attempts to demonstrate 
that by making adequate and combined use of empirical and analytic evidence from mainstream IR research 
aa well as from operational and information seeking investigations, it is possible to approximate text 
retrieval to retrieval of information in the proper sense of the concept. The following section presents 
and defines the concepts required for the establishment of a cognitive framework for IR. Based on existing 
empirical evidence, the section analyses the information need variation during IR interaction and the 
possibility of incorporating polyrepresentation of the cognitive space of users, that is, their information 
need formation and underlying work and problem situation. The following section takes a global view of 
information seeking and retrieval by pointing to the use of the variations of representations of texts 
and IR techniques in systems, already well-known to operational and laboratory IR research, and explores 
the introduced principle of intentional redundancy associated with text entities, IR system and users. 
The concluding section discusses the global model of polyrepresentation in IR and outlines briefly its 
theoretical consequences. 2. The Cognitive Approach to IR Theory From the cognitive point of view in 
information science each act of information processing -whether perceptual or symbolic -is mediated by 
a system of categories and concepts which, for the information processing device, are a model of hislits 
world [2]. In human information processing the world model constitutes the cognitive space which, consisting 
of highly dynamic and changeable cognitive structures, controls the perception and further processing 
of external input, e.g. during communication and IR interaction. The individual cognitive space and, 
in particular, the current cognitive/emotional structures and states are determined by the experiences 
gained through time in a social context [1]. In automatic information processing the world model is dynamic 
but not self-contained. It consists of the human cognitive structures embedded in the system prior to 
processing. Its individual cognitive structures, e.g. in form of algorithms or textual symbolic strings, 
may interact with one another and with structures generated by humans external to the system -when ordered 
and capable to do it. However, the processing will constantly take place at a linguistic sign level of 
communication ­never at a cognitive one. Only to human recipients of communicated signs the perception 
may also take place at a cognitive/emotional level, actually transforming the current cognitive states 
into new states, conceivably providing information transformed into knowledge and novel cognition. During 
any act of human or 102 computerized communication the viewpoint regards all communicated messages as 
signs transferred at a linguistic level which, only via perception and mediation by the individual recipient 
s current cognitive state, may transform into information at a cognitive level. Consequently, this view 
implies that any intentionality and meaning underlying the communicated messages are lost and has to 
be rebuild, i.e. interpreted, by the recipient by means of those pre-suppositions which make him/it participate 
in the communication act. Computers (or books for that matter) hold pre-defined and fixed pre-suppositions, 
whilst those of humans are individually unpredictable, formed as they are by episodic, semantic and emotional 
experiences. We may hence observe three fundamental characteristics of crucial importance to IR: 1) the 
uncertainties and unpredictabilities inherent in IR interaction and associated with interpretation, on 
the side of the user and on the side of the IR system ­ both as senders, recipients and processors. From 
a different perspective Sparck Jones has likewise pointed to similar uncertainty factors [3]; 2) the 
pre-supposition,r and intentionality underlying the communicated messages are vital for the perception 
and understanding of such messages; 3) direct and real information retrieval -as opposed to text retrieval 
performed at a linguistic level -is only possible by the individual user himself. IR systems may consequently 
only be most successful by acting as supportive means to retrieval by humans. In order to reduce the 
uncertainties as well as the unpredictabilities in IR and ease the perception and interpretation the 
cognitive viewpoint suggests to provide and make use of dl~erent cognitive structures during acts of 
communication, i.e. structures of dl@erent cognitive and jiwwtional origin -on both sides of the communication 
channel. As far as possible such structures ought to demonstrate contextual properties. From this perspective 
all the participating cognitive structures in IR are of potential value and should be available for IR 
interaction purposes, that is, the structures of the current user and those embedded in textual information 
objects and system architectures, see Fig. 1. For instance, this means also to explore further the supportive 
potentials of combinations of the mainstream partial match techniques with relevance feedback functionality. 
From this perspective the paper proposes to apply a principle of intentional redundancy to IR interaction 
by means of polyrepresentation of both contextual semantic entities of texts and of user need characteristics 
as its necessary components, in order to reduce the uncertainties constantly present in the IR interaction 
processes. 2.1 Cognitive Strictures in IR In this framework cognitive structures are manifestations of 
human cognition, reflection or ideas. In IR they take the form of transformations generated by a variety 
of human actors belonging to a variety of different cognitive origins: systems designers and producers, 
IR thedmique developers, indexing rule constructors, indexers, authors of texts and images (note 1), 
interrmxiiary mechanism designers, and users in a domain-related context, Consequently, in an IR system 
designers -cognitive structures may be represented by specific database structures or one or several 
matching algorithms, e.g. the vector space and probability formulars -see Fig. 1, left-hand side. Human 
indexers cognitive structures are represented by the index terms added to records, essentially being 
the result of an intellectual interpretation of an author s text or images, often guided by pre­ define 
rules and a thesaurus for which the structure and knowledge representation other humans are responsible. 
In automatic indexing the weighting fimction applied signifies in itself a transformed cognitive structure. 
The author s text, incl. titles, captions and headings, are representations of cognitive structures intended 
to be communicated. Speeidic portions of the texts, e.g. titles, captions, and the full-text, demonstrate 
dzjterent functional origin. An intermediary mechanism s manipulation of user requests into query formulations 
during request model building represents additional cognitive structures. The user s own request formulation 
is a representation of his current cognitive state concerned with an information need. Similarly, conceivable 
problem statements and work task or interest descriptions are representations of intrinsic cognitive 
structures underlying the user s information seeking. Such intrinsic cognitive structures of users are 
more or less variable and transformable, as opposite to system and text representations which, in a cognitive 
sense, always are invariable. From this perspective, intrinsic information needs may indeed be stable 
as well as well-defined in realistic terms, as is the case in the present Tipster/Tree projects and in 
the earlier Cranfield experiments. As empirical evidence demonstrates below, information needs in real-life 
IR situations become indeed quite stable at a certain point of a session. But rather often IR sessions 
are exploratory throughout long initial phases. Real-life information needs are commonly variable, vaguely 
stated or ill-defied, Well-defined intrinsic wishes for information seem to be a special case. What interests 
us here is consequently to establish methods founded in theory to support such intrinsically ill­detined 
and variable information needs. In the laboratory experiments IR research attempts to maximize the performance 
of a variety of retrieval techniques and methods of representation of information objects -essentially 
the left-hand side of Fig. 1. The experimental laboratory settings generally force the researchers to 
apply well­defined information needs. What is attempted in this contribution is to view these experimental 
results in combination with evidence concerned with research on real-life information seeking behaviour, 
that is, the totallity of Fig. 1. The difficult task is to cope with the unpredictability associated 
with vague information needs which yield badly constructed, twisted or one-two word request formulations 
at the initial phases of IR interaction. The assumption to exploit the underlying cognitive structures 
of users in order to improve the situation is not unknown in user-oriented IR research. Below are outlined 
the investigative results supporting the mplicit use of such underlying structures. INFORMATION OBJECTS 
-Text/Knowledge representations -Full text, pictures../ Semantic entities J Models+ \ 1 \ Individual 
user s COGNITIVE SPACE: Interface/ -Work task/Interest Social/Org.environment. Intermediary -Current 
Cognitive State -Domains/Goals Query < + Models + ~nctions ) W est c+ + Models+ <_~ -Problem/Goal -Tasks 
+ Models + -Uncertainty -Preferences -Information need -Information behaviour JR SYSTEM SETTING / -Search 
language/IR technique -Database structure -Indexing rules/computational logic t Models + > : cognitive 
transformation and influence < > : interactive communication of cognitive structures Fig. 1. Cognitive 
communication model of information interaction in information science. From [1, p. 33]. At the centre, 
Fig. 1, the cognitive structures embedded into intermediary mechanisms are, for example, the Monstrat 
functions [4,5], based on the extraction of underlying problem descriptions or the Mediator Model fanctionalities 
[1], such as the Domain Model and the Request Model Builder, also found in the 13R system [6]. At the 
right-hand side, Fig. 1, are outlined the major different cognitive strictures of individual users which 
may be represented to intermediary mechanisms and IR systems, e.g. the actual work task or interest leading 
to a current cognitive state which may end up in a problem or goal for the actual user. The cognitive 
situation in the user s problem space may produce a certain degree of uncertainty, e.g. as to how to 
reach a goal, finally generating a wish for external information, i.e. the intrinsic information need. 
According to the current cognitive state, the model of the IR system and the intentionality, this wish 
for information is represented in form of a request. These mental activities take place in the context 
of a domain of epistemic, social or organisational nature which, aside from influencing the current searcher 
in a historical sense, in addition constantly influence the authors of texts and systems design attitudes 
-the left-hand side, Fig. 1. This assumed intrinsic causali~ associated with the formation of the information 
need signifies an extension of the ASK hypothesis [7] as well as the sense-making theory by Dervin and 
Nilan [8] by making use of cognitive task analysis approaches to systems design [9, 10], placed in the 
framework of the cognitive viewpoint. Prior to Belkin, Dervin and Nilan and other scholars analytic contributions 
to understanding information need formation D.M, Mackay stated in 1960 an often cited conception of the 
issue: .. a certain incompleteness in his [the inquirer s] picture of the world -an inadequacy in what 
we may call his state of readiness to interact purposefully with the world around him in terms of a particular 
area of interest [11]. Fundamentally, both Belkin, Dervin and Nilan as well as R.S. Taylor in his analysis 
from 1968 [12] regard the recognized incom­pleteness , inadequacy or anomaly as the mental trigger for 
the proceeding internal cognitive activities related to the development of the information need. The 
point here has always been that the user is only capable of describing what he knows at a given point 
in time according to his current cognitive state, but not what he does not know yet and is actually searching 
for. Hence, the user may consequently only vaguely formulate a request for information by formulating 
fragments of his current cognitive state. However, what he might be able to do, in theory, is to state 
his underlying problem or motive. Quite importantly, already Mackay points to a reason or causality underlying 
this incompleteness, uncertainty state, ASK or problem situation: the area of interest . We regard this 
area of interest as identical to the individual s current work task. This task may deal directly with 
a person s actual work within a specific domain, e.g. designing databases for AI purposes. It may also 
simply be concerned with an interest not directly related to working conditions, but e.g. be associated 
with entertainment, hobby or leasure domains. Belkin et al. s investigations (protocol analyses) of the 
problem space provide us with insight into two basic underlying phenomena: the vagueness or uncertainty 
also associated with problem statements made during intermediary-user interaction, i.e. pre-search interviewing 
[5,7] -and the possibility of actually acquiring data concerning cognitive state , domains and tasks 
during human interaction. Saracevic and Su s large-scale investigations of online system-intermediary-user 
interaction incorporate in addition thefeedback from the system [13]. One may observe that the mentioned 
structures surface in more rich forms and evolve through the interactive IR processes. From a re-analysis 
of Ingwersen s sets of original thinking-aloud protocols (14) identical patterns emerge. The protocols 
contain a great amount of assessments and relevance feedback based on the retrieved and presented full-text 
material, By means of the experimental setting, which initially made the users browse the shelves with 
their own needs while thinking aloud prior to a system-librarian-user interaction, we may observe the 
cognitive evolution of the information need. In some cases the starting point is a very vaguely formed 
need which develops into an information need quite known to the user (and the experimenters) when finally 
encountering the intermediary. However, such internally quite well-defined needs become very often twisted 
or reduced at the initial point of search interviewing. This problem of reduction is mainly caused by 
the incompatibility of the models the participants hold of one another. The vital points during interaction 
seem to be when parts of information sources, indexes, tables of contents, etc. are confronted by the 
user and the intermediary, since such triangular situations force the user to reformulate an already 
conscious need and the problem statements, and the intermediary to ask certain types of questions. The 
protocols demonstrate clear-cut statements and assessments associated with the underlying elements of 
work task and domain . For instance, in a protocol concerned with searching for an appropriate form of 
Boolean logic formulars the user initially puts up with request labels consisting of synonyms for Boolean 
Logic . Via feedback from the system the user decides to move onto other possible domains or aspects 
of Boolean logic ­from a philosophical one to a mathematical one. During this process several text entities 
are judged relevant to the topic of Boolean logic , but only partially relevant to the actual nedproblem 
and the work task. Since his preferred mode of formular is not displayed in a suitable form in these 
full-text sources, the intermediary asks for the user s current field of interest . The answer, applied 
computer science , signi ties the domain and triggers the user to explain his underlying work task : 
the appropriate form of the formular is associated with electronic circuits when repairing and designing 
computer systems . Since a question like what are you going to use the information for? never occured 
during the search interview, the user did not supply any details of his existing intrinsic knowledge 
about his task. Kuhlthau has very recently reported empirical results supporting the idea that the initial 
state of uncertain~ concerned with an information need momentarily becomes even more uncertain during 
the initial phases of information seeking [15]. Also in relation to complex work task operations Murtonen 
and Jlh-velin [16] have found that the types of information needs maybe very different, ranging from 
well-defined ones in less complex tasks to vague or non-defined needs (and problems/goals) in case of 
very complex tasks. What seems defined are alone the task itself and the domain concerned with the task. 
This tentative result coincide with investigations of why EIS and S1S systems do not work properly when 
traditional solutions of information provisions are applied. Together with other re-analyses of similar 
protocols, these investigations of operational information seeking demonstrate that 1) aside from the 
current cognitive state additional underlying cognitive structures are indeed present, often in well-defined 
forms and their potential values should be used to guide the system towards possible ranges of information 
sources; 2) that relevance wsessments and relevance feedback maybe carried out in relation to core cognitive 
elements different from the typicality of the information need (e.g. the topic Boolean logic ) [17]. 
It is not only the what , but more importantly the why which determine assessments. For example, assessments 
are related to the underlying problem (i.e. the adequate form of the formular in a design process), the 
work task (i.e. design and repair of computer circuits), or the domain (i.e. applied computer science). 
This phenomenon of dl~erentiated relevance maybe related to the utility values introduced by Cooper [18]. 
For instance, all the domain-related philosophical, mathematical, logical, and computer science texts 
concerned with the request on Boolean logic would be regarded topically relevant. Only very few texts 
in the actual library collection were in fact useful to the user s work task and problem. With reference 
to the discussion by Salton [19] a differentiated assessment would have provided the system with a high 
performance ratio concerning the work task and problem fulfillment -and a very low traditional recall 
ratio. 2.2 Intentional Redundancy as the Principle for Polyrepresentation The principle of intentional 
redundancy applied to polyrepresentation in IR originates from the arguments put forward by Sparck Jones 
concerned with the necessity of working through redundancy, that is, dl~erent ways of referring to the 
same concept and of linking different concepts in form of a conceptual network thrown over the underlying 
information objects [3, p. 9]. The generic inference netsvork proposed by Turtle and Croft [20] follows 
similar lines of thinking. We call this redundancy intentional , since general and non-estimated redundancy 
in relation to representations of information objects may not always be productive in IR. The degree, 
mode and function of redundancy should be determined by knowledge of the current user s information behaviour, 
e.g. as inferred or believed by the intermediary mechanism, based on a elaborate model of searcher behaviour. 
In other words, from a cognitive perspective as many and as different cognitive structures as possible 
should be made available and applied during IR interaction, however, in accordance with an estimation 
which allows for a controlled or calculated selection of exactly such structures that are regarded most 
appropriate to the current retrieval situation. This issue of estimation is not necessarily seen as a 
mathematical one but rather a behavioral and psychological issue. Simplified intentional redundancy has 
been attempted for decades in the operational online environment by means of different forms of indexing 
and thesaurus support applied to the same bibliographic record collection. Conceptual inference networking 
is a more subtle and dynamic form of redundancy. However, with intentional redundancy in the context 
of the cognitive viewpoint we propose to extend the principle into the user s cognitive space, exploiting 
its different cognitive structures, Fig. 1, right-hand side. These are constituting a more powerful inference 
network with truely dynamic properties and based on human intentionality. Intentional redundancy on both 
the systems and user side is assumed to provide improved access structures for both participants during 
IR interaction. The principle is proposed carried out by polyrepresentative means. By polyrepresentation 
is meant the representation in a variety of different forms of one information object, e.g. of an information 
requirement or a text entity. Fundamental y, they are forms of the different cognitive structures as 
defined above, and are generated via a variety of well-known methods applied to IR systems. Different 
indexing methods applied to the same text collection yields different sets of text or document entities 
for the same query, e.g. natural language vs. controlled vocabulary methods. Several empirical investigations 
of the matter [21,22,23] carried out in the operational exact match environment demonstrate clearly that 
the combination -the overlap -of controlled index phrases and natural language representations from basic 
index yields the best retrieval results, better than the two separately. The more variety in cognitive 
origin of method, the more different results. Human indexing will result in retrieved sets rather different 
from automatically indexed collections of texts. Inter-indexer inconsistencies and inter-linker inconsistency 
for hypertext link-creation are, not surprisingly, quite high [24]. One of the very few investigations 
of the alternative overlap between index term retrieval of journal articles and searching via citation 
indexing has been carried out by McCain [25]. For the same queries in Medline and the 1S1 databases the 
result was as expected from a cognitive viewpoint: The two very different cognitive structures of indexers 
and authors, the latter group interpreting the texts with completely different intentions than the former, 
yielded an overlap of only 11 % on average. As above, the two representative methods are complementary 
to one another. In addition, the degree of overlap between natural language representations of full-text 
and citation indexing (as well as the NL representations of such citations) ought to be explored further. 
As instruments for such investigations the 1S1 databases are insufficient. The prediction for the outcome 
is that the two sets of retrieved text entities are similarly complementary. With respect to overlap 
between sets of texts retrieved via dl~erent partial (and exact match) techniques for the same query, 
the picture is identical. A more detailed outline of the characteristic retrieval power of the variety 
of matching techniques is provided by Belkin and Croft [26] and by Croft in relation to intelligent IR 
[27]. From a cognitive perspective this evidence of variety is obvious -and should be directly exploited. 
Not surprisingly, recent TREC investigations of the retrieval performance of combined query versions 
generated by several searchers, but deriving from the one and same well and pre-defmed information need, 
demonstrate a performance similar to that of the best performing query. This latter query version is, 
of course, always unknown beforehand and hence unpredictable [28]. This interesting research on inter-searcher 
106 consistency, similar to the inter-indexer consistency experiments, strongly indicates the individual 
cognitive nature of request formulation rooted in intrinsic causality. It seems unrealistic to assume 
that several real-life searchers may initiate IR based on identical and well-defined needs for information. 
The realistic alternative proposal is consequently to obtain simultaneous but cognitively different representations 
of the current user s information need situation -framed by the principle of intentional redundancy, 
2.2.1 Polyrepresentation of Semantic Entities of Full-Text. Adequate semantic entities of full-text are 
defined as the smallest unit of a given text which provides a recipient with a semantically y confined 
context. Such entities may thus range from sente~ces Vver paragraphs, to encyclopedia entries, news release 
units and sub-sub-sections in journal articles and books. The suggestion to apply such smaller parts 
of traditional documents for representation and retrieval purposes is not novel. For monographs the principle 
of using chapter headings and table captions was proposed and tested in relation to the SAP-Projects 
for library online catalogs for more than a decade ago [29,30]. Use of paragrahs in full-text retrieval 
of encyclopedia settings has recently been made by the Salton et al. [31,32]. Similarly, paragraphs are 
used in hypertext link-creation experiments [24]. In linguistic based IR sentences are the prefemxl semantic 
entity for analysis and retrieval [33] and are also proposed by van Rij sbergen to form the kernel to 
which to apply the principle of logical uncertainty [34,35]. The SIMPR indexing machine makes use of 
chapter and section headings as well as full-text sentences in order to produce indexing concepts automatically 
by linguistic analysis and to point to potentially relevant sub-seetions and paragraphs in large monographic 
material [36,37]. One may here observe a structural or syntactic approach to representation as well as 
to retrieval which tends to approximate a contextual level in IR research. Regardless the document type 
in question it seems adequate to assume that text paragraphs and single figures or tables provide the 
smallest semantically confined unit of documents that may produce the information searched for. Empirical 
experiences tell us this as well as intuition. If we, for instance, observe how authors directly cite 
other text entities in their own texts, it seems very probable that one or a few related paragraphs provide 
the vital context embodying and giving meaning to the cited sentence. Negative consequences exist for 
IR when using smaller units of full-text. The variation of representation methods may be reduced. No 
paragraph header normally exists in addition to the full-text terms and concepts. However, it is still 
functionally relevant, for instance, to claim that a section or news item header may cover several sequential 
paragraphs of text. Other negative aspects of introducing semantic entities is the difficulty of applying 
human indexer interpreta­tions to the entities in order to assign representations mainly concerned with 
elements not mentioned in the text, but of reasonable value to retrieval and users. This issue concerns 
indexing methods similar to those suggested by Blair [38] or by Hjorland [39], in which the domain and 
the text s cognitive potentials play vital roles. Representations of, for instance, treatment, author 
intent or situational dependent task-relationships, and alike aspects of a text incl. domain-related 
class codes, may only be possible to assign to the total document text -not to individual semantic entities. 
However, if assigned to the entire document, such representations do provide access to the context of 
entities belonging to the document. This and other relationships of conceptual dependency between the 
whole and its entities and between entities and their forms of representation may be exploited in a structured 
manner, e.g. as attempted by Schmeltz Pedersen by application of lattice theory [40]. Finally, one may 
note that the writing style manifested in the various forms of entities is influencing the parameters 
for retrieval. Paragraphs from Introductions are slightly different in style from the corresponding abstracts, 
and rather different from the entities embedded in the remaining text body. Every document type has its 
independent style which vary from domain to domain. To summarize the application of the intentional redundancy 
principle to paragraphs as the selected semantic entity, polyrepresentation may take may take several 
different forms. As a minimum, three cognitively different structures of representation and retrieval 
modes may be involved: 1) the authored textitse~ incl. overlying headings, and the citations to other 
texts in certain document types; 2a) the method(s) applied to representing the paragraph via form(s) 
of automatic indexing and linguistic text analysis; 2b) the retrieval technique(s) applied to the original 
text and the representations. The representations and the techniques may be identical, since each partial 
match technique also may serve as means to automatic indexing at single-term level; 3) the domain-dependent 
thesaurus structure (if existing) applied to and supporting the representations. In addition, structures 
of other authors actually citing the paragraph -or at least the page holding it -may be involved. This 
latter representation is only applicable for certain document types. For each different origin mentioned, 
we may anticipate at least one version of representative structure to be present in relation to the same 
semantic entity -but several dl~erent simultaneous versions may actually be expected. For instance, several 
different methods of automatic representation may be applied simultaneously: a) single term extraction 
and weighting, combined with b) linguistic analysis producing concepts -as in SIMPR ­which may c) be 
validated via a thesaurus structure, producing controlled index terms not present in the analysed text. 
Several retrieval principles may be applied in parallel: vector space, probability, clustering, spreading 
activation, logical uncertainty, etc. -each on the different versions of representations if required. 
Each version will retrieve different sets of paragraphs with a varying degree of overlap in a calculated 
and intentional manner. One is free to manipulate the search outcome, for example by producing a variety 
of overlapping sets, to create conceptual network structures, or simply to ignore some of the structures 
in action. This bottom-up approach to representation and retrieval of semantic entities makes it in addition 
possible to view larger parts of the entire document in light of the retrieval power of its own entities. 
The mode of manipulation will depend on the intentionality of the current user -as perceived by the system. 
  3. Polyrepresentation in IR -the Global Model Fig. 2 displays the global model of polyrepresentation 
of semantic entities in information space and the user s intrinsic cognitive structures following the 
principle of intentional redundancy. At the right-hand side the model attempts to visualize the participating 
cognitive elements responsible for the formation of the individual intrinsic information need and the 
resulting request versions. In this respect, the elements form the polyrepresentative entities of the 
user s cognitive space in a vertical bottom-up mode of causality, leading towards the information need. 
Combined, the representations extracted by interface functionalities, such as the Request and User Model 
Builder functions in the Mediator Model [1, p. 209-216] or similar model builders suggested elsewhere 
[5,6], provide a structured context of statements and descriptions to be applied to or by the IR system. 
Each cognitive element may form the basis for further elaboration in a horizontal dimension by structured 
questioning via an interface functionality, as suggested in [4 1]. Both dimensions may hence form the 
context necessary for applying the principle of logical uncertainty as an alternative retrieval principle 
[34,35].  c/w ...... .... ~ : Variilbility ;: Text entity l-~t~i~~id ~: Information interaction Fig. 
2. The Global Model of Polyrepresentation in IR, extending the generic inference network of information 
space by Turtle and Crotl [20] to incorporate representations of the user s cognitive space and interface 
functionality. A third dimension of context is made up by the degree of conceptual background knowledge 
of the user, associated with his current cognitive state . Again, various interface models have suggested 
fictional solutions to extract this type of knowldge from the user which is essential for estimating 
the nature and quality of the current intrinsic information need [1, 6,42]. Naturally, a fourth dimension 
of time exist during any retrieval session, signified by the variability and versioning of statements 
demonstrated on the model. The inte~ace plays a key-role in this scenario, since its outlined functionalities 
assure that the intentional redundancy principle may be inforced. The aforementioned estimations as to 
which representative methods and retrieval techniques to apply, and under which circumstances, are based 
on the the interface s perception of the retrieval situation of the user. The crucial point is the estimation 
of the cognitive nature and quality of the information need. For instance, if it is perceived that the 
user simply wish to verlfi and locate items already explicitly known, the intention of the interface 
would be to abandon redundancy and apply exact match retrieval on simplified representations of entities 
in information space. On the other hand, if the need wxxns to be of topical nature, there exist two basic 
alternatives: 1) the information need is intrinsicly vague, ill-defined or non­existent, and consequently 
variable; 2) the intrinsic need is rather welldefined and stable. According to the cognitive view it 
would be mandatory in case of the first possibility to allow the user to explore the information space 
in a multidimensional way. This exploratory behaviour constitutes an extention and specification of Bates 
so-called Berry-picking seeking behaviour [43,44]. We extend this Berry-picking metaphor also to encompass 
the conceivable (reformation of the underlying problem or goal which, as stated above, also may be vaguely 
developed internally to the user. At the left-hand side of the model the (r.. ) notation signifies nodes 
of concepts derived from different representative methods (-> r.. ) applied to the semantic entity nodes 
(S,.). The (S..) notation may also signify sets or clusters of semantic entities. As the figure stands 
it demonstrates the application of one retrieval technique, e.g. the probability-based method. In relation 
to each representation of the user s cognitive space, i.e. (q.., p.., w), incl. the domain, the retrieval 
of semantic entities is based on the probability that an entity satisfies these representations individually 
or in combination with one another (r.. -> q.., p.., w) -as discussed above. However, only real assessments 
can be carried out by the actual user in relation to his intrinsic cognitive representations. A similar 
model would represent another retrieval technique in action, e, g. vector-space, in principle yieZding 
dz~erent nodes or (sets of) semantic entities for the same (q..), (p..), etc., and for the same semantic 
entities (S..) embodied by the same methods of representations (r..) as before. (rl -m) might, for instance, 
be matching concepts validated by a domain thesaurus (r 1), simple concepts extracted by linguistic text 
analysis (r2), single text terms (r3), or personal names extracted from the entities (m). In case of 
an ill-defined or vague intrinsic information need, the interface should concentrate on the remaining 
cognitive elements, internal to the user, in order to allow for browsing and explorative behaviour in 
the information space by following dl~erent conceptual pathes in the system. These pathes are associated 
with the aforementioned different structures of representation -the left-hand side of Fig. 2. The idea 
is that for each element of the user s own cognitive space, the right-hand side, Fig. 2, there should 
exist a corresponding network of concepts (r..) and semantic entities (S.. ) which may be explored by 
the user. For each such element, say the work task , a path is constituted by at least one of several 
different methods of representation (r3) matching the user description extracted by the interface (w). 
The resulting semantic entities are signified by (s3). In total, the model demonstrates that by introducing 
statements of problem space and work task/domain , additional pathes for exploration and retrieval are 
made available -pathes which might never be reached via the query versions alone. By means of this additional 
information from the system, relevance judgment and query expansion is possible (rl ----> q2) during 
the proceeding part of the session. Not demonstrated on the model is the additional intentional possibility 
to combine, or concentrate, all the retrieved sets of entities (e.g. S2 -Sri), regardless to which cognitive 
structure they belong in the user s cognitive space. Fundamentally, this procedure implies to view request, 
problem and task statements and domain description as one large manifestation of the information need. 
This is the recommended strategy to follow if the initial request, problem statement and work task/domain 
descriptions are rich, conceivably signifying a well­defined and stable intrinsic information need. In 
addition to traditional relevance assessments resulting in relevance feedback to the system, this intentional 
strategy allows also for assessments directly associated with each of the user s different cognitive 
structures. It is thus possible to separate utility values from typicality , It would be possible to 
implement the model, Fig. 2, into several ongoing experiments, e.g. the OKAPI project [45]. The user 
response to each element, extracted by the interface, will in realistic terms consist of few conceptual 
structures. The virtue of OKAPI so far has been its conscious dedication to a realistic user environment 
in which searchers do not carry stable and well-defined information needs. In contrast to the TREC experiments, 
real-life experimentation takes place involving human searchers and real information r~uests. The advantage 
for OKAPI would conceivably be that the total amount of potentially relevant data for (initial) probability 
retrieval would be augmented and in addition be structured, that is, available for various forms of manipulation 
by the system in supporting the user s proceeding exploration and expansion of statements. In relation 
to the TREC experiments the model of polyrepresentation could be implemented by enhancing the description 
of the pre-defined information needs , already supplied by the project. At present the information needs 
in TREC contain a Domain description and a request version of the need. In addition, this request is 
explained in more depth by a description . For each need is given a detailed essay on the kind of material 
which is supposed to be relevant. This essay, or assessment background, is corresponding to the notion 
of preference , Fig. 1, right-hand side. Hence, it is suggested to add a realistic Problem/Goal Statement 
as well as a Work Task/Interest Description. This enhancement would make it possible during the relevance 
judgment and human query expansion processes [46] to know why an item ought to be relevant according 
to the mentioned assessment essay. 4. Concluding Discussion This cognitive approach to IR theory is supported 
by empirical evidence from both the information seeking research as well as from studies made in the 
operational environment. In addition, it does not contradict the IR developments achieved so far associated 
to partial matching. It attempts to incorporate them in a global framework. Polyrepresentation of the 
user s knowledge space signifies to represent not only the current information need, but in addition, 
and more importantly, to reach into the underlying problem space, actual work task or interest, and the 
dominating work domain. These elements are associated with the information need formation by following 
a principle of causality, that is, the intentionally underlying the fact of having such a need at all. 
Information needs internal to the user are basically regarded being of vague and variable nature, but 
may also exist in stable and well-defined forms, according to the nature of the current problem state 
of the user in the situation. The nature of the representations of all elements in terms of request, 
problem and work task formulations may point to the actual condition of the intrinsic information need. 
The ongoing laboratory experimental settings are found valid, but confined to investigations of invariable 
information needs represented by well-formulated and predefine requests for information. In realistic 
terms this Cranfield approach conforms to a limited case of retrieval. In this confined experimental 
scenario it is suggested also to monitor problem and work task relationships, by adding simulated elements 
for each already defined experimental query. For relevance assessment the theory suggests and allows 
for relative, but statistical significant assessments. This is already the case in the TREC and Tipster 
experiments. In addition, partial relevance of documents is made available following the presented approach, 
since the semantic entities are the main objective of assessment and retrieval. Hence, the theory also 
encourages to include differentiated relevance, implying that typicality relevance is supplied with work 
task and problem relevance or rather, utility: Several semantic entities may be topically relevant, but 
only partially relevant or irrelevant for the actual work task and problem -and vice versa. In realistic 
terms, and in order to investigate the exploratory quality of partial match and different methods of 
representation, one may in addition apply ill-defined queries with rich problem and task definitions. 
Such enhanced but still simulated experimental situations are assumed to improve the reliability of results, 
although, of course, the number of experimental variables will increase further compared to to&#38;y 
s research setting. Ideally, real-life situations should not only be simulated but actually be applied 
in the research design. The significance is to take a methodological step further by incorporating the 
problems concerning concepts like reliability and validity, known from the social sciences in general 
and marketing research in particular. Indeed, these concepts, e.g in terms of experimental question design 
[47], are important components of any type of relevance or utility assessment. Note 1: Throughout the 
paper Text signifies textand all other media-borne messages, such as images, video, films, etc. References 
1. Ingwersen, P. Information Retrieval Interaction. Taylor Graham, London, 1992. 2. De Mey, M. The relevance 
of the cognitive paradigm for information science. Jn. Harbo, O. et. al. (eds.). Theory and Application 
of Information research. Mansell, London, 1980, pp. 48-61. 3. Sparck Jones, K. Retrieving information 
or answering questions. The 8th British Annual Research Lecture. British Library, 1989 (BLRD/./l3O) 
4. Belkh, N.J., Seeger, T., Wesig, G. Dk+tributed expert problem treatment as a model for information 
systems analysis and design. J. of Inf.Sc., 1983; 5:153-167.  5. Belkin, N.J., Brooks, H., Dmriels, 
P.J. Knowledge elicitation using discourse analysis. fat. joum. of Man-machine Studies, 1987; 27:127-144. 
 6. CroR, W.B. and Thomson, R. J3R: A new approach to the design of document retrieval systems. JASIS, 
1987; 38(6): 389-404. 7. Belkin, N.J., Oddy, R., Brooks, H. ASK for information retrieval. J. of Dec., 
1982; 38:61-71; Part II: 145-164. 8. Dervin, B. and Nilan, M. Information needs and uses. ARIST, 1986;21 
:3-33. 9. Rasmussen, J., Pejtersen, A.M., Goodstein, L.P. Cognitive Engineering: Concepts and Applications. 
Wiley, 1992. 10. Wood-Harper, A. T., Antill, Lyn, Avison, D.E. Information Systems Definition: The Multiview 
Approach. Blackwell Scientific PubI., Oxford, 1985. 11. Mackay, D.M. What makes the question. The Listener, 
1960; 63:789-790. 12. Taylor, R.S. Question negotiation and information seeking in libraries. Coil. 
and Res. Llbr., 1968; 29:178-194. 13. Saracevic, T., Mokros, H., Su, L.T. Nature of interaction between 
users and intermediaries in online searchkg: a qualitative analysis. ASIS Proc., 1990, 27p. 14. Ingweraen, 
P. Search procedures in the library analysed from the cognitive pointof view. J. of Dec., 1982; 38: 165-191. 
 15. Kuhkhau, C. Seeking Meaning. Ablex PubI., New York, 1993. 16. Murtonen, K. and Jfirvetirr, K. Task 
Complexity Affects Information Seeking and Use. Tampere, Fhland, University of Tampere, dept. of Joformation 
Studies, Research Notes (RN-1992-2), 1992. 17. Schamber, L., Ekenberg, M., Nilan, M. A re-exarnination 
of relevance: toward a dynamic, situational defintion. Jnf. Proc.&#38; Managm., 1990; 26(6):755-776 . 
 18. Cooper, W.S. The paradoxal role of unexamined documents in the evaluation of retrieval effectiveness. 
Inf.Proc.&#38; Managm., 1976 ;12:367-375. 19. Salton, G. The state of retrieval system evaluation. Inf.Proc. 
&#38; Managm., 1992; 28(4):441-449 20. Tnrtle, H. and Crotl, W.B. Inference methods for document retrieval. 
In: Vldlck, J. (cd). ACM-Sigir Conf. Proc.Bruxelles, Bruxelles University, 1990, pp. 1-24. 21. Tenopir, 
C. Issues in Online Database Searching. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Libraries Unhited, 1989. 22. Katzer, J. 
et al. A study of the overlap among decument representations. Information Technology: Res.and Dev., 1982:2, 
261-274. 23. Lancaater, F.W. Indexing in Theory and Practice. Library Association. London, 1991. 24. 
Ellis, D., Fumer-Hines, J. and WNett, P. On the creation of hypertext links in full-text documents: Measuring 
of inter-linker consistency. J. of Doc. (in press). 25. MacCain, K.W. Descriptor and citation retrieval 
in the medicine behavioral sciences literature: Retrieval overlaps and novelty distribu­tion. JASIS, 
1989; 40:110-114. 26. Belkin, N.J. and Crotl, W.B. Retrieval techniques. ~ST, 1987; 22:109-145. 27. 
Croft, W.B. Approaches to intelligent information retrieval. Inf. Proc. &#38; Managem., 1987, 23(4), 
249-254. 28. Belkin, N.J. Cool, C., Croft, W.B. and CalIan, J.P. The effect of multiple query repreaentations 
on information retrieval performance. Proceedhgs of the 16th SIGIR Conf. New York, NY: ACM Press, 1993, 
pp. 339-346. 29. Atherton-Cochrane, P. Books are for Use: F,nal Report of the Subject Acess Project. 
Syracuse, N. Y., Syracuse University, School of Information Studies, 1979. 30. Wormell, L Subject Access 
Project-SAP: Improved Subject Retrieval for Monographic publications. Doctoral Dksertation. Lund: Lund 
University, 1985. 31. Salton, G. and Bucktey, C. Automatic text structuring and retrieval. Experiments 
in automatic encyclopedia searchhg. In: 14th Int. Conf. of ACM-Sigir. New York, ACM Press, 1991, pp. 
21-30. 32. Salton, G., AlIan, J. and Buckley, C. Approaches to passage retrieval in full text information 
systems. Jn: Proceedings of the 16th SIGJR Conf., Phtsbourg. New York, NY: ACM Press, 1993, pp. 49-58. 
 33. Smeaton, A. Progress in the application of natural language processing to information retrieval 
tasks. The Computer Journal, 1992:35, 268-278. 34. van Rljsbergen, C. A new theoretical framework for 
information retrieval. ACM-Sigir Conf. Proc., Pka, 1131, 1986, pp. 194-200 35. van R]jsbergen, C. The 
science of information retrieval: its methodology and logic. Jn: Conf. Informatienvetenschap in Nederland. 
Haag, Rabin, 1990, pp. 20-38. 36. Smeaton, A., Voutilainen, A., Sheridan, P. The application of morpho-syntactic 
language processing to effective text retrieval. Esprit 90 Conf. Dordrecht, IGiiver, 1990, pp. 619-635. 
 37. Bookstein, A. Towards a multi-disciplinary Bradford Law. 4th In. Conf. on Blbliometrics, Jnforrnetrics, 
and Scientometrics. Berlin, 1993. (extended abstract).  37. Gibb, F. Knowledge-based indexing in SJMPR: 
Integration of natural language processing and principles of subject analysis in an automated indexing 
system. J. of Doc. and Text Managem., 1993, 2:131-154. 38. Blair, D.C. Language and Representation in 
Information retrieval. Oxford, Elsevier, 1990. 39. Hjorland, B. The concept of subject in information 
science. J. of Dec. 1992; 48: 172-200. 40. Schmeltz Pedersen, G. A browser for bibliographic information 
retrieval, based on an application of lattice theory. In: Proceedings of the 16th SIGIR Conf., Pktsbourgh. 
New York, NY: ACM Press, 1993,270-280. 41. Jogwersen, P. and Worrnell, I. Ranganathan in the perspective 
of advanced information retrieval. Libri, 1992; 42(3): 184-201. 42. Brajnik, G., Guida, G., Tasso, C. 
User modelling in intelligent information retrieval, Inf. Proc. &#38; Managm., 1987:23(4), 305-320. 
43. Bates, M. Ao exploratory paradigm for online information retrieval. In: Brookes, B.C. (cd.). Intelligent 
Information Systems for the Information Society. London, Notllt-Holland, 1986, pp. 91-99. 44. Bates, 
M. The design of browsing and berry-picking techniques for the ordine search interface. Orrhe Review, 
1989; 13(5):407-424. 45. Hancock-Beautieu, M. Query expansion: advances in research in online catalogues. 
J. of Inf.Sc., 1992; 18:99-103. 46. CalIan, J.P. and Crotl, W.B. An evaluation of query processing strategies 
using the TIPSTER collection. Conf. Proc. of the 1993 ACM-Sigir, Sigir Forum, New York, ACM Press, 1993, 
pp.347-355. 47. Fowler, F.J. Survey Research Methods. 2. ed. Sage, London, 1993.  
			