
 Papers POSTMA.STERC?VIRGINIA.EDU: WHEN USER SUPPORT IS POSTMASTER Jayne Ashworth Janet SakeU User Support, 
Inform&#38;ion Technology and Communicatwn User Support, Information Technology and Communica&#38;ion 
University of Wginia lTC -Wilson Hall UniversiQ of Erginia lTC -Wilson Hall Charlottesville, VA 22903 
Charlottesville, VA 22903 (804) 243-6596 (804) 243-6594 jpa@W-giniaedu jcs@ V7rginia.edu INTRODUCTION: 
WHY DO WE HAVE ELECTRONIC MAIL POSTMASTERS AND WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE? As each day passes, the number of 
schools that remain isolated from The Net diminishes. How the connectivity is accomplished may wwy, but 
it seems that everyone is finding a way to join the electronic world outaide their campus. When the connection 
to the outside finally happens, electronic mail quickly becomes one of the first applications offered 
to and readily aeeepted by people in the academic community. Sites also gain something else along with 
the connection to a network and widespread electrc)nic mail usage by their user population, sites become 
responsible for pro­viding an electronic mail address posbaster this requirement is specified in document 
RFC 822, Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet Text Mess ages. (1) This common address is needed so 
that when problems develop, there will be one place to which problem report messages can be sent and 
where they will receive prompt attention. Having an address exis4 however, does not necessarily mean 
that the mailbox that exists at the address is read actively. How much attention the postmaster s mailbox 
receives varies from site to site. At a few sites this mailbox is ignored, probably by a postmaster who 
has other responsibilities that make worrying about problems with delivery of electronic mail seem small. 
Other sites check this mailbox occasionally, usually when the posbnaster can lind the odd moment or two 
each quarter (whether this is neededl or not). Many sites check the postmaster s mailbox at least once 
a day so that problems can be resolved before they become insurmountable and responses can be made quickly. 
Reading this required mailbox is an important task. It can be done by a variety of people, but at many 
sites this responsibility falls to someone who is a technical wizard. When you think abcmt it this approach 
makes sense: the person who reads the problems has the authority (rights, privileges, passwords) to correct 
errors when they occur. On the other hand, these people ase not usually the people people of the organization. 
They sometimes believe that succinct on-line help is sufficient in most situations, that Unix man pages 
are user-friendly and that using electronic mail is intuitive, They are sometimes surprised that people 
have questions; they may feel the need to know all of the detail surrounding the ques­tion (person s 
nsme, where they were born, when they were born, under what astrological sign the person was born, ete.) 
before they will offer a response; sometimes they know too much to know where to begin the answeG sometimes 
they couch the answer in terms that make their response unintelligible to the user and some­times they 
are concerned only with whether the system is function­ing and will ignore other requests for assistance 
altogether. It is significant therefore, to have the right person processing the mail reeeived in the 
postmaster s mailbox, This person needs the technical expertise to do the tasks associated with this 
mailbox, the communication skills to convey information at the appropriate level to a variety of people 
who have differing levels of expertise and the vision to understand how messages received fit into the 
mission and policies of the organization aa a whole so that responses both within and without can be 
targeted appropriately. At the University of Virginia (UVa), we have found a unique solu­tion to these 
needs that works for us.  A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON POSTMASTER@ VIRGINL4.EDU At UVa, the duty of reading 
the pxtsrmster s mailbox initially fell within the Operating Systems Support group. These people man­ 
aged the mail on a local network before we connected to The Net and continued to do this as we gained 
outaide connectivity. The task was later moved (with the person who was doing it) to a new group called 
Networks. Documentation and training in using electronic mail continued to fall within the reahn of User 
Support, We wrote our documentation based on what happened as we used the various mail systems that were 
supported on the various com­puter platforms. We taught our short courses from these docu­ments. As connectivity 
within the University expanded, so did the variety of supported computer platforms and with each platform 
came yet-another-mail-system. Systems and Networks made them all exchange messages and User Support answered 
the non-teehni­eal questions we received. The network grew and so did the num­ber of messages in the 
postmaster s mailbox. When the Network Postmaster began to feel overwhelmed with the volume (and when 
it was felt that this person was needed more for the infrastructure support than for mail support), an 
agreement was reached between Permission to make digitabkmd copy of part or all of thzkwork for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forptvfit or 
commercial advantage, the copyti,ght notice, the title of the publication and its &#38;te appea~ and 
notice is given that copying is by permission of ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish to post on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists, requittn prior specr@ permission &#38;or a fee. @ 1995 ACM ISBN 
# 0-89791-704.9/95/0010 $3.50. Winning the Networking Game Papers User Support and Networks: the Network 
Postmaster would scan all messages in the mailbox and forward those that seemed user level to a mailbox 
that was accessible to an individual within User Support: these messages went to the person s personal 
mail­box. Most of these were of the How do I do? and Can you help me ? variety. The number of people 
using electronic mail increased and so did the number of messages arriving both in the postmaster s mailbox 
and in the User Support person s mailbox. A second User Support person was added to help with the increased 
volume. The Network Postmaster would forward a message to one person or the other, trying to distribute 
the load equitably. When the Network Postmaster left to explore new adventures else­where, the person 
hired to become the new Network Postmaster came from User Support. This individual was also our gopher­gum, 
a duty needed in User Support and for which we had no replacement. A trade was made: Networks would create 
access to the full postmaster s mailbox for User Support and User Support people would read all the messages, 
forwarding to the Networks Postmaster only those that needed this person s attention. In return for this, 
the new Network Postmaster would continue gopher-guru tasks for User Support until User Support could 
hire a replacement to undertake this assignment. The access to the postmaster s mail­box was from an 
account on the mail server computer. The account had the same name as a mail-distribution list for User 
Support and was a shared account: everyone in User Support had access. A spe­cial command gave access 
to the postmaster s mailbox from this account. In this way, the two User Support individuals began to 
read and process all incoming mail addressed to postmaster @Vir­ginia.edu. SO WHAT IS IN THE MAILBOX 
OF POST-MASTER@ VIRGINIA.EDU? The postmaster s mailbox proved to have a little of everything in it chain 
letters, love letters, hate letters, scholarly discourses, travel plans, messages from Mom and Dad, and 
even empty mes­sages. The adtiess postmaster@ domairs is well-known throughout the Intemet community. 
When someone elsewhere wants to apprise a site of misbehavior by one of its users, postmaster@ domain 
is an address that will likely work and sometimes yield a response. So postma.rter@ Virgirtia.edu hears 
about all the inane and/or inappropriate Intemet postings from members of our com­munity to the Usenet 
community, to mailing lists and on the vari­ous chat networka. We hear from the people whose feelings 
have been hurt when a discussiorr/disagreement goes nuclear by a per­son in our community. Postmaster@ 
W-giniaedu also hears from people elsewhere who are trying to locate a member of our com­munity or someone 
they believe to be within our community. Not every state is as fortunate as Virginia is in having many 
institutions of higher education within its borders: many people elsewhere may know that their friend/acqttaintance 
is somewhere in Virginia and will try the address postma.rter@ J@-ginia. edu to see what helps they receive 
to their query. We by to be helpful if we can but also refer people to their local postmaster: we cannot 
support the world from our site ! We receive mail from elsewhere about the mailing lists that are at 
UVa: while most of our mailing lists are intended for internal UVa use, there are some that have a wider­than-UVa 
distribution and the interaction of people elsewhere with these lists provides for some of our questions. 
We also get the How do I? questions and the What is the address for? ques­tions from our own community. 
The most interesting questions usually arise when a mail system does not interact well with our z­ mail 
system and we are left to puzzle about how to deliver a mes­sage that is undeliverable. Deciphering the 
Failed Mail report that accompanies these messages can also be a challenge. THE PROS AND CONS OF OUR 
SYSTEM From a staff perspective, this system works well. In seeing all of the postmaster questions, 
comments and queries, User Support becomes more aware of the needs of the users and where the diffi­culties 
with using our electronic mail systems arise. The Networks group is kept apprised of non-user-level problems 
and can respond to them effectively while having the time to do other tasks as well. As the reports of 
these problems sometimes come first to the post­master, User Support sometimes knows about a difficulty 
at the same time as the telephone calls with questions about it begin arriving. Including User Support 
in the technical electronic mail working group has given the user community a voice not only with current 
conditions but also about proposed changes before they happen. We are able to notify and prepare the 
user community for changes reliably. In the working group, User Support gains insight into what is and 
is not possible in the network/electronic mail arena and is better able to recommend changes for the 
users that have positive influences on the way users work. Policies are put into place that have all 
elements (Systems, Networks and users) interests represented. One drawback we found to the arrangement 
of having the post­master s mailbox read from an account that has the same name as a mail-distribution 
list for User Support is that when a User Support postmaster inadvertently bounces a message from this 
id, the failure is delivered to everyone within User Support. The User Support postmasters try to type 
carefully, but occasional confu­sions with this system are inevitable. Eventually, access to the postmaster 
s mailbox was moved to a different account and the ~stmasters can now privately deal with mail that they 
send that fails to be delivered. Another difficulty that arose was with the arrangement of having two 
people read one mailbox is that we sometimes have two people working on the same problem better communication 
between the individuals and a split between roo­mingand afternoon times-to-read has improved this sitnation. 
The last difficulty we encountered with having User Support personnel read the postmaster s mailbox was 
the time needed for Networks to respond to requests for help from User Support. Some of this has been 
resolved by scripts (the account where the postmaster s mailbox is read is on a Unix system) that allow 
the User Support people the access they need for particular tasks. As time passes and the User Support 
postmasters continue to avoid causing a cataclys­mic mail system crash, we are given more rights and 
privileges to respond to problem reports and other requests quickly, We believe the following happened 
for our users when User Sup­ port became the postmaster. Responses to questions became more standard: 
as User Support had to deal with more questions in the posbrtaster s mailbox while still meeting demands 
in other areas, too, standardized answers were written for common questions. Some of these common answers 
have become part of FAQs (Fre­quently-Asked-Questions) that we are creating for our users. Responses 
to many questions are now a copy of the user s question and the insertion of a prewritten response. Even 
if this response needs minimal editing, it is faster to keep the 20-or-more-litte response on file and 
change the three words that need changing rather than typing the 20-lines repeatedly. These responses 
can also be tailored to provide information that enables the user to bet­ter use electronic mail: when 
we see someone who is trying to Winning the Networking Game Papers resend a failed message by replying 
to the failed message and then adding the intended recipient as a carbon copy address, we can let them 
know that this sends the message to both the intendled recipi­ent and to the postmaster s mailbox. We 
can tell them how to avoid this in the future so that their messages will remain private. The end of 
many messages from the postmaster now says something like, If you have other questions or ITC (User Support 
is within the Department of Information Technology and Comrmmication at UVa) can be of help in another 
way, please let me know. This invitation opens the door to those who do not understand the stan­dard 
response to let us know so that we can help them resolve their difficul~. Response time to requests for 
standard information has improved. AS those of USin User Support are more customer-ser­vice oriented 
than some of our Networks counterparts, we are sup­porting people in using technology that might not 
have used it before because Networks would have expected them to \ust do it, whereas we often provide 
start-up help that gets them going and then teach them how to help themselves. We hear in the pnst­master 
s mailbox where confusion with documentation exists and can respond quickly to correct these needs. We 
keep our students, staff and faculty who travel outside our community in touch with the community at 
UVa by helping them access their UVa mail from elsewhere and providing addresses for them to use reaching 
people at UVa. THE FUTURE User Support resumed gopher-guru support two yews ago. Pri­mary responsibility 
for reading the postmaster s mailbox did not return to Networks. Given the responses to our services 
survey from our users about our efforts in this area, we feel this is appro­priate. However, we need 
to find ways to automate some manual processes the postmaster currently does. We are looking into pro­viding 
instructional tools that will do things like automate the pro­cess of creating and populating a mail 
distribution list for a class. We need to provide ways for people to update their local telephone numbers 
and campus mail addresses in our database. We are look­ing into the feasibility and security issues involved 
with cloing this. We need to find better ways to initiate new students into the use of electronic mail 
and tinding addresses of others when they first arrive on Grounds. (Thomas Jefferson, the founder of 
U% referred to the campus as the Grounds of the University and this name is still used.) We are developing 
video tapes that will provide introductory information via our cable TV network and one may focus on 
this. We need to provide better orientation to new faculty and new staff on the use of electronic mail 
and other technology to increase their effectiveness. We are considering methods by which this can best 
be done. We need to reach the new transfer students and help them integrate into the UVa community via 
its electronic community. We are talking about how best to do this. Lastly, we need to anticipate and 
identify emerging trends in the use of elec­tronic communication and be ready to respond to them in appropri­ 
ate ways. [1] RFC S (Originally Request For Comments) are lhe standards published by the ISOC (Intemet 
Sociely) ­the people who define the Internet technical standards through their various task forces, authorities 
and boards. Winning the Networking Game 
			