
 Presenting Web Site Search Results in Context: A Demonstration Michael Chen Computer Science Department 
492 Soda Hall University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720-1776 http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/lmikechen 
We address the case of search over large, heteroge- neous web sites such as those found at universities 
and within corporate intranets. The goal is to make use of structure implicit within the site to provide 
context for the retrieved documents, even for those sites for which there is no centralized organization. 
 Most web site search, if available, presents results as a list of titles and URLs (and optionally, summary 
infor-mation and an opaque score). The context in which the pages appeared, and their relationship to 
one another, cannot be discerned from such a display. Our alternative is to place the retrieved pages 
within an automatically generated context. For each hit, we determine a root page (typically, the home 
page for a server within the tar- get domain) and find and display the shortest path from the root to 
the retrieved page. Hits that share paths are grouped together. Thus, a hierarchical structure is dy- 
namically imposed on the search results. We demonstrate our idea on web pages within the berkeley.edu 
domain. (Space does not permit inclusion of a screenshot.) We have found this grouping by link path informa-tion, 
although simple, is a surprisingly effective way to organize what might otherwise be perceived as a dis-connected 
jumble of pages. The system, which we call Cha-cha, is written in Java. A web crawler gathers in- link, 
outlink, and title information from all the pages in the domain of interest and builds up a graph represen-tation, 
which is stored in a disk-based database (from www.sleepycat.com). Searches are sent to the Inktomi search 
engine via a specially set up connection, using Inktomi s IDP proto- col (www.inktomi.com). The results 
returned are parsed into a set of hits. For each hit, the root node is the home page for the server on 
which the hit is located, and a bidi- rectional shortest path search is conducted from the root to each 
hit. A new graph is constructed that combines all the paths so that hits located close together in web 
space are shown near one another in the display. Hierarchially structured HTML is produced by traversing 
this graph. This work is closely related to that of SuperBook [l], which demonstrated that showing hit 
search results in the context of the chapters and sections of the manual from which they are drawn can 
improve users information ac- Permission to make digital/hard copy of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial ad-vantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear,and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers 
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or fee. SIGIR OI, Melbourne, Australia 
@ 1998 ACM l-58113-015-5 S/98 $5.00. Marti A. Hearst School of Information Management &#38; Systems 
102 South H&#38;l University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720-4600 http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/-hearst 
 cess experiences. The AMIT system [5] indexed a web site covering a specific topic (sailing) in a similar 
man-ner, providing a Superbook-like focus-plus-context envi-ronment to place search results in context. 
Our project is of larger scale and broader functionality. The WebTOC system [3] also imposes a hierarchical 
table of contents over a web site, but focuses on showing the number of pages within a subdirectory and 
empha-sizes browsing at the expense of search. Also relevant is the Dynacat system [4] in which medical 
journal ab-stracts are organized according to what type of query they are found in response to and where 
they fall within a taxonomy of medical metadata. In future we plan to incorporate user behavior into 
the interface. We envision a learning mode in which parts of the web site the user does not usually see 
are shown fist, and a familiar mode in which hits found along the users most often traveled paths are 
shown to- wards the top of the list of search results. We also plan to incorporate general domain knowledge 
into the rank- ing and organization algorithms (currently the domain is universities). In the next few 
weeks we plan to conduct user studies comparing the Cha-cha approach to stan- dard output produced by 
other search engines. We also plan to use Cheshire II [2] as our search backend. Acknowledgments We thank 
Eric Brewer for ar- ranging access to Inktomi, and Kevin Heard for general technical assistance. References 
[II Dennis E. Egan, Joel Ft. Remde, Thomas K. Landauer, Carol C. Lochbaum, and Louis M. Gomez. Behavioral 
evaluation and analysis of a hypertext browser. In Proceed-ings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 205-210, May 1989. Ray Ft. Larson, Ralph Moon, Jerome McDonough, 
Lucy Kuntz, and Paul O Leary. Cheshire ii: Design and evalu-ation of a next-generation online catalog 
system. In ASIS 95: Proceedings of the 58th ASIS Annual Meeting, 1995. PI A. Nation. Visualizing websites 
using a hierarchical table of contents browser: Webtoc. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Human 
Factors and the Web, Denver, CO, 1997. [31 Wanda Pratt. Dynamic organization of search results us-ing 
the umls. In American Medical Znjormatics Associa-tion Fall Symposium, 1997. 141 Kent Wittenburg and 
Eric Sigman. Integration of brows-ing, searching, and filtering in an applet for web infor-mation access. 
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Late Breaking Track. 
ACM, 1997. [51 
			