
 9:00 Monday PROBLEMS OF COMMUNICATION by Rita Seplowitz Saltz User Relations Specialist West Virginia 
Network for Educational Computing Morgantown, West Virginia 26505 (304) 293-5192 S UMMARY Technological 
advances have made the world a global village, we are told. When we embark from one airport, we can expect 
that we will deplane at another that looks, and behaves, very much like the first. We can sit or stand 
before a television set and witness a gymnastic competition as it occurs on the other side of the planet. 
We can accomplish what seems like instantaneous trans- mission of data from any part of our world to 
any other part--and sometimes beyond. Distance has diminished; time has compressed. We now can count 
as neighbors the people furthest from us. Gerald Weinberg has said, "Programming is at best a communication 
between two alien species ...." The truth is that all human communication is at best a transaction between 
two alien beings. Each of us speaks in the hope that we will be understood; each of us listens in the 
hope that We will understand. But each human transmitter and each human receiver is unique. It is as 
if no two processors, no two systems, were designed from the same specifications. Unde1: such circumstances, 
evidence of any natural compat ib il ity would be miraculous. It is also miraculous when any of us manages 
effective communica- tion with any other, near neighbor or far; it is not at all surprising that often 
there are problems of translation. Dur ing this SIGUCC User Serv ices Conference, we will be addressing 
problems of communication with all the energy we can summon up and all the creativity we can muster. 
We will begin with tr ue-life experiences and from these we will synthesize general definitions of the 
problems we encounter in various aspects of our work. During subsequent formal sessions and informal 
meetings, we will try to develop solution approaches to the problems thus defined. In our final time 
together, each of us will address some particular area of concern, and in a final moment of sharing, 
we will attempt to unify our many voices to create a common statement which treats the various facets 
of our theme topic.  M1 2 
			