
 KEYNOTE ABSTRACTS Problems, Methods, and Structures Michael Jackson MAJ Consulting Ltd and AT&#38;T 
Research Software engineering has traditionally focused on solutions and their properties, paying far 
less attention to problem analysis and classification. A stronger focus on problems, exploiting the notion 
of a problem frame, can lead to better understanding of development methods in general and of problem 
decomposition in particular. Dr Jackson devised the widely used JSP and JSD software methods, which he 
describes in Principles of Program Design (Academic Press, 1975) and System Development (Prentice Hall, 
1983). His latest book is Software Requirements &#38; Specifications: A Lexicon of Practice, Principles 
and Prejudices (Addison-Wesley, 1995). Engineering Bridges: From Concept to Reality Henry Petroski Duke 
University The conceptual design of a bridge can come fully formed to an engineer s mind, but the success 
or failure of the project depends upon numerous technical and nontechnical details. Examples drawn from 
the history of American bridges will be employed in this lecture on the nature of engineering design 
and construction. Dr Petroski has written and lectured widely on engineering design and failure. His 
most recent books are Engineers of Dreams: Great Bridge Builders and the Spanning of America (Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1995) and Invention by Design: How Engineers Get from Thought to Thing (Harvard University 
Press, forthcoming). Software Systems Architecting Eberhardt Rechtin University of Southern California 
 Software architectures are increasingly recognized as a source of software effectiveness and as a center 
of real-time, software-intensive systems design. Less understood, perhaps, are the founda­tions and tools 
of the architecting process itself, the subject of this address. Dr Rechtin has been the Director of 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), an Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications), 
and the chief engineer of Hewlett-Packard. He is author of two books, Systems Architecting: Creating 
and Building Complez Systems (Prentice Hall, 1991), and The Art of Systems Architectirzg (CRC Press, 
1996). 1 
			