
 Quantifying Achievable Routing Performance in Multiprocessor Interconnection Networks Swaminathan Ramany 
and Derek Eager Department of Computer Science University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon SK S7N 5A9 CANADA 
swami@ pecsys.enet .dec.tom, eager@ cs.usask.ca 1 Introduction Adaptive routing techniques for multiprocessor 
inter­connection networks have been found to significantly improve average message latency and throughput 
ca­pacity. Current techniques are, however, limited by the fact that routing decisions are based only 
on the local conditions at each router, rather than on global knowl­edge of network traffic. This suggests 
that it might be fruitful to search for more powerful routing techniques. In this paper we investigate 
the fundamental ques­tion of how close (locally) adaptive routing comes to achieving the best realistically 
achievable performance in wormhole networks. To this end, we compare the per­formance of adaptive routing 
(by means of simulation) against that of a source-directed routing technique in which routes are predetermined 
based on full knowledge of the application communication pattern. Our results suggest that there is only 
modest scope for improvement beyond the performance provided by (locally) adaptive routing techniques, 
when performance is determined by average message latencies. Adaptive routing techniques are, however, 
found to be much less effective when per­formance is dictated by the maximum message latency within a 
communication phase. 2 Source-Directed Routing Implementation of source-directed routing requires both 
hardware mechanisms to carry out such routing, and an *Currently working at Performance Expertise Center, 
Digital Equipment Corporation, Littleton, MA 01460. Permission to make digital or hard copies of part 
or all of this work for permnal or classroom we is granted without fee provided that copies are not made 
or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting 
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGMETRICS 96-5/96 Philadelphia, PA, USA @1996 ACM algorithm 
to be executed at compile time (or possibly runtime by using some inspector-executor approach) to determine 
good routes. In the routing mechanism proposed here intermediate points through which the message haa 
to pass, according to the chosen route, are specified in the header flits of the message. R,outers forward 
each message to the node specified in the mes­sage s leading header flit, according to the base routing 
scheme. The router at each of the specified intermedi­a.ksuodes strips off the-hchg header flit and continues 
forwarding the message, rather than delivering it to the attached node. A single bit in each header flit 
can be used to determine if it is the last such flit. The hardware resources necessary for our implemen­tation 
of source-directed routing depend on how dead­lock prevention is implemented, In this work dead­lock 
prevention is achieved by using the virtual channel topology used in the *-Channels [1] adaptive algorithm. 
This algorithm has low virtual channel requirements and good performance, but cannot guarantee that the 
path preselected by the source can always be followed. In such a cnse, the header flit specifying the 
respective in­termediate node must be discarded, and routing of the message must be done (according to 
whatever base rout­ing strategy is followed, either deterministic or adaptive) to the next node in the 
specified list. In this paper, we consider only the caae of compile time route determination, and are 
thus concerned pri­marily with the quality of the routes produced by an algorithm, rather than with the 
problem of minimizing the algorithm execution time. The new algorithm that we use for route determination 
is discussed in [2].  3 Experimental Study Experiments that compare the performances of deter­ministic, 
adaptive and source-directed routing were per­formed using a flit-level network simulator. Represen­tative 
results are given here for a 12 x 12 mesh. Full results are found in [2], 270 The maximum message latency 
is an important measure, as often, performance depends on the length of time required to complete a communication 
phase consisting of a number of message transmissions, which depends more on the maximum message latency 
ex­perienced during that phase than on the average la­tency. Figure 1 compares the completion times (for 
a single phase of communication) for adaptive, determin­istic and source-directed routing algorithms 
for a matrix transpose traffic pattern (along with a derived analytical lower bound). Note the large 
gap between the comple­tion time provided by adaptive routing, and the lower bound. (Although results 
are shown only for 2-5 virtual channels, the gap remains quite large for any number of channels.) Source-directed 
routing mostly closes this gap through use of global knowledge of tratlic patterns. . 1400 1200 : .\==: 
x.. N. L\ ........ ... ... ... . II 400 200 i Oj t 2 5 J 6 Mm&#38; of V*d Ch mnda Figure 1: Completion 
times for deterministic, adap­tive and sourc~directed routing algorithms, for a matrix transpose traffic 
pattern Average latency can directly determine performance in asynchronous computations in which multiple 
com­munication phases overlap. This was studied in exper­iments with multiple phases of matrix transpose 
with each physical channel in the network having 4 virtual channels. In our multiple phase experiments, 
each node is assumed to compute for some fixed length of time af­ter receiving the message generated 
for it in one phase of communication, after which it sends its message for the next phase of communication. 
Figure 2 shows results for the average message latency with 30 asynchronous phases (including both communication 
and computa­tion). From the above sample results it can be seen that adaptive routing yields much better 
performance (in comparison to the achievable performance, as indicated by that of source-directed routing) 
with respect to aver­age message Iatencies than it does with respect to max­imum message Iatencies. 12C4 
r202mm8no * .C21MMI$ -Scuc4 -­ woo- MO . m­ 4 4C4 ­---0 ........... _­.. ....... ........... . ----G 
200 t Figure 2: Average message Iatencies with determinis­tic, adaptive and source-directed routing 
algorithms, for thirty synchronous matrix transpose message exchange phases 4 Conclusions In this paper, 
we investigated the question of how close locally adaptive routing comes to achieving the best realistically 
achievable performance. For this purpose, the performance of adaptive routing was compared (by means 
of simulation) against that of a new source-­directed routing method under the favorable assumption of 
full knowledge of the application traffic pattern. Our results suggest that there is only modest scope 
for improvement beyond the performance provided by adaptive routing, when application performance is 
de­termined by average message latenciea. On the other hand, source-directed routing can yield large 
improve. ments in performance when this performance is depen­dent on maximum message latencies. These 
improve­ments are mainly due to balanced multiplexing of traffic in the physical channels, which ensures 
that there are no messages which lag far behind other messages. It ap­pears that it may be worthwhile 
to provide support for source-directed routing in future multiprocessor inter­connection networks, as 
this method offers the potential for substantive improvements in performance in some cases, at reasonable 
cost. References [1] P.E. Berman, L. Gravano, G.D. Pifarre and J.L.C. Sanz, Adaptive Deadlock-and Livelock-Free 
Routing with All Minimal Paths in Torus Net­works , Proceedings of the lth Annual ACM Sym­posium on Parallel 
Algorithms and Architectures, June 1992. [2] S. Rarnany, Routing in Wormhole Networks , Ph.D. Thesis, 
Department of Computer Sci­ence, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, December 1995. 271 
 
			