
 Quantitative Analysis of the Wikipedia Community of Users FelipeOrtega JesusM.Gonzalez-Barahona UniversidadReyJuanCarlos. 
UniversidadReyJuanCarlos. Tulipan s/n. Tulipan s/n. 28933,Mostoles.Madrid.SPAIN 28933,Mostoles.Madrid.SPAIN 
jfelipe@gsyc.es jgb@gsyc.es Abstract Many activities of editors in Wikipedia can be traced us­ing its 
database dumps, which register detailed informa­tion about every single change to every article. Several 
researchers have used this information to gain knowledge about the production process of articles, and 
about activ­itypatternsof authors.Inthis analysis,wehavefocused on one of those previous works, by Kittur 
et al. First, we have followed the same methodology with more recent and com­prehensivedata.Then, wehave 
extended this methodology to precisely identify which fraction of authors are produc­ing most of the 
changes in Wikipedia s articles, and how the behaviour of these authors evolves over time. This en­abled 
us not only to validate some of the previous results, but also to .nd new interesting evidences. We have 
found that the analysis of sysops is not a good method for esti­matingdifferentlevels of contributions, 
sinceitisdependent on the policy for electing them (which changes over time andfor eachlanguage).Moreover,wehavefound 
new activ­itypatterns classifying authorsby their contributionsduring speci.cperiodsof time,instead of 
using theirtotal number of contributions over the whole life of Wikipedia. Finally, wepresent atoolthat 
automatesthis extended methodology, implementing aquick and completequantitative analysis of everylanguage 
editioninWikipedia. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.3.7 [Information Storage andRetrieval]:DigitalLibraries 
systemissues General Terms Performance Keywords quantitative analysis, methodology, Wikipedia, WikiXRay 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroomuseisgranted 
withoutfeeprovided that copiesarenot madeordistributed forpro.tor commercial advantage andthat copiesbearthis 
notice andthefull citation onthe .rstpage.Tocopy otherwise,torepublish,topostonservers ortoredistribute 
tolists, requiresprior speci.cpermission and/or afee. WikiSym 07, October21 23,2007,Montr´eal,Qu´ebec,Canada. 
Copyright c &#38;#169; 2007ACM978-1-59593-861-9/07/0010. . .$5.00  1. Introduction Wikispresenta newparadigm 
of website withdynamic con­tents created by its own users. When we refer to content development systems, 
wiki is now synonymous of collab­orative, agile, powerful and even easy.They are now a core component 
of what is presented as the Web 2.0, providing toolsto create contentsthroughcollaborationandinteraction 
of users. Wikipediais, byfar, the most successful example of this newparadigm of web services.With morethan200different 
language editions, and one of the biggest communities of users of theInternet,Wikipediahas showed us 
thepower of collaborativecontentdevelopment.As ofApril26th,2007, a total of 1,755,932 articles are already 
available in the English language edition, and the top 10 language editions (English,German,French,Japanese, 
Polish, Dutch,Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish) accumulate a total sum of4,852,810articles.Many 
scienti.c works areincreasingly referencing Wikipedia, and many learning systems employ it as aprimary 
source ofinformation. One ofthe mostrelevant contributionsthatWikipediahas madetothe wiki communityistheMediaWikisoftware, 
ali­bre(free, open source) softwarethatfacilitates thetask of creating, con.guring, maintining and using 
a wiki. Medi­aWiki provides some very useful tools for wiki users and administrators,forinstance: Easy-to-useeditinginterface:Atoolbarprovideseasyac­cess 
to the most common editingfunctions.This reduces thelearning curve of new users, who canget up to speed 
in editingcontentsfastly.  Content classi.cation:Contents canbe classi.ed attend­ing to their topic 
into several categories, presented in special pages, thus helping users searching for a certain topic. 
 Discussionpagesfor every article:Each articleinMedi­aWikiis accompaniedbyits talkpage, a specialpage 
al­lowingusersinterestedin editingthat article to exchange theirimpressions, and collaboratetowards obtainingcon­sensus 
aboutthe article s contents andpresentation.  Contents organization tweaks: Some automaticfeatures, 
like the creation of a table of contents for long articles (those with at least 4 main epigraphs) and 
automatic archiveindexation andlinking(for example,to archive previousdiscussionsintalkpages),foster 
correctcontent arrangement and clarity.  Automatic back-up and recovery tools: MediaWiki also provides 
automatic tools for administrative tasks like back-up and recovery from previous crashes, as well as 
updating the wiki contentswith newdump versions(for example,in wikiswhosecontentsaremirrorsof another 
wiki).  Wikipediasets upa contentdevelopmentphilosophyvery similar to the one we .nd in libre software 
projects. The edition of articles is completely open to any user who feels like doing so, no matter its 
level of knowledge about the topics included in the article. This rises some important issues regardingcontentquality 
andpreservation: Contentquality and accuracy:As wehave already men­tioned, Wikipedia classi.es its articles 
in categories, to enhance content arrangement and clearness, making the search for a certain topic easier. 
In addition to this, a shorttimeagotheEnglishversionofWikipediabeganthe Wikipedia 1.0 initiative. A group 
of volunteers searches through the encyclopedia for articles with a high qual­ity level, both in terms 
of accurate contents and cor­rectpresentation.Thegoal of thisinitiativeisto retrieve enough articles 
to construct a stable version of the En­glishWikipedia, with trusted contents, that couldbedis­tributedinCD 
orDVD media.  Preservation of contents: As Wikipedia is completely open to anyoneinterestedin edittingits 
contents,it must support many acts of vandalismfrompeople whose main purposeisjust todamageWikipedia 
s contents or rep­utation. Despite these attacks, Wikipedia has proved a greatresiliency againsttheseissues.Afundamentalpoint 
to .ght against them is the role of sysops, Wikipedia users that have received special privileges to 
block cer­tain users orIP addresses thathave attempted todamage contents, among otherimportant tasks 
that we will sum­marize shortly.  Another similarity that Wikipedia shares with libre soft­wareprojectsisthepromotionof 
certain usersto aprivileged status, like sysops, in order to look after the good health of the systeminfrastructure.Specialtypes 
ofWikipediapower­usersinclude: Administrator(Sysop):Administrators,usuallyalsoknown as admins, or sysops,arespecial 
userswith certainpriv­ileges that enable them to help with maintenance tasks. Among their main attributions, 
as we mentioned above, isthepower ofprotectingpagesfrom anonymousedits, deletingpages,blockingother editors, 
as well as undoing these actions. It is a common practice within admins to be elected by other usersin 
the community according to their reputation, knowledge about Wikipedia infrastruc­tureandpolicies,andprovedcontributionstothe 
contents of the encyclopedia.In theEnglishlanguage version, ad­mins acquire their new statusin apermanent 
way, unless abuse actions recommend revocation of their privileges. We will see that this policy may 
vary among different language editions. Bureaucrat:Bureaucratsimplement administrativedeci­sions like 
promoting other users to administrator or bu­reaucrat status, granting or deleting a user s bot status, 
(bots are special users for automated programs that im­plementrepetitivetasks), or renaming a user s 
account.  Steward: Users with even higher privileges. They can grantor revoke virtually allkind of user 
accesslevels.  Oversight: This users have the power of removing the history of revisions for a certain 
article. This revisions can onlybe restoredby systemdevelopers.  Checkuser: They can retrieve the IP 
address employed by a certain username, as well as all edits madeby users with a certainIP, or within 
a certainIP range.Logs ofthe checkuser s activities are always available to the rest of the community. 
 As a consequence, we end up with a system with many of theingredientstobecome a success: an easy-to-useinter­face, 
strategies for content preservation and ef.cient clas­si.cation, and power-users that distribute privileges 
and watchfor system and contents health.Thequestion nowis, where do contributions to Wikipedia come from? 
Do most ofthe contributionscomefrompower-users, with adeep and strong implication level in the project? 
Do they come from thegroup of average users, withjust afew contributionsper month? In this paper, we 
look back to previous methodologies presented to answer these questions. We evaluate their re­sults, 
which were obtained only for the English version of Wikipedia, andwepoint out someimportantparametersthat 
mayhavebeen overlooked.Wethen extend this methodol­ogy to other language versions, showing why we need 
to consider newparameterstofully explainbehavioralpatterns indifferentcommunities of users.Finally, wepresent 
an en­hanced methodologythat shows us a more completepicture of contributionsinWikipedia, and we applyit 
to analysethe community of users in the English edition, as well as the Swedish andNorwegian editionsfor 
comparisonpurposes. 2. METHODOLOGIES FOR QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF WIKIPEDIA Although thereis still verylittle 
researchpresentingquanti­tative analyses ofWikipedia,there are someprevious works we need to mention 
in order to give an accurate picture of thecurrentstate-of-the-artinthisinteresting.eld.Inthefol­lowingparagraphs,we 
offer abriefpresentation ofthesepre­vious investigations. Then, in the next section we focus on proposed 
methodologies to answer the question: where do contributions to Wikipedia comefrom?Thisis followed by 
adiscussionpresenting additionalparametersthat we should takeinto account.Finally, wepresent our ownproposalfor 
a improved methodology to undertake this challenging ques­tion. 2.1 Previous Methodologies Oneof the 
.rst research workspresentingquantitativeanal­ysis results about Wikipedia was conducted by Jakob Voss 
[7]. In this paper, he presents some interesting preliminary results about the evolution of contents 
and authors, mainly focusing on theGerman version of theWikipedia: the num­ber ofdistinctauthorsper articlefollows 
apower-law, while the number of distinct articles per author follows Lotka s Law.Buriol et al.[2] showedthat 
thegrowthin the num­ber of articles and users in the English edition were consis­tent with Voss results. 
The authors .nd many similarities among several language versions of Wikipedia, as well as with the structure 
of the World Wide Web. This should be no surprise,becausein someway,wikis aresimply another .avorof websiteswherecontentsmaybelinkedfromother 
contents(usingHTMLhyperlinks). Viegas et al.[5] found an alternative approachfor study­ing contribution 
patterns to Wikipedia articles. They have developed a software tool, History Flow, that can navigate 
through the complete history of any article. This way, it is possible toidentifyperiods ofintensegrowthin 
the content of articles, acts of vandalism and other interesting patterns in users contributions.In a 
more recentpaper[6],Viegas et al. usetheirsoftwaretool todescribethecollaborativepro­cessbehind articles 
creation,how users employWikipedia s talkpagesfor reaching consensus anddemanding additional contentsand 
theperiodicprocessof archivingpreviousdis­cussions.Inthispaper,we can alsoget agraphicaldemon­stration 
of theimpressivegrowth rate ofWikipedia,looking at thehistorygraphsfor somepopular articles. The .rst 
study that tried to answer the question about whatisthe major sourceof contributionsinWikipediawas [1]. 
In this paper, the authors measuredthe quality of con­tributions by the percentage of aggregated contents 
that re­mains in the subsequent revisions of a certain article. They concludedthattwo maingroupsof contributorsare 
responsi­blefor most of thehighquality contributions.On onehand, high quality contents come from zealots, 
registered users with a stronginterestin reputation and ahighlevel ofpartic­ipation. On the other hand, 
we have good Samaritans, that is, anonymoususers with alowlevel ofparticipationinthe project.Theyalso 
show that thereis a strong correlationbe­tween the quality of contributed contents and the level of contributions 
made by individual authors. In the group of registered users, thegreater the number of contributionsper 
useris,thebetterthequality of those contentsistoo.If we turnto thegroup of anonymoususers,quality contents 
come from users with a smaller number of contributions, and that quality decreases as the number of contributions 
per user raises. Finally,we .nd amoreseriousattempttoestablish afor­mal methodologyfor measuringtheseparametersin 
a recent paperbyKittur etal.[4].Inthis work,the authorstryto con­.rm the theory that, after an initial 
period in which contri­butions usually camefrom registered users with ahighlevel ofparticipation, thesedaysWikipedia 
receives the majority of its contributions from those users with a very low level ofparticipation.Therefore, 
these authors argue that the rea­son for the current growth of Wikipedia is what they call the wisdom 
of the crowd, or in other words, the rise of the bourgeoisie. In the next section, we will revisit these 
results, creating similar graphs to those appearing in that paper, but with a new set of data. This will 
lead us to some interesting conclusions about who are really making the majority of contributionstoWikipedia. 
  3. REVISITING THE RISE OF THE BOURGEOISIE In theirprevious researchpaper,Kittur et al.propose a sim­ple 
methodfor classifying Wikipedia s users,applyingitto the English edition of the encyclopedia. Results 
were gen­erated using the history dump created on July 2nd, 2006, with 4.7 million wiki pages, and 2.4 
million article related entries.They classifyWikipedia s usersinto5different cat­egories, according to 
the total number of contributions each user made to the encyclopedia up to that point: more than 10,000 
edits (10k+); between 5,001 and 10,000 edits (5­10k); between 1,001 and 5,000 edits (1-5k); between 101 
and1,000 edits(100-1k); and100 orfewer edits(< 100). They also generate some graphics isolating contributions 
thatcomefrom administratorsoftheEnglishWikipedia(that is,sysops), comparingthesedata withthe contributionsgen­eratedby 
the5 categories we mentioned above. Before extending the methodology, we decided to re­produce these 
results, though using a more recent dump (November 4th, 2006)of the English edition. For this rea­son, 
our graphics show some additional data that could not beconsideredinthispreviousresearch.We also retrieved 
a more recentdump(April4th,2007) with thedatabase ta­ble containing users privileges(table user groups 
inMedi­aWiki), to recreate graphics concerning sysops. We present the evolution in time of these results 
in monthly periods, starting from the .rst month of existence of that language edition(thatis,intheEnglish 
editionperiod0 corresponds to January 2001, period 1 corresponds to February 2001, and so on).As thedatabasedumpsdid 
notinclude the com­pletehistory of thelastperiod(period70,corresponding to % of total contributions 
per month made by admins enwiki Contributions per month for admins enwiki  0 10203040506070 0 10203040506070 
 months Figure 1. Percentage of total number of contributions per month madeby sysops in theEnglish edition 
ofWikipedia. November2006),thegraphicswe showinthis articlepresent a strongdropoffin thisperiod.So that, 
results withinperiod 70 should not be taken into account. It was not possible to manually eliminate these 
remaining data without affecting the automatic tool we have developed for this quantitative analysis,which 
wewilldescribeshortlyinthe .nal section. For this new sets of graphics, we have .ltered contribu­tions 
made by bots, special programs created to automat­ically load new contents retrieved from publicly available 
information sources, and to implement some maintenance tasks as controlling vandalismand spam.We only 
takeinto account contributions madetoWikipedia spages thatfallin the main namespacecategory,corresponding 
to articles,in­cluding redirects (articleslinkingto the maindenomination of a certain topic) and stubs 
(articles withfew or verypoor contentsthat still need tobeimproved).We should alsopre­cisethat,foreach 
month,weonly countthoseusers(and admins) who made atleast one editin that month. Figure 1 reproduces 
the percentage of total edits per month made by sysops. We should remark that, in the En­glish edition 
of Wikipedia, sysops never leave their special statusoncetheyhavereachedit.At .rst sight,wecandetect 
a newpeak at thebeginning of thegraph(period3) thatdid not appear in the reproduced study. The reason 
for this is that we are considering a broader population, since we are using a more up-to-date version 
of the list of sysops, and speci.cally some new users who made almost the 80% of the total number of 
contributionsduringthat month.We can see that thepercentage of contributions madeby sysops still tends 
todecrease,fromperiod36(January,2004) topresent time. We can also see an overall increment in the percent­age 
of total editsper month madeby admins with respect to the resultspresentedin theprevious work,due to 
thehigher number of sysops we consider this time. Even moreinterestingisthe recreationinFigure2, show­ingthetotalnumber 
of contributionsper month madeby ad­mins.Inthe reproducedstudy,the authorspointed out adrop in the number 
ofedits madeby admins, startingfromperiod 60(January,2006),that seemed tobe merelyproduceddue months 
Figure 2. Totalnumber of contributionsper month madeby sysops in theEnglishedition ofWikipedia. to some 
new admins that were not included in the list yet. We need topointoutthatintheEnglishWikipedia,admins 
are selected through a peer review process. Some users are proposedtobecome sysops, and then the community 
makes positive, negative or neutral votes in response to each pro­posal. For this reason, there is an 
inherent start-up time as­sociated withtheprocess ofbecoming admin, asKittur et al. already explained. 
Nevertheless,the newgraphshowsthat maybethatis not the motiveforthisbehaviour.Inthe additionalperiodsthat 
we analyse now,thereis a cleartrendtowards stabilization of the numberofedits madeby admins,and nowwe 
canbe sure that we are considering all the possible users that reached the sysop status. The most reasonable 
hypothesis now is a switch in the behaviour of admins, that cease to contribute to articles at the samegrowing 
rate thanbefore. We now turn to the classi.cation of users in the English Wikipedia based on the total 
number of contributions they madesofar,whereKittur et al.presented the so called rise of thebourgeoisie.They 
showed that the mass of users with alower number of contributionsper monthis responsiblefor most of the 
contributions receivedby theEnglishWikipedia in thelast months. Infact,this seemstobethe caselookingatthegraphs 
we showinthefollowing .gures(createdfromourowndata, but applying the methodology from the reproduced 
study). InFigure3wecan seethatthepercentageofthetotalnumber of contributionsper month madeby users withless 
than100 editsis increasing steadily.Figure4presents the number of contributionsper monthfor each editinglevel.InthisFigure, 
as well asinFigures5 and6,wetakethelog10 of thetotal number of contributions. This is perfectly consistent 
with thereproduced study,sincethenumberof contributionsper month madeby userswithlessthan100 editsisgrowing 
at a much faster rate than any other group. At the same time, the average number of contributionsper 
userin each editing level,depictedinFigure5, shows that the valuesper month foreachgrouphaveremainedvery 
stableovertime. Finally, Figure 6 depicts the evolution in time of the population in % of total contributions 
per user level per month <100 100-1k 1-5k 5-10k 10k+ were nottakeninto account.Butthe reproduced.gures,that 
consider the whole population of sysops, re.ects that this tendency is not a mere artifact, but a behavioural 
change. Figure7showsthatthepercentageof usersinthegroup with lessthan100editsis steadily rising, a resultthatis 
consistent with thepreviousdatapresented up to thispoint. Growth of each user group per month % contributions 
0 20 40 60 log(num users) 012345 <100 100-1k 1-5k 5-10k 10k+ 0 10203040506070 months Figure 3. Percentageof 
thetotal number contributionsper month made by users with distinct editing levels in the En­glishedition 
ofWikipedia. Total contributions per user level per month contributions 0123456 0 10203040506070 months 
Figure 6. Evolution in time of the population in each user groupin theEnglishedition ofWikipedia.(log-scale) 
 <100 % of users in each user group per month 100-1k 1-5k 5-10k 10k+ % users 0 20406080 <100 100-1k 1-5k 
5-10k 10k+ 0 10203040506070 months Figure 4. Number of contributions per month made by users with distinct 
editing levels in the English edition of Wikipedia.(log-scale) Avg revisions per user level per month 
avg. contributions 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 10203040506070 <100 100-1k months 1-5k 5-10k 10k+ Figure 
7. Percentage of usersin each usergroupper month in theEnglish edition ofWikipedia.  4. EXTENDING PREVIOUS 
METHODOLOGIES 0 10203040506070 months Sofar, wehave reproducedsome ofthe mostrelevant results found in 
previous methodologies, proposed for the quanti- Figure 5. Average number of contributionsper userin 
each editinglevelper monthin theEnglish edition ofWikipedia. tativeanalysis ofWikipedia.Inthis section,we 
will extend (log-scale) theseprevious methodologies to thequantitative analysis of otherlanguageeditionsofWikipedia.We 
will alsoenhance these previous methodologies, quantifying per period pa­ each user group. As we can 
see, most of the groups shows rameters. That will lead us to get a more accurate picture an exponential 
growing rate, except for the group of users of the evolution in time of the Wikipedia s community of 
with a total of more than 10,000 edits. Again, the authors users, as well as to show some interesting 
conclusions that explainedthisleverageduetothefactthatnewadmins canbeextractedfromthisextended analysis. 
4.1 Extending the previous methodology to other language versions As we have seen in the previous section, 
some interesting behaviors were hidden in the previous versions of these graphs, due to the fact that 
they could not consider data we have included in this recreation. But there are some additionalpoints 
that worth a morein-depthdiscussion. First of all, we consider the analysis of data from the sysops population. 
The graphics above have shown that, in the English edition of Wikipedia, contributions that come from 
admins are steadilydecreasing, supposedlyinfavor of the contributionsfrom thegroup of users withless 
editsper month. However, it would be interesting to know how many of the current admins were included 
in each user group per month.ThisinformationispresentedinFigure8, where we show the number of current 
admins that falls in each user groupper month.Hence, we can seein thisgraphicthe evo­lution ofthe current 
adminspopulationthroughthedifferent classes of users.Clearly, the three most contributinggroups provide 
the majority of sysops in the English Wikipedia. However,we shouldmetionthatthe number of contributions 
to articlesin the main namespaceis not the unique measure consideredfor electing sysops, thoughitis very 
common to Another aspectwe should considerishow extensiblethis methodologyis when we apply ittothe study 
of otherlan­guage editions of Wikipedia. If we take, for instance, the Swedishedition,we can see adifferentbehaviourfor 
sysops, inFigure9 andFigure10.While the total number of contri­butions per month made by sysops follows 
a very similar pattern to that of the English Wikipedia, the percentage of thetotal numberof contributionsper 
monthfromadminsis quite distinct. Figure 9 shows that this percentage has re­mained very stable, around 
the 40% of the total number of contributions,fromperiod17(May,2004) onwards,in con­trasttothe steadilydecreasingtrendexhibitedbytheEnglish 
Wikipedia ssysops inFigure1. % of total contributions per month made by admins svwiki  require that 
the sysop candidatehave at least afewhundred months edits. Figure 9. Percentage of total number of contributions 
per Current admins per level per month month madeby sysops in theSwedish edition ofWikipedia.  Contributions 
per month for admins svwiki months Figure 8. Number of sysops in each user group per month in theEnglishedition 
ofWikipedia. So, we couldask thefollowingquestion:how many users that we now include in the group with 
less edits will be­come admins in the near future? We cannot give a de.nite answer for that question, 
because nobody can predict fu­ture, but from historic results we can de.nitely .gure out that many of 
them will not reach that status. Furthermore, if wecompareFigure8 andFigure6,wecan seethat many authorsfallingin 
the three most activegroups of usershave notbeen selected as adminsyet.Forthis reason,we cannot considerthat 
adropoffinthepercentage of contributionsper month madeby admins(presentedinFigure1) re.ectsthe behavioral 
pattern of the whole population of most active users, since many of them are not sysops. months Thisbehaviouralchange 
maybedueto a radicallydiffer­ent approachfor selecting admins 1.Inthislanguage edition, adminsdo not 
acquire apermanentprivilege,butthey rather must be re-elected every year, according to the work they 
havedeveloped.Therefore,the .gureshowsusasomewhat constantlevel of effort maintainedby thisgroup,in order 
to retainthe admin status.That creates aframeworkthatfavors ahighernumberof contributionsper userthanin 
any other 1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swedish Wikipedia#History languageedition.IntheSwedishWikipediathereis 
no rise of thebourgeoisie, or atleast notyet. As we can seeinFigure11,thepercentageoftotalcontri­butionsper 
month madeby usersinthe most activegroups is still above the level exhibited by users with fewer total 
contributions, althoughit seems tobe a slight trend towards changingsinceperiod30.As a result,regardingadminsanal­ 
% of total contributions per user level per month months ysis we cannot make a general assumption about 
their im­pactinthe contributions madeby a certain community.On the contrary, we should takeinto account 
special conditions like, for example, the way that community of users selects admins and whether or notthese 
special users maintaintheir status of privilege inde.nitely. We should carefully revise theseparameters 
when we turn to the analysis of adifferent language version,because they may even affectbehavioural patterns 
ofthe whole community of users. Anotherfactor we shouldremarkis agenerationalchange that may have been 
overlooked in the previous research; many language editions presents, like English, a tendency in which 
thepopulationof usersbetween5,000 and10,000 edits in total has surpassed the population with more than 
10,000 edits, as we saw in Figure 6. This presents us the hypothesis that, in short time, these users 
will leave this group to be included in the more than 10,000 edits class, since the average number of 
edits per user per month is approximately constant. This evolution in the composition of the community 
of users may remainhiddenin subsequentpresentations of this methodology, as long as we use the aggregate 
number of edits to classify users. The total number of contributions made so far by a certain user through 
the whole history of a language edition may shadow very active and young users, with a higher number 
of contributions per month in the recenthistory,thatgetlostin the mass of users withless overall number 
of edits.Besidesthat,followingtheprevious methodology we do not know, for example, how many of theless 
active users made one or two edits toWikipediain a certain month, andthen never cameback againto contribute. 
The effectofthegroup of users withlessthan100total edits is worthtobe analysed,butwe should alsotakeinto 
account periodbyperiodmeasurements,tobe sure that we canget a precisepicture ofthe whole editionprocess.Thatleads 
usto ourproposalfor an enhanced methodology to automatethe quantitative analysis ofallWikipedialanguage 
editions with our own software tool, WikiXRay.  4.2 Per Period Analysis of the English Wikipedia s Community 
of Users Trying to expand ourknowledgeabouthowthecommunity of most active editors evolves over time, 
we have extended theprevious methodologyanalysing users accordingto their activitylevelduring speci.cperiods 
oftime(instead of con­sideringthe wholehistory of a certain edition ofWikipedia). This avoids the in.uence 
of duration, and location, of the activeperiod of timefor a contributorin the way sheis clas­si.ed.As 
wediscussedintheprevioussubsection,the conse­quence of using theprevious methodologyis that some new 
editors are classi.edinlow-contributingpopulationsdespite being very active,justbecausethey had notenough 
timeto contribute signi.cantlyyet. As a result,followingthe samepresentation approachwe have split the 
history of edits in the English Wikipedia in monthlyperiods,consideringthe .rstone(January,2001, fortheEnglishedition) 
asperiod0.Then,for eachlanguage edition we have analysed the number of contributions per monthfromthemostactiveeditors,with 
an specialinterest inhow stableis thegroupof top contributors.Wehave con­sidered two criteriaforidentifyingthe 
most active editors: We sorted editors according to their number of contribu­tions per month. Then, 
we identi.ed the 5% of editors with thehighest number of contributionsin each month.  Later, we considered 
again the list of editors sorted by their number of contributions per month, but this time isolating 
the most active editors responsiblefor the10% of the total number of changesin each month.  We should 
recall at this point that these data has been ob­tainedfromthedatabasedumpscontainingthe complete edit 
history of each Wikipedia page, .ltering out any page that does notbelong to the main namespace.Therefore, 
we only considerto computethese resultsthose usersthathave made atleast one contributionin each month. 
In the rest of this section, we showhowbothpopulations havea similarbehaviour,andhow,after aninitialperiod 
of instability, authorsinbothpopulations remain activeduring longperiods oftime, suggestingthatthe core 
ofWikipedia s top contributorsis stable overtime. Figure12plots the edithistory of the5% of authors with 
the highest number of edits in each month in the English Wikipedia. This 3D graph has been created as 
follows: the x axis indicates the period in which we identify the group of the 5% of editors with the 
highest number of edits in that month. Then, we plot on the y axis the edit history of that group of 
editors in the remaining periods of the English Wikipedia. On the z axis, we plot the total number of 
contributions quanti.ed for each group in every month. For instance, for the group of 5% of authors with 
highest numberof editsinperiod40(x axis) wetracethecomplete history oftheir editsinthe remainingperiods(y 
axis).We havetakenthelog10 of thetotal numberof edits(zaxis) to ensurethat recentperiods, with ahigher 
number of edits,do nothide resultsforprevious months.As we can see, thereis a group of very active editors 
for each month that has also been very activein other months.Thegraphdoes notshow any signi.cant valleys, 
demonstrating that the community of users with the higher number of edits in each month presents aquite 
constantbehaviour overtimefortheEnglish Wikipedia. One of the parameters we are interested in is the 
level of inequality that can be found for contributions. Analyzinginequalitywill allow us to seeifbothphenomena 
presentsimilarpatterns.  We will measureinequalityby means of theGini coef.­cient. This coef.cient, 
introduced by Conrado Gini [3] to measure income inequality in economics, shows how un­equal something 
is distributed among a group of people. To calculatetheGini coef.cient, .rst wehaveto obtainthe Lorenz 
curve, a graphical representation of the cumulative distribution function of a probability distribution. 
Perfect distribution among authors is hence given by a 45 degree line. The Gini coef.cient is given by 
the area between the two curves,providinghowfar the actualdistributionisfrom perfectequality.Figure13presents 
theLorenz curvefor the English edition ofWikipedia, considering editors that made at least one edit in 
that language edition. As we can see, approximately90% of the active editorsis responsible alto­getherforlessthan10%ofthetotalnumber 
ofcontributions, (Ginicoef.cientof0.9360).Hence,we .nd asmallgroup of very active editors maintaining 
ahigh activitylevelthrough­out the wholehistory of theEnglishWikipedia. We showinFigure14 anotherinteresting 
viewquantify­ing,fortheEnglishWikipedia,the edithistoryinthe remain­ingmonths ofthe most active editorsin 
each month who ac­cumulatethe10% of thetotal number of editsin thatperiod. Thegraphhasbeen createdfollowingthe 
samepresentation method explained above.We also take thelog10 of the total number of contributions to 
plot values in the z axis. Again, we can see that the behavior of this group of users is fairly similar 
in periods other than the one in which they reached the group of top editors with the 10% of the total 
number of contributionsin that month.Nevertheless,in thisgraphic we appreciate some valleys towards the 
early edithistory of these users,betweenperiods20to40.Thisfactindicatesthat those usersdid notparticipate 
with such ahigh editinglevel in the earlyhistoryof theEnglishWikipedia.  To evaluate the average pro.le 
that a certain user must present to be considered under this analysis, we summarize inFigures15 and16 
the number of authorsin thisgroupfor eachperiod, and the minimum number of edits that a certain user 
must reach to be included in the analysis for each pe­riod,respectively.As wecanseefromthesegraphs,though 
the number of most active usersin each month accumulating the 10% of the total number of contributions 
in that month is steadily rising,(most notablyfromperiod51 onwards), the evolution of thesegroups of 
userspresentsperiodicfalls that worth a more in deep analysis. The number of contri­butions that a certain 
user must reach in each period to get into thisgrouppresents adisproportionatedmaximum value inperiod21 
that alsodeservesfurther analysis.We suspect that this outlier is due to a bot, unregistered as such 
in the databasedump. Finally,inFigure17 weshowthatthis methodology can be extendedto otherlanguage versions 
ofWikipedia as well, depicting the same graph as in Figure 14, but this time for the Norwegian edition 
of Wikipedia. This is an example of a medium size Wikipedia, edited in a language that not many users 
employ outside its own country. It is just the opposite situation of the English edition, which can receive 
contributionsfrom abroader communityof users all overthe registered editors with at least one contribution 
per month world.Here,wetakethe naturallogarithmtoplotthe number (EnglishWikipedia). of contributionsinthe 
z axis,instead ofthelog10previously   employed. This time, we can see remarkable valleys in the recenthistory,showingperiodsof 
clearinactivityofthe most active users in each month responsible for the 10% of the total number of contributions 
in that month. Thus we can infer that these are younger users that did not contribute to thislanguageeditionduring 
its early history.Most notably, we detect for those editors an interval of almost complete inactivity 
from periods 2 to 10. These young editors could nothavebeenidenti.edfollowingthepreviousmethodology proposedby 
Kittur et al., as they wouldhavebeenincluded in thegroupofless active editors, since we were classifying 
contributors regarding their total number of edits troughout the wholehistory of a certainlanguage edition. 
 4.3 Automating Quantitative Analyses WikiXRay2 is aPython softwarepackagelicensed under the GNU GPL, 
whose main goal is to provide a set of tools for automating the quantitative analysis of all Wikipedia 
language editions.Infact,thistoolcouldbe usedin any wiki based onMediaWiki. Some features of WikiXRay 
can be applied to the quan­titative analysis of the Wikipedia s community of users, in particular: 2http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/WikiXRay 
1. WikiXRayhas reproducedpreviousmethodologiesforthe quantitative analysis of the different language 
editions of Wikipedia. We have use this capability to create the graphicspresentedin this researchpaper. 
2.As well as reproducingpreviousmethodologiesthat use aggregated contributions to classify users, WikiXRay 
is capableof classifying usersby theirnumberof editsper period. Currently, we consider monthly periods, 
but it is fairly straightforward to switch WikiXRay, so we can take periods by quarters, semesters, etc. 
This way, we can have a more accurate picture about what is really happening in each month, rather than 
trusting solely in aggregateddata to showbehavioralpatterns. 3. WikiXRay can depict 3D graphs showing 
the evolution for other different periods of relevant groups of users within an individual period. We 
can show, for example, the historical behavior in the remaining periods of the most activeeditorsinperiod40,(measuredfromthe 
.rst month of history), concentrating the 10% of the total number of editsin thatperiod.Thisfeatureis 
very useful to verifyif certainbehavioralpatternsarejustlocalor they can be extrapolated to the whole 
history of that language edition. 4. WikiXRay allows us to easily extend this methodology to other relevant 
parameters like articles. For example,  instead of focusing on the most active contributors in period 
40 concentrating the 10% of the total number of edits in that period, we can analyse the most popular 
articlesinperiod40,(those obtainingthehighest number ofcontributions),thatreceivethe10%ofthetotalnumber 
of edits in that period. We could then use those data to correlate them with the number of distinct authors 
per article, thelength of those articles, etc. We have applied our tool to the quantitative analysis 
of the English edition ofWikipedia, trying to validate some of the results andpreviousmethodologieswehavepresentedsofar. 
Wehave also useditto extendthoseprevious methodologies to other language editions of Wikipedia and to 
include per periodparametersin thequantitative analysisprocess.  5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this 
research paper, we revised previous methodologies proposed for the quantitative analysis of Wikipedia. 
We showed that, although these methodologies reveal some in­terestingbehavioralpatterns, they can alsohide 
anotherim­portant phenomena that could lead us to acquire a more complete anddetailedpicture oftheWikipedia 
s community of users. Later, wepresentedour ownproposalfor enhancingthese previous methodologiesto undertakethequantitative 
analy­sis ofWikipedia.This extended methodologycanbe applied to further language editions other than 
English, and it fo­cuses on the study ofperperiodparameters topreciselyfol­low the evolution in time 
of the Wikipedia community of users. We .nally showed some graphs summarizing the most relevantparametersthat 
we can study withthis new method­ologyusing WikiXRay,aPythonsoftwaretoolthatautomates thequantitative 
analysis of allWikipedialanguage editions. Further development of WikiXRay will include extending this 
per period analysis method to Wikipedia articles, and re.ectingpossible correlationsbetweenfeaturedparameters 
that will let us better explain the behavior of the communi­ties of usersin alllanguage editions ofWikipedia. 
 References [1] D.Anthony,S.W.Smith, andT.Williamson. Explainingqual­ity in internet collective goods: 
Zealots and good samaritans. the case of wikipedia. November2005. [2] L. S. Buriol, C. Castillo, D. Donato, 
S. Leonardi, and S. Millozzi. Temporal evolution of the wikigraph. In Proceedings of the Web Intelligence 
Conference, December 2006. [3] C. Gini. On the measure of concentration with especial reference toincome 
and wealth. In CowlessComission,1936. [4] A.Kittur,E.Chi,B.A. Pendleton, B.Suh, andT. Mytkowicz. Power 
of the few vs. wisdom of the crowd:Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. In Proceedings of the 25th 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI2007),April-May2007. [5] F. B. Viegas, 
M. Wattenberg, and K. Dave. Studying cooperation and con.ict between authors with history .ow visualizations. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 575 582, April 2004. 
[6] F. B. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, J. Kriss, and F. van Ham. Talk beforeyou type:Coordinationin wikipedia. 
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 07), page 
78a. Computer Society Press, January2007. [7] J.Voss. Measuringwikipedia. In Proceedings oftheISSI2005, 
July2005.  
			