
 QUEUEING ANALYSIS OF FINITE BUFFER TOKEN NETWORKS Aura Ganz and Imrich Chlamtac Department of Electrical 
&#38; Computer Engineering University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA 01003 ABSTRACT This paper introduces 
analytic models for evalu- ating demand assignment protocols in realistic finite buffer/finite station 
network configurations. We present a solution for implicit and explicit token passing systems enabling 
us to model local area networks, such as Token Bus. We provide, for the first time, a tractable approxi- 
mate solution by using an approach based on restricted occupancy urn models. The presented approximation 
involves the solving of linear equations whose number is linear and equal only to the number of buffers 
in the system. It is demonstrated that in addition to its sim- plicity, the presented approximation is 
also highly accu- rate. 1. INTRODUCTION Token oriented demand assignment protocols are widely used in 
local area, high speed and satellite com- munication systems. Demand assignment (DA) proto- cols provide 
collision free channel allocation with "guar- anteed" channel access leading to bounded station re- sponse 
times. An extremely large number of DA proto- cols have been proposed in the literature [2,7]. A sig- 
nificant number of DA protocols have also been imple- mented and have recently been adopted as communica- 
tion standards [14]. Due to their popularity the body of models pro- posed for the analysis of DA protocols 
is very large. The models presented so far for finite number of sta- tions have assumed either an infinite 
buffer capacity or the existence of a single buffer at each station [1,5,10- 13]. In operational systems 
however, not only the num- ber of stations is finite, but the number of buffers at each station is finite 
too and is greater than one. Ex- Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or 
specfic permission. &#38;#169; 1988 ACM0-89791-254-3/88/0005/0030 $1.50 aO isting models thus, do not 
reflect the actual behavior of multi-buffered networks in terms of the packet re-jection probability, 
the average packet delay and the network throughput. As pointed out repeatedly in pre- ceding analyses, 
no tractable solutions have so far been given for analyzing realistic network configurations due to the 
complexity of practical finite station/finite buffer models. It should further be pointed out that similar 
difficulties are also encountered in analyzing random ac- cess and carrier sense multiple access protocols, 
where for realistic network configurations, tractable and ac-curate approximate models were also presented 
for the first time only recently [3,4,16,17]. To indicate the difficulty of the analysis of DA con- trolled 
systems with finite number of stations (N) and finite number of buffers (L) we consider the exact solu- 
tion. Notice that in this case the state description must contain the exact distribution of packets at 
all stations. The state description of the exact model is thus given by the vector (bl, b2, ..., bN) 
with bi the number of packets queued at station i, 1 < i < N. This state descrip-tion leads to an exponential 
number of states given by (L+I) N, in a fixed priority DA protocols. In the case of fair DA protocols 
due to the need to include the identity of the last transmitting station in the state description the 
number of states is given by N (L + l) N. No-tice further, that similarly to random access and carrier 
sense protocols [3,4,16,17], even with the assumption of symmetry in traffic demands and in station access, 
the number of states in the exact model of the DA protocols remains the same. Therefore, exact solutions 
become in- tractable for all but very small number of stations and buffers and an approximate solution 
becomes manda-tory. In this paper we provide, for the first time, a tractable and accurate approximate 
solution for symmetric net-works. The presented solution is linear in "two dimen- sions"(!): it involves 
the solution of linear equations whose number is also linear. Using restricted occu-pancy urn models, 
first introduced in [3], we construct a Markov chain in which the number of equations equals only to 
the number of buffers in the system plus one: (N.L+ 1). 2. MODEL We consider networks with a single broadcast 
chan- nel (bidirectional or unidirectional) or with a collection of channels connected via a central 
switching facility. The system under consideration consists of N stations, each with a storage capacity 
of L buffers. The time in the system is divided into time slots equal to tile end to end propagation 
delay r. It is assumed that all stations are synchronized to slot beginnings. Every network sta- tion 
can generate a packet at tile beginning of each slot with probability r. The generated packets are of 
con- stant length, with packet transmission time being equal to T slots. (:['he constant packet length 
assumption is later relaxed and analysis is given for a general packet length distribution). When a packet 
arrives at a station with full buffers it is rejected and removed from the sys- tem. We shall say that 
a station is busy when it has at least one packet in its buffers. To effect communication each busy station 
executes a demand assignment protocol for accessing the chan- nel. In DA protocols a single station is 
guaranteed to be allocated the channel for transmission at any given time. We shall consider demand assignment 
protocols with fair round robin nonexhaustive service. For imple- menting this type of access, stations 
can negotiate tor the channel by explicit token passing or implicit schedul- ing prior to each packet 
transmission. If a station has a packet for transmission (is busy) when its turn comes up, it is allowed 
to transmit a packet. If a station has no packet to transmit at this time it must wait until all the 
other stations are offered the right to transmit. This service policy is also referred to as non-gated 
sequential service [9]. To describe an NGSS protocol we consider the op- eration of a station with implicit 
token passing [6,7,835]. Explicit token protocols, such as the Token Bus stan-dard [16], yield the same 
modeling representation. An implicit token passing protocol is based on a scheduling delay access mechanism. 
The system is assumed to be fully distributed so that when executing the protocol a station can only 
utilize information available from tim channel. To obtain the access right all stations con-tinuously 
monitor the channel and remain synchronized to the beginning of scheduling intervals. The begin-ning 
of a scheduling interval is marked by the end of a transmission or, in case of an idle channel, by bound- 
aries of full scheduling interval multiples (N slots). A full scheduling interval is defined by the time 
needed to pass control (implicit "token") among all stations. At the beginning of a scheduling interval 
a busy station waits for a scheduling delay given by an integer nmltiple of r. If following its chosen 
scheduling delay the station finds the channel idle, the station transmits the packet. If the channel 
is found busy the station reschedules its transmission in the following scheduling interval. Denoting 
by j the index of the last successfully transmitting station, a scheduling demand assignment protocol 
as executed by station i becomes: While packet for transmission do Begin If channel idle wait until the 
beginning of a schedul- ing period {the next N -r multiple} Else wait for the end of transmission { channel 
is busy} Wait a scheduling delay H(i,j) r where: It(i,j) = (i-j + N-1) mod N If channel idle transmit 
the packet End. 3. ANALYSIS In the presented approximate solution we use Markov chain embedded at the 
end of each transmission. The time between two successive embedded points is called a cycle. A cycle 
can consist of a variable number of slots. To obtain a solution with a linear number of equations we 
choose a state description given by (i), where i rep- resents the total number of packets ii1 the system 
at the beginning of each cycle. This leads to a number of equa- tions equal only to the number of buffers 
in the system plus one: N L + 1. Let P be a (N. L + 1) x (N. L + l) matrix which represents tile transition 
probability matrix of the sys- tem. Entry Pij of P gives the probability that there are j packets in 
the system at the beginning of a cycle, given there were i packets in the system at tile begin- ning 
of tile previous cycle. Let H be the steady state probability vector, where ri is the steady state proba-bility 
that there are i packets in the system at the cycle beginning. H is obtained as the solution of the following 
set of equations: H.P = II N.L (1) ~i=0 ~ri = l To calculate the transition probabilities and the system 
behavior in a cycle, notice that in the proposed approx- imate model the state description is defined 
so as to guarantee a linear number of equations. For this reason the state definition is only partial 
and does not pro-vide the exact packet distribution among the stations at the embedded points. The key 
problem of the intro- duced approximation is thus to calculate the transition probabilities without the 
direct availability of the state information, so that a set of linear degree equations is obtained. To 
solve this problem we first calculate slot transition probability matrices using the (analogous) re-stricted 
occupancy urn model, considering: the distri- bution of n indistinguishable balls into m distinguish-able 
urns, when the occupancy of each urn is restricted to k balls. The analogy between the original problem 
and this model is obtained as in [3,4], by viewing the packets as balls, the stations as urns and the 
number of buffers at each station as the urn occupancy restriction. The cycle transition probability 
matrix is obtained as a product of slot oriented transition probability ma-trices calculated above. To 
solve the restricted occupancy urn model we assume system symmetry, consistently with previously given 
models [13], whereby each station has an equal chance to receive a new packet or to transmit a packet. 
For computing the slot transition probabilities we use the following characteristics of the restricted 
occu-pancy urn model as computed in [3,4]. R(n, m, k) is the number of ways of distributing n balls 
among m urns under the k -(occupancy) restric-tion, given by: R(n,m,k) = ~-'~(-1) 3 m-1j=0 (2) and R(n,m,k 
[ bt = u) is the number of ways of distributing n balls among m urns so that exactly u urns have exactly 
t balls under the k - restriction, given by: R(n,m, k lbt : u) : ~(_1) i m u j=o R(n-(u + j)t, m-(u + 
j),k) (3) In subsequent sections we show that the introduced model allows us to develop a linear approximation 
with- out reducing the accuracy of the solution. 3.1. Transition :Probabilities Calculation A cycle 
consists of an idle period (in case no packet is present in the system at the end of a transmission), 
a scheduling period and a transmission period. To calcu- late the transition probability matrix P between 
consec- utive embedded points we take advantage of the slotted time property of the model and compute 
P as the prod- uct of several matrices: P = H.AT-1.j.A (,I) where H, A and J are (N. L + 1)x(N. L+ 1) 
matrices with entries hr,, at,, and jr,, defined respectively by: hr, -the probability that, given l 
packets were present in the system at the end of a transmission, there are v packets in the system at 
the end of the following scheduling period, atv -the probability that there are v -l packet arrivals 
in a slot, given there were I packets in the system at the slot beginning, and Jtv - indicates a packet 
departure following a trans- mission. We next present the calculation of matrices A, J and H. 3.1.1. 
Matrix A Calculation We compute al,, the probability that there are v-l packet arrivals in a slot given 
there were l packets at the slot beginning, similarly to [4]. We first observe that packet arrivals can 
occur with probability r only at sta- tions which have at least one empty buffer. We have to find the 
number of stations to which packet arrivals can occur, an information not directly provided by the reduced 
state description of our model. We, therefore, define wj (L,l) as the probability that there are exactly 
j stations with at least one empty buffer, given l pack- ets were distributed among N stations with at 
most L packets per station. Using w3(L,l), at~ can be computed by: { ~:,-t w3 (L,0" (o'-t)" r°-t' (1 
-r) j-"÷t at, = for v > l 0 for v<l (5) To calculate w3 (L, l) we notice that this probability cor- responds 
to the probability of finding exactly N -j urns with exactly L balls, given l balls were distributed 
among N urns with at most L balls per urn. Using the restricted occupancy model presented in section 
2 we, therefore, obtain: wj(L,l) = R(I'N'L I bL = N-j) R(I,N,L) (6) 3.1.2. Matrix J Calculation Matrix 
J represents the fact that at the end of a successful transmission the number of packets in the system 
decreases by one. Therefore, as in [4] Jr, is given by: 1 for v=l-1 Jt~ = 0 otherwise (7)  3.1.3. Matrix 
H Calculation As defined above htu is the probability that, given l packets were present in the system 
at tile end of a transmission, there are v packets in the system at the end of the following scheduling 
period. Notice that the number of packets arriving during the scheduling period (SP) is a function of 
the the scheduling period length distribution. We denote by Pr(SP = t [ i) the condi- tional probability 
that, given there were i packets in the system at the end of the transmission, the length of the following 
scheduling period is exactly t slots, 1 < t < N. Using Pr(SP = t [ i) htv is given by: N htu = ~ Pr(SP=t 
II).[At]t. (8) t=l where [B]ij represents the (i,j)th element of matrix B. To obtain htv it remains to 
calculate the distribu- tion of the scheduling period (SP) length. Scheduling Period Length Distribution 
To calculate the scheduling period length distribu- tion we define Pr(SP > t ] i) as the conditional 
prob- ability that given there were i packets in the system at the end of the transmission, the length 
of the following scheduling period is at least t slots, 1 < t < N. Using Pr(SP > t I i) the probability 
Pr(SP = t l i) can be given as: Pr(SP = t I i) = Pr(SP>t I i)-Pr(SP>_t+ll i) (9) To calculate Pr(SP 
> t I i) we define gi(t,j) as the probability that the scheduling period length is at least t, given 
there are i packets in the system at its beginning and j packets at its end. Noticing that in the calculation 
of Pr(SP > t ] i) we also have to take into account the packets arriving during the scheduling period, 
as these may also partic- ipate in the scheduling process, we obtain: N.L Pr(SP > t Ii) = E [At-'lij 
 gi(t,j) for t > 1 1 for t=l (10) gi(t,j) Calculation We calculate gi(t,j) recursively as a function 
of: 1) g¢(t - 1, k), the gi( ) probability in tim previous slot, 2) the probability that no packet among 
the k packets present in the system at the end of the t -1 slots is scheduled to point t -1, and 3) the 
probability that no packet among the packets arriving in slot t -1 is scheduled to point t -1. To calculate 
the probabilities for 2) and 3) we have to find the distribution of the number of saturated stations 
(stations with L packets each) at slots t,t + 1, ..., N in the scheduling period. To find this distribution 
we re- call that the i packets found in the system at the be- ginning of the scheduling period are distributed 
among the N stations under the restriction that any station has ~t most L packets. The distribution of 
the i packets present in the system at the beginning of the scheduling period thus determines the present 
occupancy restric-tion of each station, to be encountered by the packets arriving during the scheduling 
period. Therefore the k - i packets arriving during the scheduling period are distributed among the stations 
according to a restriction pattern dictated by the previously distributed i packets, found in the system 
at the beginning of the scheduling period. In accordance with these observations we dis-tinguish between 
stations which are saturated by the previously distributed i packets and stations saturated by the k 
-i packets arriving during the t -1 slots of the scheduling period. Clearly we have gi(O,j) = 1, initially. 
For t > 0 gi(t,j) is given by: j N--3'+k l gi(t,j) = Egi(t-l,k) Z E cz(i'N-t+2'L) k=i /=0 x=O c,_~(k- 
i,N- [LJ,L)d(k,l) e(j- k,I) f(j -k,l) (11) where for any given scheduling point t: cz(i,m,L) is the 
probability that there are exactly x stations with exactly L packets, given i packets were distributed 
among rn stations, d(k,l) is the probability that among the k packets dis- tributed among N stations 
there is no packet scheduled to transmit at slot t -1 of the scheduling period given there are exactly 
l saturated stations, e(j,I) is the probability that j packets arrived in a slot given there are l saturated 
stations in the system at the slot beginning, f(j,I) is the probability that no packet among the j packets 
arriving in a slot arrives at the station scheduled to transmit in scheduling point t -1, given there 
are exactly l saturated stations. To calculate cz(i, rn, L) we use the urn analogy. No- tice that the 
probability c,(i, m, L) corresponds to the probability that there are exactly x urns with L balls given 
i balls were distributed among m urns with at most L balls per urn. Using eqs. (2) and (3) we obtain: 
c~(i,m,L) = R(i,m,L ] bL = x)R(i,m,L) (12) In the d(k,l) calculation we can use the urn analogy again 
noticing that, given I urns are saturated, l .L balls are already distributed among the urns. The remaining 
(k -l L) balls are distributed among N -l remaining urns with the restriction of L balls in each urn. 
Then the probability that urn t -1 is empty, given this dis- tribution of the total number of k balls, 
is obtained by: R(k--I.L,N--I--I,L) d(k,l) = R,(kII'L,N-I,L) for g > 1 (13) N forL= 1 For e(j,I) calculation 
we notice that packet arrivals can only occur at stations with at least one empty buffer. Since with 
l saturated stations there are exactly N -l stations with at least one empty buffer, and in a given slot 
at most one packet arrival may occur to any one of these stations, e(j, l) is given by: e(j,l) = (Njl)" 
rJ " (1--r)N-t-J (14) It remains to calculate f(j,l). Since the packet arrivals in a slot may occur 
to N -I stations with at most one arrival per station, and recalling that in a demand as- signment protocol 
each station corresponds to a schedul- ing point (slot), the probability that no packet arrival occurred 
at slot t -1 is given by: [1-ff-t for N <l f(j,l) (15) i for N = l To obtain gi(t,j) we substitute equations 
(12)-(15) into eq. (11). The scheduling period length distribution is finally obtained by substituting 
(11) in (10) and the result of the substitution in eq. (9). By substituting fi- nally the computations 
of matrices H, A and J in eq. (4) we obtain the transition probabilities for the nongated demand assignment 
protocol.  3.2 Performance Measures To derive the system performance we use tile steady state distribution 
H obtained by substituting the ahove transition probabilities in eq. (1). Given II we calculate the system 
throughput S, the average packet delay D and, due to the finite buffer modeling, we also consider the 
packet rejection probability PR. 3.2.1. System Throughput Calculation We compute ttle system throughput 
S as the ratio between the time the channel is occupied by a transmis- sion (T) and the average cycle 
length (CL). Using CL S can, therefore, be obtained by: T S ---(16) CL with the average cycle length 
given in slots. Average Cycle Length (CL) Calculation We recall that, consistently with section 2, a 
cy- cle consists of an idle period, scheduling period and a transmission period. CL is thus, given by: 
CL = i + S~-fi + T (17) where i denotes the average length (in slots) of the idle period, SP denotes 
the average length of the scheduling period and T is the packet transmission time. By definition of the 
collision free demand assign- ment protocol the idle period is given by an integer multiple of the full 
length scheduling period (of N slots each). Given the arrival process as given in section 2, this number 
is distributed geometrically with the prob- ability of success representing the probability that there 
is at least one packet arrival in a period of N slots given there is no packet in the system at the beginning 
of this period. Using the "arrival matrix A" computed in section 3.1.1., this probability is given by: 
1 - fAN]00. Recall further that an idle period begins when there is no packet in the system at the end 
of a transmission. Given the geometric distribution of the scheduling pe- riod length, the average length 
of the idle period is, therefore, given by: N i = ~o' (18) 1 -fAN]00 To calculate the average length 
of the scheduling period SP we first define SPi tile average length of a schedul- ing period which starts 
with i packets. To compute SPi we can use the distribution of the scheduling period length derived in 
section 3.1.3. We obtain: N SPi = Et" Pr(SP = t l i) (19) t=l Using SPi, SP is given by: N.L i=0 Substituting 
(18) and (20) in (17) CL: N,L N Z ~ri~i T (21) CL = to' 1 - jIAN'[o0 + + t~ i=O Tile substitution of 
(21) in (16) yields the system through- put S. 3.2.2. Average Packet Delay Using Little's result the 
average packet delay D is given by: N D- (22) S where: N is the average number of packets in the system 
and S, the system__ throughput, is given by eq. (16). We com- pute N as the ratio of the expected number 
of packets over all slots in a cycle, and the average cycle length. We, therefore, obtain: N-L N : __1 
. ~.ff Tr~ . ~-~ Pr( S P : t l i )CL i=0 t=l t+T N.L   E Z [Aq,o l=0 n=i ~ (23/ 1 =C--~ " E Iri Z 
Pr(SP = t l i) i=0 t=l N.L t=T ] rt~t in 3.2.3. Packet Rejection Probability The packet rejection probability 
P~ is the expected fraction of packets rejected in a slot due to fllll buffers. We shall compute this 
fraction from the following ob- servation based on the behavior of the system in steady state. Since 
in each cycle exactly one packet is trans- mitted in the system the output rate per cycle is 1 The input 
rate per slot is N. r nmltiplied by the pro~:a ~-bility that the packet is not rejected (1- Pn)- In steady 
state the input rate will equal the output rate. There-fore, the packet rejection probability can be 
obtained by equating these two rates, yielding: 1 P, = 1 (24) N.r.CL 4. GENERAL PACKET LENGTH DISTRIBU-TION 
In this section we present an analysis of the de- mand assignment protocols for a general packet length 
distribution. Let T be a discrete random variable given in multiples of v with generating function Fr(z) 
defined by: oo FT(Z) = E z t " Pr {T = t} t=l The analyses of the DA protocols is obtained from the preceding 
sections with the following modifications:  1.) The matrix A T-I in eq. (4) is replaced by FT-1 (A). 
The transition probability matrix P becomes: P = H.FT_I(A).J.A (25) 2.) The packet transmission time 
T in equations (16), (17) and (23) must be replaced by the average packet transmission time T given by: 
: ~_~ t. Pr {T : t} (26) t=l 5. RESULTS The exact model of the finite buffer/finite station token based 
protocols results in nontractable solutions. The presented approximations are, therefore, validated by 
comparison with simulation. For the simulation of the DA protocol a network model was constructed. The 
model represents the actual system behaviour in terms of stations, buffers, transmission time and end 
to end propagation delays. For each configuration tile simu- lation was executed until results were obtained 
with a confidence level of 99.9%. The evaluated network con- figurations represent system models with 
the number of stations, N = 5 and 10. For each case we observe a varying number of buffers, L -1, 2 and 
3. ]u all cases we take tile packet length (T) to be 10 slots, i.e., the packet transmission time is 
10 times the end to end propagation delay. Figures 1 to 3 present the DA pro- tocol behavior in terms 
of the system throughput, the average packet delay and the packet rejection proba- bility. Figure 1 shows 
the average packet delay versus the total packet generation probability per slot (N r). Figure 2 gives 
the packet rejection probability versus the total packet generation probability per slot and fig- ure 
3 gives the average packet delay versus the system throughput. In all eases the results of the introduced 
approximate model are seen to be in perfect correspon- dence with simulation. 6. SUMMARY This paper presented 
for the first time a tractable analytic model of token based demand assignment pro- tocols for realistic 
network configurations consisting of a finite number of stations with finite number of buffers each. 
The introduced analysis can therefore be used in evaluating existing network configurations, such as 
the IEEE Token Bus standard. The presented approxi- mate model was shown to be based on a two dimensional 
linear solution. It was demonstrated that in each case the linearity is provided without sacrificing 
accuracy. REFERENCES [1] Network Performance Evaluation, IEEE J. Sel. Ar- eas in Comm., Vol. SAC-4, 
No.5, August 1986. [2] W. R. Franta and I. Chlamtac, Local Networks: Motivation, Technology and Performance, 
Lexing- ton Books, 1981. [3] A. Ganz and I. Chlamtac, "Queueing Models for Single and Multiple Transnfission 
Channel Access Protocols", 2nd International Workshop on Applied Mathematics and Performance/Reliability 
Models of Computer/Communication Systems, Rome, Italy, May, 1987. [4] A. Ganz and I. Chlamtac, "Finite 
Buffer Queueing Model for P-Persistent CSMA/CD Protocol" Joint Conf. Performance 87 and ACM S1GMETRICS, 
Brussels Belgium, December 1987. [5] J. K. Itayes, Modeling and Analysis of Computer Communications Networks, 
Plenum Press 1984. [61 F.A. Tobagi, F. Borgonovo, L. Fratta, "Express-net: A High-Performance Integrated-Services 
Lo- cal Area Network", IEEE J. Sel. Areas in Comm., Vol. SAC-l, No.5, November 1983. [7] M. Fine, F. 
Tobagi, "Demand Assignment Multiple Access Schemes in Broadcast Bus Local Area Net- works", IEEE Trans. 
Comp., Vol. C-33, No. 12, December 1984. [8] I. Chlamtac, W.R. Franta, K.D. Levin, "BRAM: The Broadcast 
Recognizing Access Method", IEEE Trans. Comm., Vol. COM-27, No.8, 1979. [9] F. Tobagi, M. Fine, "Performance 
of Unidirectional Broadcast Local Area Networks: Expressnet and Fasnet", IEEE J. Sel. Areas in Comm., 
Vol. SAC- 1, No.5, November 1983. [1O] C.M. Murphy, N.L. Webb, "Tile Efficiency of N Machines Uni-Directionally 
Patrolled by One Op- erative when Walking Time and Repair Times are Constant", J. Royal Stat. Soc., Ser. 
B, No.19, 1957. [11] A. R. Kaye, "Analysis of Distributed Loop for Data Transmission", Proc. Symp. Comput. 
Commun. Networks, Teletraffic polytech. Inst., Brooklyn, N.Y., April 1972. [12] P. J. Kuehn, "Multiqueue 
Systems with Nonex-haustive Cyclic Service", Bell System Tech. Jour-nal, Vol. 58, No. 3, March 1979. 
[13] H. Takagi, "On the Analysis of a Symmetric Polling System with Single-Message Buffers", "Performance 
Evaluation", No. 5, 1985. [141 IEEE Comp. Soc., "Local Networks Standards", Token Ring and Token Bus 
Networks", 1983. [15] M. E. Ulug, G. M. White and W. J. Adams, "Bidi- rectional Token Flow System", in 
Proc. 7'th Data Commun. Symp, Mexico City, Mexico, October 1981. [16] T. K. Apostolopoulos and E. N. 
Protonotarios, "Queue- ing Analysis of Buffered CSMA/CD Protocols", IEEE Trans. on Comm., Vol. COM-34, 
No. 9, Septem- ber 1986. [17] E. D. Sykas, D. E. Karvelas and E. N. Protono- tarios, "Queueing Analysis 
of Sonic Buffered Ran- dom Multiple Access Schemes", IEEE Trans. on Comm., Vol. COM-34, August 1986. 
*Simulation t .~ o.8 ..o ..~ o 0.6 o ,rq .r7 ~ o.4 p.~ o.2 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 i Packet Generation Probability, 
N'r  Figure 2 - Packet Rejection Probability vs. Packet Generation Prob- ability for N=I0 and T=I0. 
Analytic and simulation results. *Simulation g o.~ o14 o.'6 o!~ I I > Packet Generation Probability, 
N'r Figure i - Average Packet Delay vs. Packet Generation Probability for N=5 and T=I0. Analytic and 
simulation results. *Simulation ',o ~o 3o 2O I I 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 ! Throughput Figure 3 - Average 
Packet Delay vs. Throughput for N=I0 and T=I0. Analytic and simulation results.   
			