
 Short Paper:R&#38;D of a Dual mode acoustic modem testbed for shallow water channels Feng TONG1,2 
Shengyong Zhou1 1. Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic communication and Marine Information Technology 
of the MOE, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China ftong@cs.ucsd.edu ABSTRACT Recent years witnessed an increasing 
requirement of marine missions like oceanographic investigation, environmental monitoring, underwater 
structure inspection and sea bottom resource exploitation, which urged the R&#38;D of high performance 
underwater acoustic (UWA) modems. However, as underwater acoustic channels pose multiple difficulties 
such as multipath, time-space selectivity, frequency dependent noise, and Doppler shifts on transmission, 
currently there is not a single modulation strategy that can provide high data rate, energy efficiency 
and channel robustness simultaneously. Enlightened by the similar dual mode (DM) systems developed in 
wireless channels, this paper presents the R&#38;D of a DM UWA modem testbed system, which enables the 
switch between DSSS and OFDM scheme to accommodate different channel situations. Experimental results 
obtained in a physical shallow water channel demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system. Categories 
and Subject Descriptors H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Communications Applications; C.3 [Special-purpose 
and Application based Systems]: Signal Processing Systems General Terms Algorithms, Design, Experimentation 
Keywords Underwater acoustic communication; dual mode; OFDM; DSSS  1. INTRODUCTION More and more interests 
for various marine missions such as environmental (pollution, coral reef, seismic, ocean current, etc.) 
monitoring, underwater structure inspection (oil platform, pipeline, Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. WUWNet 10, Sept. 30 - Oct. 1, 2010, Woods 
Hole, Massachusetts, USA Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0402-3 ...$10.00. Bridget Benson2, Ryan Kastner2 
2.Department of Computer Science and Engineering University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA 
kastner@cs.ucsd.edu undersea tunnel, etc.), oceanographic investigation, and sea bottom resource exploitation 
drive increasing attention on the R&#38;D of underwater acoustic (UWA) communication modems. However, 
UWA channels present significant challenges for underwater acoustic communication [1-4], which is recognized 
as much more difficult compared to counterparts in other media, such as the radio channel. Main obstacles 
for reliable high speed UWA communications through severely band-limited UWA channels consists of multipath, 
fading, Doppler effect and long propagation delay. There is a great amount of literature on modulation 
strategies used to develop UWA communication system (such as MFSK, DSSS, FHSS, OFDM and QPSK), each of 
which can achieve satisfactory performance with respect to certain UWA channel. Nonetheless, considering 
the diversity of marine missions, there is a lack of a single modulation technology that can attain different 
performance requirements, i.e., high data rate, channel adaptability and high energy efficiency in different 
environments. Inspired by the dual mode systems developed for wireless channels that allow handsets to 
operate on different networks such as CDMA, GSM and Wi-Fi to meet different needs [5], a dual mode UWA 
modem can provide a flexible solution to effectively operate under different kinds of environments. The 
WHOI micro-modem[6] has dual mode of operation: high rate PSK to achieve bandwidth efficiency, as well 
as low rate FSK used for robust communication. In this paper we present the R&#38;D of a dual mode UWA 
modem testbed which can switch between DSSS and OFDM mode. Specifically, the proposed DM modem testbed 
can use the DSSS mode to achieve a reliable and low data rate link with low energy consumption and use 
the OFDM mode to enable high data rate communications when the channel is relatively ideal. The switch 
of different modulation modes is controlled by a mode selection mechanism according to the quality of 
the underwater channel, as well as the requirement of mission. Though both DSSS and OFDM systems have 
been widely investigated in several papers [7-11] for underwater scenarios, there are few works that 
reported simultaneous adoption of both protocols in one system. In this paper, we present the system 
design, modulation modular, mode selection protocol, and DSP implementation, and report experimental 
results showing the dual mode system s performance on a real UWA communication scenario. The rest of 
the paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the basis of the dual mode system. Section III 
introduces the system design and sea experiment configuration. Section IV provides experimental results. 
We conclude in section V. 2. BASIS OF DUAL MODE MODEM A dual-mode phone is defined as a phone that uses 
more than one technique for sending and receiving voice and data. Similarly, a dual-mode UWA modem uses 
more than one modulation scheme for sending and receiving data. In the proposed DM system, DSSS and OFDM 
are adopted as the candidate modulation techniques and a mode selection protocol based on channel probing 
is employed to control switching between the two modes. As the main focus of this paper is the dual mode 
mechanism, we directly utilize classic DSSS and OFDM schemes in the design of the modulation and demodulation 
modulars.  2.2 OFDM modular For the OFDM scheme, the original bit is firstly mapped to the DQPSK constellation 
to form the sequence {d0, ", dN-1}, where n=n j da+bn. The DQPSK sequence is further mapped to the frequency 
band associated with OFDM modulation as: 2 N-1 1 sn=. dexp ( j2 pknN /) k Nk=0 where n=0, 1, ",2 N-1. 
 transducer demodulate transducer   Fig.1 Block chart of DSSS modular 2.1 DSSS modular Firstly, let 
us consider the classic DS-DBPSK strategy. The baseband waveform can be expressed as: bt() =.8 nT( -Tb) 
=.8 T( -Tb bgtnb gtn) t n=-8 n=-8.. b .. b T b .. and PN sequence can be expressed as: c() =.c(mod ) 
( -c) =.c.. T( -c t gkT gkT ) k GT ( mod G) c tc kk .. T c .. after carrier modulation the transmission 
signal is produced as: Where bnwidth, gis T b bit source bit received s()t=bc cos( wct) .. .. t ( t mod 
G) .. .. TT bc .. .. is the bits after differential coding, Tcis the chip a rectanglar pulse with width 
Tb, gis a T c rectangular pulse with width Tc, and Gis the spread spectrum gain. A block chart of the 
DSSS modular is shown in Fig. 1. For the receiver, OFDM demodulation is performed as: 2 N-1 1 snexp( 
j2 pkn N ) dk =. / N n=0 after differential decoding, original bits can be obtained as: d, kn dkn, = 
 dk-1,n A block chart of the OFDM modular is shown in Fig 2.  2.3 Mode selection protocol To achieve 
flexibility under different channels, the mode switch of the DM modem system will be controlled by a 
mode selection protocol according to the quality of channel. Under the proposed protocol, a terminal 
initializing the data transfer will perform handshaking in advance of any data communication. To guarantee 
the reliability of the handshaking transfer, DSSS is used in the handshaking stage. The main purpose 
of the handshaking stage is to obtain the quality of the channel to determine the mode to be used for 
data communication. Specifically, the handshaking protocol consists of the following procedure:   
D/A Power Amp. Transduce r IFFT  Fig.2 Block chart of OFDM modular (1) Terminal A (which is the one 
initializing the transfer) sends a request frame to Terminal B (which is the target terminal of transfer) 
to ask for a channel measurement. The request frame contains a PN signal acting as a channel probe. 
(2) Upon receiving the request frame, Terminal B performs channel measurement via matched filtering of 
the PN signal. (3) Terminal B sends a clear frame back to Terminal A, which contains the channel parameters 
obtained by the measurement. (4) After receiving the clear frame and acquiring the channel parameters, 
Terminal A selects the suitable modulation mode (DSSS or OFDM) according to the channel parameters and 
mode selection mechanism and then sends a mode confirm frame to set the mode of Terminal B. (5) After 
receiving the mode confirm frame and extracting the specific mode contained, Terminal B send an acknowledge 
frame back to Terminal A. (6) Terminal A and B enter the data communication stage with the selected 
modulation mode after Terminal A receives the acknowledge frame.  Considering the severity of UWA channels, 
the control frames transferred during the handshaking stage will be transmitted again if the corresponding 
response is not received after a specific time. The design of the handshaking protocol ensures the suitable 
modulation mode will be selected to accommodate the specific channel each time any terminal initializes 
data transfer.  3. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION The UWA communication testbed used to demonstrate the dual 
mode scheme was built based on a TI TMS320C6713 DSP. The dual mode testbed consists of a DSP chip acting 
as the processing core of the testbed, a DAC and ADC for data output and acquisition, an RS232 serial 
port, a power amplifier, preamplifier, and two transducers (as shown in Fig.3). The DSSS and OFDM modulation 
schemes as well as the mode selection protocol are implemented on the same DSP. Fig .3 Bock chart of 
the testbed Table.1 Parameters of OFDM modulation  FFT length 4096 Subcarrier space 23.4Hz Symbol duration 
42.67ms BW occupied rate 93.5% Bandwidth 2.08k Bit per frame 4000 Guard time 10.67ms Length of reference 
53.4ms Frame length 534ms Bit rate 6.8kbps Frame period 587.4ms Modulation DQPSK The modulation parameters 
for the OFDM and DSSS modulars are presented in Table 1 and Table 2 Respectively. The bandwidth of the 
transducer is 13-18k Hz, with the sampling rate at 96ksps. The probe used for channel measurement is 
a 127-chip PN signal with a width of 31.75ms. After the matched filtering process, the correlation peak 
and the background noise of the received signal corresponding to the channel probe is obtained to calculate 
the SNR of the current channel. In the proposed system, SNR is used as the criterion in the mode selection 
protocol to select the suitable modulation mode, specifically, when SNR is higher than 10dB, the OFDM 
mode will be selected to achieve high data rate, otherwise, the system will work in the DSSS mode to 
ensure reliability. As the main purpose of this work is to test the dual mode strategy, no error coding 
technique is adopted in the proposed testbed. The experiment in the ocean was carried out at Wuyuan Bay, 
Xiamen, China. The depth of the experiment area is approximately 7m under the pier and 12 m offshore. 
The arrangement of the experiment is shown in Fig.4. The transducer of the transmitter was suspended 
from the pier at a depth of 5 m from the sea surface. The transducer of the receiver was suspended from 
a boat at a depth of 5 m from the sea surface. Under the same transmission power level, signals were 
sent over distances of 300m and 2km to test the performance of the testbed system under different SNR. 
To simulate different kind of communication missions, a 16 gray level image was transmitted in OFDM mode 
and ASCII code characters were sent in DSSS mode. Table.2 Parameters of DSSS modulation Spread gain 63 
Guard time 20ms Carrier frequency 16kHz Bit per frame 192 Chip rate 4k PN code M sequence Bit rate 63.49 
Modulation DBPSK  Fig.4 Sea experiment configuration  4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Firstly, the DM modem 
testbeds were tested at the distance of 300m. During the DSSS mode handshaking, the matched filtering 
output of the channel probe is shown in Fig.5(a), which indicates an SNR of 15dB. According to the SNR 
criterion defined in the mode selection protocol, the OFDM modulation mode is selected for data communication. 
The OFDM signals received are shown in Fig.5(b). The final image obtained at a bit rate of 6.8kbps is 
presented in Fig.6(b), which corresponds to a bit error rate of 3.5%. At the distance of 2km, the correlation 
curve of the channel probe (shown in Fig.7(a)) reveals an SNR of 5dB. As a result, the low data rate 
DSSS mode is selected by the mode selection mechanism. In Fig7.(b), we can see the DSSS waveform received 
at 2km which contains some serious impulsive noise. The DSSS mode demodulation achieves a bit error rate 
of 0.5% with a low data rate of 63.45bps. These preliminary results of the sea trial show that, the dual 
mode mechanism enables the proposed UWA modem testbed to achieve good performance under different channel 
conditions, with low rate DSSS for low SNR and high rate OFDM for high SNR. (b) OFDM waveform received 
Fig.5 Signals received at 300m (a) Original (b) Received Fig.6 Image received at 300m (b) DSSS waveform 
received Fig.7 Signals received at 2km 5. CONCLUSION In this paper, we have presented the R&#38;D of 
a Dual-mode modem testbed, in which DSSS and OFDM are selected as the candidate modulation schemes of 
the DM system to achieve flexibility under different channel characteristics. The design of DSSS/OFDM 
modulars, modulation selection protocol and system configuration were introduced. The UWA modem testbed 
system is implemented based on a TI DSP platform. Considering the implementation complexity, classic 
DSSS/OFDM modulation modulars as well as relatively simple SNR based mode selection protocol are adopted 
to fulfill the functional demonstration of the proposed dual mode system. Finally, sea trials at Wuyuan 
bay are performed to test the effectiveness of the proposed system. Experimental results under different 
SNR validate the improved channel adaptability of the dual mode system, which has the potential of being 
developed and applied in related fields of underwater applications. 6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This material 
is based upon work partially supported by Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 10704063) and 
NCET Foundation of Fujian Province. 7. REFERENCES [1] Liao, D Z; Harrold, S O; Yeung, L F, An underwater 
Acoustic Data Link for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles , IEEE Int. Conf. in Circuit and Systems, p28-33, 
Singopare, July 1995. [2] Bridget Benson, Ali Irturk, Junguk Cho and Ryan Kastner, "Energy Benefits of 
Reconfigurable Hardware for Use in Underwater Sensor Nets", IEEE Reconfigurable Architectures Workshop 
, May 2009 [3] D.B.Kilfoyle, A. B. Baggeroer, The State of art in underwater acoustic telemetry , IEEE 
J.Oceanic. Eng., Vol, 25(1), pp.4-24, 2000 [4] M.D.Green, J.A.Rice, Channel-Tolerant FH-MFSK Acoustic 
Signaling for Undersea Communications and Networks , IEEE J.Oceanic. Eng., Vol, 25(1), pp.28-39, 2000 
[5] M. Jian, W. H. Yung, B. Songrong An Efficient IF Architecture for Dual-Mode GSM/W-CDMA Receiver of 
a Software Radio , IEEE International Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communications, San Diego, USA, November 
1999. [6] L. Freitag et al., "The WHOI Micro-Modem: An Acoustic Communications and Navigation System 
for Multiple Platforms," Proc. IEEE Oceans Conf., 2005 [7] M.Stojanovic, L.Freitag, Acquisition of Direct 
Sequence Spread Spectrum Acoustic Communication Signals , Oceans 2003 Proceedings, Vol. 1, pp.22-26, 
Sep. 2003 [8] E.M.Sozer, J.G..Proakis, M. Stojanovic, J.A.Rice, A.Benson, M.Hatch, Direct sequence spread 
spectrum based modem for underwater acoustic communication and channel measurements , Oceans 99, MTS/IEEE, 
Riding the Crest into the 21st Century, Vol.1,pp. 228-233. 1999 [9] S. Coatlelan and A. Glavieus, Design 
and test of a coded OFDM system on the shallow water acoustic channel , in Proc. OCEANS Conf., Sep. 1994, 
pp2065-2070 [10] M. Stojanovic, Low complexity OFDM detector for underwater acoustic channels , in Proc. 
MTS/IEEE OCEANS conf., Boston, MA, Sep. 18-21, 2006 [11] B.Li, S.Zhou, M. Stojanovic and L.Freitag, Pilot-tone 
based ZP-OFDM demodulation for an underwater acoustic channel , in Proc. MTS/IEEE OCEANS conf., Boston, 
MA, Sep. 18-21, 2006  
			