
 Reading Time, Scrolling and Interaction: Exploring Implicit Sources of User Preferences for Relevance 
Feedback Diane Kelly and Nicholas J. Belkin School of Communication, Information and Library Studies 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey New Brunswick, NJ 08901 USA Email: diane@scils.rutgers.edu, 
nick@belkin.rutgers.edu 1. INTRODUCTION Implicit feedback techniques appear to be attractive candidates 
to improve retrieval performance through relevance feedback without requiring more effort on the part 
of the user. Implicit feedback techniques gather data indirectly from the user by monitoring behaviors 
of the user during searching. If information about a document s relevance to a user s query can be gathered 
passively rather than actively, then users can experience the benefits of relevance feedback without 
having to expend any additional effort. Implicit feedback techniques have been primarily investigated 
in information filtering and recommendation systems [2, 3, 5, 7]. Behaviors most extensively investigated 
as sources for implicit feedback have been reading, saving and printing. For instance, [5] found that 
the major factor influencing the amount of time a user spends with a news article is the user s preference 
for that article. Specifically, [5] found that there is a strong tendency for users to spend a greater 
length of time reading those articles rated as interesting, as opposed to those rated as not interesting. 
This finding has been replicated by others in similar environments [4]. Other behaviors that have been 
explored include printing, saving, scrolling and bookmarking [6]. The work reported here is an explicit 
test of the work of [5] in an IR context other than information filtering. Three sources of implicit 
feedback are of particular interest: reading time per document, scrolling and interaction. The specific 
hypotheses for this study are, accordingly: H1: Users will spend more time reading those documents that 
they find relevant. H2: Users will scroll more often within those documents that they find relevant. 
H2: Users will interact more with those documents that they find relevant. 2. METHOD A secondary analysis 
of data was employed for the method for this study. The data for this study was extracted from trace 
files generated during the TREC-8 Interactive Searching Study [1], which implemented relevance feedback 
techniques in two experimental IR systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of 
this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGIR'01, September 9-12, 2001, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. Copyright 
2001 ACM 1-58113-331-6/01/0009...$5.00. 2.1 Participants A total of 36 volunteers, recruited from the 
university community, participated in the original project. Data from only the first 6 subjects are included 
in this report. Each subject conducted six searches. A total of 561 documents were opened by these 6 
subjects. The instructions to the subjects were that for each search, they should find and save documents 
which identified the different instances or aspects of the specified topic. 2.2 Procedures Several pieces 
of data were extracted from the trace files and analyzed. These data included time spent reading a document, 
scrolling and amount of interaction with a document. Time spent reading a document began when the user 
clicked on a document title to display its full text. The end time for reading a document was indicated 
by the user executing another action that signals he or she was finished reading the document, such as 
saving the document, displaying the text of another document, scrolling through the title summary window, 
running a new search or exiting the system. Scrolling was measured by the number of times the user clicked 
on the scroll bar. Interaction with a document encompassed the following activities: clicking on Show 
Next Keyword, Show Best Passage, Show Next Best Passage or Show Previous Passage buttons. The relationship 
between time, scrolling and interaction and the user s relevance judgements was considered. For this 
study, saving a document was considered to be a positive relevance judgement and not saving a document 
was considered as a negative relevance judgement. The instructions for the experiment state that users 
should save those documents that identify positive instances of a particular information problem. Assuming 
that users want to perform well, construing a user s relevance judgement as either saving a document 
or not saving a document seems reasonable.  3. RESULTS A total of 561 documents were viewed by the 6 
subjects. Within the 561 documents, a small number of documents (< 1%) were displayed multiple times 
per subject. Of these 561 documents, 240 (43%) were identified by users as relevant and 321 (57%) were 
identified as non-relevant. On average, subjects spent 26.49 seconds with each document. The amount of 
time that users spent with relevant and non-relevant documents was similar (Relevant: M=27.62, SD=25.99; 
Non-relevant: M=25.63, SD=23.65). This difference was not significant, t (558)=.94, ns. The frequency 
distributions of relevant and non-relevant documents and time spent viewing the document are displayed 
in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respectively. As can be observed from the histogram, users most often spent 
approximately 10 seconds viewing those documents that they eventually identified as relevant and also 
those that they eventually did not mark relevant. Indeed, the distribution curves are nearly identical. 
These numbers provide quite a different, and more accurate, description of the data than the means reported 
in the proceeding paragraph. This is most likely the result of high standard deviations for each group. 
120 100 80 60 40 20 0  viewing a document was not significantly related to the user's subsequent relevance 
judgement. The results suggest that the original theory motivating the study may be limited in its scope. 
It appears that things like tasks, document collection and searching environment may affect the generalizability 
of the original findings more than was initially anticipated or specified. The non-significant results 
in the present study may be a result of the characteristics of the document collection, the searching 
environment and/or the experimental protocol. The users in [5] were only required to read incoming articles 
and assign scores to them. The users in the present study were engaged in a more complex task, where 
they were required to construct queries, evaluate, save and label document all within a specific time 
period. This may explain why viewing time for both relevant and non-relevant documents was so low. Users 
may have felt compelled to perform as quickly as possible because of the current experimental protocol. 
Task may have also affected the results. The tasks in [5] were those that naturally interested the user, 
since presumably the users originally subscribed to the news group because they found the general topic 
of discussion relevant and/or interesting. In the current study, the tasks were artificial Time Figure 
1. Frequency Distributions of Time Spent Reading Relevant Documents. 120 100 80 60 40 20 0  and unfamiliar 
to the users. A relevant document could most likely be better distinguished in the former case. At present, 
we are working to analyze the remainder of the data from the TREC-8 study. We are also working to identify 
and investigate other potentially useful sources of implicit relevance feedback in a more traditional 
IR context. 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was funded in part by NSF Grant #99-11942. 6. REFERENCES 
[1] Belkin, N. J., Cool, C., Head, J., Jeng, J., Kelly, D., Lin, S., Park, S. Y., Savage-Knepshield, 
P., &#38; Sikora, C. (2000). Relevance feedback versus local context analysis as term­suggestion devices: 
Rutgers' TREC-8 interactive track experience. In D. Harman, &#38; E. Voorhees (Eds.), TREC-8, Proceedings 
of the Eighth Text Retrieval Conference. Washington, D. C.: NIST, 565-574. [2] Hill, W. C., Hollan, 
J. D., Wroblewski, D., &#38; McCandless, Time Figure 2. Frequency Distributions of Time Spent Reading 
Non-relevant Documents.  Subjects scrolled an average of 4.28 times per document. There was no significant 
difference between the amount of scrolling users did in relevant documents (M=4.41, SD=12.70) and non-relevant 
documents (M=4.20, SD=9.92), t (558) = .23, ns. Interaction was measured by the number of the times users 
clicked on the Show Next Keyword, Show Best Passage, Show Next and Show Prev buttons. Overall, subjects 
interacted with documents very little (M=.20). There was no significant difference between the amount 
of interaction that users engaged with relevant documents (M=.19, SD=.48) and non-relevant documents 
(M=.21, SD=.56), t (558) = -.52, ns. 4. CONCLUSIONS Previously, it had been found that users spend more 
time reading those documents that they find relevant than those that they do not find relevant [5]. The 
primary goal of the current study was to see if this finding could be replicated in another IR context. 
For the current study, overall, the length of time that a user spends T. (1992). Edit wear and read wear. 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 3-9. [3] Kamba, T., Sakagami, 
H., &#38; Koseki, Y. (1997). ANATAGONOMY: A personalized newspaper on the World Wide Web. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 46, 789-803. [4] Konstan, J. A., Miller, B. N., Maltz, D., Herlocker, 
J. L., Gordon, L. R., &#38; Riedl, J. (1997). GroupLens: Applying collaborative filtering to usenet news. 
Communications of the ACM, 40(7), 77-87. [5] Morita, M., &#38; Shinoda, Y. (1994). Information filtering 
based on user behavior analysis and best match text retrieval. Proceedings of the 17th Annual International 
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 272-281. [6] Oard, D. W., 
&#38; Kim, J. (1998). Implicit feedback for recommender systems. Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on 
Recommender Systems. http://www.glue.umd.edu/~oard/research.html. [7] Seo, Y. W., &#38; Zhang, B. T. 
(2000). Learning user s preferences by analyzing wed-browsing behaviors. Proceedings of the ACM 4th International 
Conference on Autonomous Agents, 381-387.  
			