
 ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 24, Number 4, August 1990 Real-Time Robot Motion Planning Using Rasterizing 
Computer Graphics Hardware .led Lengyel*, Mark Reichert*, Bruce R. Donaldl and Donald P. Greenberg ~ 
Abstract We present a real-time robot motion planner that is fast and complete to a resolution. The technique 
is guaranteed to find a path if one exists at the resolution, and all paths returned are safe. The planner 
can handle any polyhedral geometry of robot and obstacles, including disjoint and highly concave unions 
of polyhedra. The planner uses standard graphics hardware to rasterize config- uration space obstacles 
into a series of bitmap slices, and then uses dynamic programming to create a navigation function (a 
discrete vector-valued function) and to calculate paths in this rasterized space. The motion paths which 
the planner produces are minimal with respect to an L l (Manhattan) distance metric that includes rotation 
as well as translation. Several examples are shown illustrating the competence of the planner at generating 
planar rotational and translational plans for complex two and three dimensional robots. Dynamic motion 
sequences, including complicated and non-obvious backtracking solutions, can be executed in real time. 
 Introduction Motion planning has been regarded as a core algorithmic problem in computational robotics 
for many years, and many researchers have worked on finding better algorithmic solutions.[Yap85] However, 
despite the fact that all of the key elements in planning robot motion substantially overlap with computer 
graphics interests, the problem has not been presented as a computer graphics topic. The classical formulation 
of the Find-Path or Piano Mover's problem is stated as follows: given an arbitrary rigid polyhedral object, 
P, and polyhedral environment, find a continuous collision- free path taking P from some initial configuration 
to a desired goal configuration. *Graduate Student, Program of Computer Graphics, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, N.Y. 14853 t Assistant Professor and Director, Computer Science Robotics Labora- tory, Department 
of Computer Science,4130 Upson HalI,Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y. 14853 ~Director, Program of Computer 
Graphics, Jacob Gould Shurman Pro- fessor of Computer Graphics, Comell University, Ithaca, N.Y. 14853 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not 
made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. We view this 
motion planning process as an algorithmic en- deavor analogous to hidden surface removal in computer 
graphics. First, precise combinatorial solutions exist, but rasterized, approx- imating techniques (such 
as z-buffer algorithms) are faster and more effective. Second, such approximation algorithms can be provided 
with massively parallel, specialized hardware support. Instead of concentrating on more efficient, combinatorially 
exact algorithms, the end-user is more effectively served by (a) choosing good representations for the 
geometric constraints, (b) selecting local, isotropic geometric algorithms that are easily parallelizable, 
and (c) providing or using appropriate hardware support to make the algorithms run very fast. Our algorithm 
is based on the configuration space representations that are due to Lozano-Prrez [LPW79], and we use 
a local, isotropic search algorithm [Don87][Don84] to obtain a very fast motion planning algorithm that 
runs on standard graphics hardware. Two parts of the local algorithm we present here are very similar 
to the work of [DT88]. The paths produced have minimal length with respect to an L~ distance metric imposed 
on the rasterization which treats translational and rotational movements equally. In addition to being 
simple, the algorithm is complete to a resolution (of the rasterization), and while inherently "local", 
does not suffer from local minima. Many other fast motion planning algorithms, in particular, potential 
field methods, get "stuck" in local minima and therefore cannot be effectively used to plan paths for 
complex, concave, or disconnected robots. While these other algorithms run well when the robot is (a) 
small and convex relative to the environment, or (b) when the space of solutions is "very dense", our 
planner may be more effective in more complicated cases. For computer graphics applications, the visual 
impact of the robot motion is important. Since the motions are time-dependent and complex, real-time 
graphical playback is desirable to assess the motion sequence, including the complicated back-tracking 
paths which may be necessary to obtain a solution. In Section 2 a brief overview of the historical approaches 
used by the robotics community is presented. Section 3 describes our algorithm in detail. Section 4 presents 
the results of the implementation for several specific cases. Section 5 presents the conclusions and 
topics for future research. 2 Background The Piano Mover3" problem has been approached in many ways. 
We present below a brief overview of the two major approaches used by the robotics community, the configuration 
space and potential field methods, and discuss the advantages and limitations of each method.  O SIGGRAPH 
'90, Dallas, August 6-10, 1990 The first module allocates a voxel array representation of c-space and 
rapidly computes c-space obstacles in this array using standard graphics rasterization hardware. The 
second module calculates a c-space navigation function [Kod87] with a dynamic programming technique (expanding 
wavefront of solutions.) This navigation function is essentially a discrete vector-valued function which, 
when given the robot's current voxel location in c-space, returns the direction that the robot should 
move to decrease its distance to the goal. The third module determines the shortest path from any voxel 
start position to the goal if there is a viable solution. Since the navigation function gives the direction 
to move at every cell, this module can calculate the path quickly, and determine in constant time if 
a path exists. The fourth module produces a real-time kinematic simulation of the robot motion. Each 
of these modules is described in more detail below. 3.2 Definitions The following definitions due to 
[Loz80] are useful prior to the algorithmic explanations. A c-space obstacle, CO, is a forbidden region 
of c-space R 2 x S 1 . A slice, CO[Sl, 82], of CO is CO restricted to an angular interval [81, 82], i.e. 
CO N (R 2 × [81,82]). A slice projection is the projection of C0101,02] onto the "plane" R 2 x {80} for 
00 = (81 -q-82)/2. 3.3 Generation of Configuration Space Representation We calculate the configuration 
space obstacle polygons by taking the Minkowski sum of the obstacles and the rotated and negated robot 
as described by Lozano-Perez [LozS0] (Figure 3). We then use graphics polygon-fill hardware to fill the 
configuration space obstacle polygons (Figure 4). When the robot motion is restricted to two degrees 
of freedom (only translation in the plane) our discrete representation of c-space is a single bitmap 
with rasterized c-space obstacles. However, when rotation is allowed, the configuration space is represented 
by a set of bitmaps, where each bitmap is a slice projection representing the configuration space for 
the angular interval [01, 82]. While generating a representation of c-space at exactly one orientation 
is trivial, generation of a conservative, discrete, repre- sentation of c-space over some angular interval 
is more difficult. Our goal is to ensure that, in the bitmap slice representing c-space for the angular 
interval [8~, 02], no cell is labeled as free if it has a c-space obstacle penetrating it at any orientation 
in [81,82]. To produce a discrete representation of c-space for the angular inter- val [0~,Sz], we generate 
n discrete representations of c-space at equally spaced orientations within the interval [81, 82]. The 
angular increment 0 = (02 -01)/n. The bitmap slice representation for the angular interval [81,02] is 
the union of all of the sub-intervals. Figure 7 is a pseudo-code implementation of this method. Note 
that the bitmap slices are conservative. If any part of an obstacle penetrates a cell, then the whole 
cell is labeled with "obstacle." This discards some potential paths, but enforces the complete-to-a-resolution 
property of the planner. If two adjacent cells are labeled as being "free" of obstacles, then the path 
between them is free, since if there were any obstacle in the way, one or both of the cells would have 
been labeled with "obstacle," which would contradict the assumption of both cells being "free". Since 
330 movement is allowed only between "free" cells, every path returned is valid (collision-free.) GENERATE 
C-SPACE() For theta = 0 to 2= by 2~/]V (N~#of~em slices) Foreach robotPoly in robot polygon list For 
tl = theta -dtheta to theta + dtheta Rotate robotPoly by tl Foreach obstaclePoly in environment Generate 
the minkowski sum of rebotPoly and obstaclePoly Fill minkowski polygon with  obstacle color. Read filled 
polys from frame buffer Move bitmap into voxel array. Clear frame buffer. Return bitmap voxel array 
 Figure 7: Pseudo-code for Generation of Discretized C-Space 3.4 Calculation of Navigation Function 
A dynamic programming technique is used to expand a wavefront of solutions from the goal, with a queue 
to keep track of the current wavefront.[DT88] Each element in the queue holds a position in the rasterized 
environment and a current length of the path from the goal position. An element is dequeued, its location 
in the environment is filled with the current length, and then all of its free space neighbors that have 
not yet been filled are put on the end of the queue with an incremented distance. This algorithm is essentially 
isomorphic to the "Bumble Strategy" in Donald's 1984 algorithm [Don84] [Don87], which operated as follows: 
a search node N on a c-space grid is dequeued, and its c-space grid neighbors are generated, The reachable, 
unexplored, free-space neighbors are put on the end of the queue. Each new neighbor M contains a backpointer 
to N, and N's direction from M. This back pointer (and back-direction) corresponds precisely to our navigation 
function. Note the Bumble Strategy is simply a breadth-first-search (BFS) from the start (or goal.) We 
regard dynamic programming and BFS as "dual" algorithms in that BFS from the goal yields our dynamic 
programming algorithm. FILL NAVIGATION FUNCTION(goal location) Enqueue goal location with distance = 
0 While queue is not empty Dequeue element F Label F's location with F's distance Enqueue all neighbors 
of F that are not obstacles and that have not yet been filled with distance = distance + 1  Figure 
8: Pseudo-code for Navigation Function Fill The initial element placed in the queue is the goal node 
with a path length of zero. The algorithm takes that node out of the queue, fills its location in the 
rasterized environment with zero, then queues up all of the neighboring nodes with a path length of one. 
The wavefront continues out like a "brush fire", spreading around the C-space obstacles, in a way similar 
to flood-fill or seed-fill algorithms used in computer paint programs [Pav8 I]. Each cell that can be 
reached from the goal is set just once (Figures 9 and 8.)   ¢ Computer Graphics, Volume 24, Number 
4, August 1990 Start Position Goal Figure 9: Calculation of Navigation Function. Note that with the 
three-degree of freedom case (two translations plus rotation) that the fill expands upward and wraps-around 
in the theta direction as well as expanding in the x and y directions. The running time is proportional 
to the number of free cells in the environment. Complicated scenes which consist of many obstacles have 
fewer free cells. Thus, paradoxically, more complicated scenes are quicker to fill! 4 3.5 Path Generation 
Since the navigation function is generated by a breadth-first search through the rasterized configuration 
space, it yields the shortest path from the goal to any reachable position in the configuration space 
(where a "shortest path" is defined to be one passing through a minimal number of voxels.) [See [DT88] 
for other metrics.] To get closer to the goal from any start position, the robot moves to the lowest-numbered 
neighboring cell. This corresponds exactly to following the breadth-first search tree to the goal. (We 
call this process "surfing", since the robot is simply sliding down the "hills" of the potential function,) 
If there are multiple cells which have the lowest number, any one can be picked, since each would correspond 
to a path with the same number of moves needed to reach the goal. Given a choice between a rotation (a 
move in the theta direction) or a translation (a move in the x or y direction), our algorithm selects 
the translation option to minimize rotation(Figures 10 and I 1.) By construction, every cell that can 
be reached from the goal has a neighbor with a lower number than itself (the cell which was queued to 
label it.) Thus, there are no local minima in the navigation function. The robot can just follow the 
bread-first search tree to the goal and not worry about getting stuck. The following of the search tree 
is fast, running in linear time with respect to path length. This path generation technique corresponds 
precisely to gradient following[DT88][Kod87]. 3.6 Display Routines A program has been implemented which 
uses standard graphics hardware acceleration to generate dynamic real-time playback of the robot motion, 
allowing the viewer's position to be interactively modified. Two sequential pre-processing steps are 
required, the rasterization of c-space and the computation of the navigation function. This discretized 
configuration space must be recomputed 4Also observed by [DT88]. / Goal -~Path Figure 10: Path Generation. 
GENERATE PATH(start location) let C = cell corresponding to start location let P = NULL if C was not 
reached by fill (label is blank) return CANNOT REACH GOAL  else while C is not at goal add C to path 
P pick lowest numbered neighbor, L let C = L return P Figure 11: Pseudo-code for Path Generation 
(Surfing) for every change in the obstacle definitions or the robot geometry. The navigation function 
is recomputed only if there is a change in the goal position. Since the path generation is so fast, this 
can be computed on-the-fly, and the dynamic sequences of the robot motion can be displayed. 3.7 Use 
of Hardware While our algorithm is the slowest possible on serial machines, it is very fast using parallel 
or specialized hardware. Each of the above modules can benefit from use of specialized hardware. In our 
implementation only the first, the generation of the c-space obstacles, and the fourth, the kinematic 
simula- tion, use specialized graphics hardware. The second module, the flood-fill, uses a very local 
operation and is ideal for a distributed computation[BL89]. The third module, the gradient following 
or bread-first-search-tree following, is essentially a fast serial opera- tion. 4 Examples The algorithm 
was tested in several obstacle environments with robots and obstacles of varying shape and convexity. 
Experimen- tal timings for each of these examples are presented in Table 1. Note 'that once the preprocessing 
steps for the configuration space and navigation function are complete, the path-generation algo- rithm 
runs almost instantaneously, and real-time motion display is possible. @SIGGRAPH '90, Dallas, August 
6-10, 1990 Problem Figure She C-space Fill Surf Display Moving Planar Robot 13b 256x256x120 22.6 44.1 
0.11 35.8 Backtracking Planar Robot 13e 256x256x120 * * 0.11 50.3 Stuck Planar Robot 13f 256x256x120 
* * 0.01 0 Piano (Room 1) 14a 192x192x180 26.0 50.2 0.05 27.1 Piano (Room2) 15a 92x92x90 8.1 8.1 0.04 
7.2 Table 1 : Table of experimental timings. Times are given in seconds, Processing and display was performed 
on a Hewlett Packard 835 with a Turbo-SRX graphics display. The precalculations whose times marked as 
"*" for Figures 13e and 13f were already performed for Figure 13b and did not need to be repeated. 4.1 
Complex R 2 × S 1 This example illustrates the motion of a complex, concave planar robot, Note the triangular 
peg obstacles in the upper left-hand comer (Figure 13b.) Since the search algorithm does not rely on 
a heuristic distance to the goal, backtracking paths are easily found (Figure 13e.) In this example, 
the robot is not able to turn around until it backtracks all the way to the right side (where the region 
is devoid of the pegs preventing the turning on the left side). If the search backwards from the goal 
(the navigation function) reached the start point, then a path exists from the start to the goal, otherwise 
one does not exist at the given resolution. With one array reference, it is known whether or not a path 
can be found from the start configuration to the goal. In Figure 13f, the robot's "head" is stuck between 
the peg and the wall, and thus the algorithm returns with the result that no path exists. 4.2 R 2 x 
S 1 motion for 3D robots Many three-dimensional robots have pieces which are quite distinct vertically. 
A piano, for example, has small legs and a large main body. By creating two classes of environmental 
objects, one class of objects which obstruct the legs, and the other which obstruct the body, the algorithm 
for planar problems can be extended by object space partitioning (3~D1 representation.) Piano Body Piano 
Legs Figure 12: Piano Environment Partitioning. The rasterization is performed as before, with the exception 
that the body is now convolved only with the body obstacles, and the legs only with the leg obstacles. 
The union of the leg and body c-space obstacles is used to create one bitmap. Since the leg obstacle 
is not convolved with the body when generating the c-space obstacles, the piano body can move over it, 
while the legs maneuver around it (Figure 14a.) 332  5 Discussion &#38; Conclusion We have presented 
a robot motion planner that is fast and, unlike other fast motion planners, is based entirely on complete 
and provably-good approximation algorithms. The algorithm is based on part of Donald's original algorithm 
[Don87], which was initially considered to be slow and ineffective for real-time motion planning, but 
when modified to run on current graphics hardware is actually quite fast. The planner can handle any 
polyhedral geometry of robot and obstacles, including disjoint and highly concave unions of polyhe- dra. 
The planner is very general and is guaranteed to find a path if one exists at the resolution. In constant 
(O(1)) lime, it detects if a path exists from the start location to the goal, or between any two points 
through the goal (compare [DTS8].) The method is memory intensive, but for many problems the resolutions 
can be made much lower, especially in the rotational dimension. Storage can also be reduced by eliminating 
the navi- gation function value, and only storing a direction at each point, requiring as few as three 
bits per cell (for the 3DOF case.) The method is resolution dependent. The higher the resolution, the 
closer the robot can squeeze by the obstacles. The lower the resolution, the lower the memory requirements. 
We believe that we have demonstrated that provably good ap- proximation algorithms for kinematic motion 
planning can be made to run very fast, if the algorithms are local, isotropic, and can take advantage 
of special purpose computer graphics hardware for tasks such as rasterization (poly-fill), flood-fill, 
and gradient-following. We conjecture that the fastest solutions will involve algorithms similar to ours, 
that is, characterized by use of 1. Configuration space representations such as [LPW79]. 2. Local, geometric, 
isotropic, parallelizable search algorithms such as IDon87]. 3. Appropriate hardware support for geometric 
computation.  In robotics, and in animation, in addition to kinematic planning and simulation, one also 
desires to plan robot motions with full dy- namics. In recent work, [CDRX88][DX89][DX90] have developed 
provably good approximation algorithms that generate motions that (1) avoid obstacles, (2) obey dynamic 
bounds on generalized forces and velocities, (3) respect full Lagrangian rigid body dynamics equations 
of motion, and (4) are provably close to optimal-time. These algorithms are also grid-based, and currently 
run very slowly on traditional architectures. We hope that by using techniques similar to those we propose 
in this paper, that these algorithms can be made to run quickly when modified to exploit appropriate 
hardware support. We hope that this paper illustrates the substantial overlap in research areas between 
the graphics and robotics communities, and fosters collaborative efforts to create more innovative solutions. 
  ~' Computer Graphics, Volume 24, Number 4, August 1990 Figure 13a: Key to Robot Positions. Figure 
13b: Moving Planar Robot. B I ! Figure 13c: First Leg of Backtracking. Figure 13d: Last Leg of Backtracking. 
'1 | - . Figure 13e: Backtracking Planar Robot. Figure 13f: Trapped Planar Robot. 13a is a key to the 
start and goal locations of the subsequent figures. In 13b, the robot follows the gradient of the potential 
function to the goal (which is the same as following the breadth-first search tree.) In 13c, the robot 
first moves from the start to the right, since there is not enough room between the pegs on the left 
to reorient. The robot then has enough room to reorient (the right side is not blocked by the small pegs 
as on the left.) Finally, in 13d, the robot can squeeze by the small pegs, and obtain the goal position 
and orientation. 13e shows the entire motion of 13c and 13d. The algorithm is exactly the same as in 
13b, simply following the breadth-first search tree. In 13f, no solution exists. Our planner detects 
this in constant O(1) time.   ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 24, Number 4, August 1990 Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Science Foun- dation whose two research grants entitled 
"Interactive Input and Display Techniques" (DCR8203929) and "Visualization for Sci- entific Computing" 
(ACS8715478) help support the Program of Computer Graphics. Support for Bruce Donald's robotics research 
is provided in part by the National Science Foundation under grant No. IRI-8802390 and by a Presidential 
Young Investigator award, and in part by the Mathematical Sciences Institute. Jed Lengyel is supported 
by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship. Our interactive graphics computing environment 
has been substantially enhanced by generous equipment donations from Hewlett-Packard and Digital Equipment 
Corporation. Thanks to Robotics CS661, and Bruce's teaching assistants Pat Xavier and Russell Brown, 
for introducing us to the field of robotics (and for assigning Homework 1, which lead directly to this 
work.) Thanks to Len Wanger for the piano model, to Emil Ghinger for photographic work, to Tim O'Connor 
for keeping our computers alive and well, to Fran and Ellen for keeping everything else alive and well, 
to Jim Ferwerda for breathing life into the video system and to Dave Baraff for taking time to show us 
how to use it. Thanks to Roy Hall for proof-reading drafts of this paper. Special thanks to Wendy, Michele, 
Rachael, and Iris for their unending patience while this paper was being written. References [BL89] 
Barraquand, J. and J. Latombe. Robot Motion Plan- ning: A Distributed Representation Approach, Re-port 
No. STAN-CS-89-1257, Stanford University, De- partment of Computer Science, May 1989. [CDRX88] Canny, 
J., B. Donald, J. Reif, and P. Xavier. "On the Complexity of Kinodynamic Planning," in 29 th Symposium 
on the Foundations of Computer Science, White Plains NY., 1988. [Don84] Donald, B. R. Motion Planning 
with Six Degrees of Freedom, Report No. MIT AI-TR 791, M/T, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 1984. 
[Don87] Donald, B. R. "A Search Algorithm for Motion Plan- ning with Six Degrees of Freedom," Artificial 
Intelli- gence, 31, 1987, pages 295-353. [DTS8] Dorst, L. and K. Trovato. "Optimal path planning by cost 
wave propagation in metric configuration space," Proceedings of SPIE-The International Society for Op- 
tical Engineering, 1007, November 1988, pages 186- 197. [DX89] Donald, B. and P. Xavier. "A Provably 
Good Ap- proximation Algorithm for Optimal-Time Trajectory Planning," in 1EEE Int. Conf. On Robotics 
and Au- tomation, Scottsdale, AZ, 1989. [DX90] Donald, B. and P. Xavier. "Provably Good Approxi- mation 
Algorithms for Optimal Kinodynamic Planning for Cartesian Robots and Open Chain Manipulators," in Proceedings 
of the ACM Symposium on Computa- tional Geometry, Berkeley, CA, 1990. [KLM78] Khatib, O. and J. Le Maitre. 
"Dynamic Control of Manipulators Operating in a Complex Environment," Proceedings Third International 
CISM-1FToMM Sym- posium, September 1978, pages 267-282. [Kod87] [Kod89] [LozS0] [Loz83] [Loz87] [LPW79] 
[Pav81 ] [Udu77] [Yap85] Koditschek, D. E. "Exact Robot Navigation by Means of Potential Functions: Some 
Topological Consider- ations," IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, March 1987. 
Koditschek, D. E. "Planning and Control via Potential Functions," in Lozano-Pgrez, T. and O. Khatib, 
editors, Robotics Review I, M1T Press, 1989, pages 349-367. Lozano-Prrez, T. Spatial Planning: A Configuration 
Space Approach, A.I. Memo No. 605, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Artificial Intelligence Labora- 
tory, December 1980. Lozano-Prrez, T. "Spatial Planning: A Configuration Space Approach," IEEE Transactions 
on Computers, C-32, I983, pages 108-120. Lozano-Prrez, T. "A Simple Motion Planning Algo- rithm for General 
Robot Manipulator," IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation, RA-3(3), 1987, pages 224-- 238, Lozano-Prrez, 
T. and M. A. Wesley. "An Algorithm for Planning Collison-Free Paths Among Polyhedral Obstacles," Communications 
of tile ACM, 22, 1979, pages 560-570. Pavlidis, T. "Contour Filling in Raster Graphics," Proceedings 
of SIGGRAPH'81 (Dallas, Texas, August 3-7, 1981), 1981, pages 29-36. Udupa, S. Collision Detection and 
Avoidance in Com- puter Controlled Manipulators, PhD dissertation, De- partment of Electrical Engineering, 
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 1977. Yap, C. K. "Algorithmic Motion Planning," 
in Schwartz, J. T. and C. K. Yap, editors, Advances in Robotics, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1985. 
 
			