
 Real Business Processing Meets the Web James Chong Vice President Charles Schwab and Co. 101 Montgomery 
Street San Francisco, CA 94104 +l (415)-636-7401  JamesChong 63 Schwab.com The extensions Schwab wrote 
cover workload balancing from the 1. BACKGROUND Web Server, client code performance in the Web Server, 
and Charles Schwab and Co, Inc. is a major web trader asynchronous data replication at the middle (UNIX) 
tier. These generating a large proportion of its revenue from the Web. extensions will be described in 
the talk. That revenue is based on both having a site with lots of useful facilities and also the speed 
of execution, ability to cope with 3. THE NEXT STEP peaks in demand volumes, and the reliability of the 
site and its Schwab s web trading system acts as an additional channel for its underlying services. James 
Chong, VP Architecture and corporate data systems. The exposure of those systems to the Planning at Schwab, 
will talk about the fundamental Web, which is a fundamentally 24 hour, 7 days a week service, infrastructure 
that supports the Web trading, and his plans puts extra demands on the core systems which formerly had 
to for its evolution. cope with a more relaxed availability requirement. In addition, the unchecked 
growth of web trading is making a strong case for consolidating the middle and bottom tiers to improve 
2. CURRENT ARCHITECTURE management and reduce the cost of trading. Those requirements The volume of 
trading generated by Schwab s sites has increased are also causing Schwab to re-engineer the system (non- 
by an order of magnitude in 9 months. That scalability has been disruptively) so that it can be available 
24x7, scale and also be achieved with a three-tier structure in which the Web server acts manageable. 
as a client, and there are two tiers of transactional application serving, one UNIX (RS/6000) and one 
host (S/390). The A core premise is that complexity is diametrically opposed to application server that 
we use for both tiers is IBM s CICS reliability. That implies that using one component layer instead 
Transaction Server. In order to produce a fully scalable, reliable of two will give a more reliable and 
manageable result, all else system, we deployed and enhanced the standard product in being equal. Now 
that all else is more equal in price/performance several ways. the manageability, reliability and built-in 
scalability of the host environment means that consolidating into a two-tier (client on Web Server and 
host) physical model (while retaining a three tier The CICS AIX product was deployed on a set of farms 
of logical model) is sensible. cloned UNIX machines, so that extra capacity can be achieved by merely 
adding additional clones , and component failures can be masked from the users. In addition we have some 
data on the The talk will further describe the rationale and approach. middle tier (to map between the 
Web user space and the host user space and to manage the essentially stateless HTTP conversations), and 
a copy of this data exists at each farm . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of 
this work for psrsonsl or clsssroom use is granted without fee provided that copiee we not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advan- tage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, to republish. to post on servers or to redistribute to lists. requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGMOD 98 Seattle. WA, USA 8 1998 ACM O-89791-995.5/98/006...$5.00 
 536 
			