
 REALISTIC STUDENT PROJECTS William J. Joel Division of Computer Science &#38; Mathematics Marist College 
Poughkeepsie, New York 12601 (Jzem@marist.bitnet) Abstract When a student performs a project, under 
the supervision of a faculty member, it is important that the student feel that the project is of mer- 
it and reflects both the student's capabilities as well as the student's interests. All too often the 
project is fine unto itself but has no tonnection to the student's other studies or background except 
that the project falls in the same major field. Therefore it is important to create a project, in cooperation 
with a student, that is not only challenging in itself but. also relies heavily upon the student's previous 
coursework. It should mimic project work as performed outside the academic sphere in that it yields a 
useable result. Through the use of techniques such as a con- tract for project grade, outlining attainable 
goals agreed upon by both the student and the instructor, the student gains an understanding of the project 
in relation to the student's entire course of studies, as well as future endeavors. Introduction While 
acting as advisor for various student projects, I have discovered several techniques that can be used 
to create what I call a realis- tic student project. A realistic student project is one that reflects 
both a student's abilities as well as a student's interests. Therefore, it is real to the student and 
not merely an exer- cise.  Elements of a realistic student project ................................................. 
 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are 
not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/ or specific permission. 
&#38;#169;1987 ACM 0-89791-217-9/87/0002/0244 75¢ Fits time allotted The project should first be one 
that, based upon discussions between the instructor and the student, easily fits within the time frame 
allot- ted it. It should be "... small enough to be 'doable'." [3] Normally a project is planned to 
be completed in either one or two samesters. It is important that the instructor should attempt to maintain 
a degree of difficulty in the project else the project will be too easy and will not test the student's 
abilities. The 'A' grade should be attainable, but only Just so. Uses existing knowledge base A realistic 
project should rely upon as much of a student's existing knowledge base as possi- ble. This knowledge 
base is meant to include not only information relating to a student's major but also to anything the 
student has learned in other related and non-related areas. A project that is based upon a more diverse 
knowledge base generally turns out to be more interesting to both the student and the instructor. A 
project of this type shows a student that no matter what you learn, there may always come a day when 
it will be useful. Challemges student The project should challenge the student to both test and expand 
this knowledge base, through l~erature research as well as original thought. It is important that the 
project allow the stu- dent to grow intellectually. A project that merely relies on previous knowledge, 
and does not build upon it, generally ends up being nothing more than either a continuation of previous 
coursework or a mere review of this work. There is no forward progress from the base. Expands knowledge 
base Projects assigned during regular courses usu- ally are meant to expand a student's knowledge base 
in depth only. This is not to say that there is never an expansion in breadth, but that it generally 
is not the intent of such a project. Such projects are meant to utilize and solidify a student's knowledge 
in a specific area. The philosophy of giving small inde- pendent programming assigm~ents does not 
supply the context and motivation  244 for the students to independently come to their own realization 
that they really want to use these tech- niques as opposed to their instructor wanting them to be used. 
[2] When teaching a course such as our COml~mter Science I, I often assign the students projects in 
relation to the semester's material. These project topics are student initiated but are usu- ally heavily 
modified by myself to ensure that they fit within the scope of the particular course. This method creates 
projects that are narrow in scope and produce limited knowledge integration. Even coarses with a specific 
focus, where the project is the primary goal of the course, often do not produce this knowledge integration. 
Projects in these courses are still directly tied to an area of computer science not selected by the 
student. [4,6,7] A realistic project should therefore att~npt to expand the student's knowledge base 
horizon- tally as well as vertically. It should be designed to create links across the various sub- Ject 
areas in this knowledge base. These linkag- es are what constitute the real importance of such a project, 
forcing a student to go beyond what is normally encountered. For example, in one project I supervised, 
a Computer Science student was teamed with a Fash- ion Design student to create a pattern drafting package. 
It was necessary for the Computer Sci- ence student to learn the basics of fashion ~esign and for the 
Fashion Design student to learn about computer graphics. As it turned out, each had a sufficiently diverse 
knowledge base so that the necessary mental linkages were easily ~onstructed.  Mimics non-classroom 
conditions A realistic student project should mimic con- ditions found outside not only the classroom 
but ~lso academia if at all possible. This is not to say that the academic environment is not suitable 
for a project. Rather that the student should be exposed to problems outside day to day experi- ences 
if the knowledge base is to be properly ~xpanded. Reasons for a realistic student project  Knowled6e 
integration A realistic student project utilizes as much information from a student's previous coursework 
as possible. It integrates this information in such a way as to allow a student to examine the naterial 
from angles not previously explored. This was shown to be true in the previous exam- ple. Much of the 
information acquired by a student in the classroom is not truely learned until it is utilized, in some 
fashion, to solve a new problem, one that is new to the student. Exer- cises assigned during a course 
help a student to begin to understand the material but only under specific, isolated conditions. If 
a student is to really learn the material, it is necessary to segregate the knowledge inte- gration from 
those conditions under which it was originally presented.  Exploration of student's interests A realistic 
project allows the student to explore individual interests and abilities, and thus feel a certain sense 
of ownership. This sense of ownership is important as it provides the student with the impetus to do 
well not only with the project but in other coursework as well. If a student realizes his/her potential 
early in the studies, then the course of study can be tailored to best utilize these abilities. Also, 
a student's interests are not always satisfied during lecture oriented courses. Therefore these interests 
require an outlet that is also a con- trolled learning experience. A realistic project does this. S~mse 
of reslx~nsibility As stated above, a realistic project gives a student a sense of ownership concerning 
the project. It also will give the student a sense of responsibility. If the student feels he/she owns 
the project then the student will feel impelled to make sure the project is the best it can be. Instructors 
should therefore be more of a guiding hand than a controlling one, acting as a source of information 
to the student Just as libraries are information resources. If the instructor controls the project too 
strongly the student will not feel that sense of ownership and therefore wi3_l not feel any responsibility 
to seeing that the project goes well. "[T]he stu- dent learns more about the subject matter when he chooses 
some aspect of that subject matter to explore ...." [i] This all boils down to the instructor letting 
go of the project in order that it be the best learning experience possible. This concept of letting 
go is in direct con- trast to what is sometimes called a directed projects course. There the instructor 
keeps a tight grip on the progress of the project, and administers strong direction as regards the stuJ 
dent ' s work. "The instructor has eight major re sponsibilit ies : 1. define specific sets of subtasks 
and associated products,  2. assign the subtasks to individu- al students,  3. set due dates for the 
subtasks,  4. evaluate the products as they are ccmplet ed,  5. maintain close contact with the user, 
 6. meet regularly with each team to monitor their progress and make   245 new assignments as subtasks 
are Frequent meeting, s completed, 7. teach as necessary based on individual needs surrounding individual 
assig~nents, and  8. assign a semester grade to each student."  [5]  The instructor should meet with 
the student frequently, so as to assess the progress of the student's project and to ensure that the 
details of the contract are being followed. Again, the instructor should softly guide the student during 
these meetings and not maintain a firm control of the project. this form of projects course is valuable 
in that it allows the student to explore in-depth one area of computer science. It does not, however, 
allow for the formation of linkages as described above. Of the eight points listed, only h, 7, 8 ~nd 
the first part of 6 would apply to realistic student projects, and even here the actions of the instructor 
would be governed by the contract specifications. On another project I supervised, a Fine Arts student, 
who had previously taken my Comlsmter Graphics I course, worked with me to both develop a 2-D educational 
graphics package as well as to =reate artwork for submission to a student compe- tition. In the beginning 
I was so wrapped up in developing the software that the student began to lose interest. After I let go 
of the project the student gained a sense of autonomy and eventually net if not surpassed our original 
expectations. Along with this responsibility for the project's quality comes responsibility for the 
grade acquired. As will be described below, a well written outline for the project, agreed upon by both 
the instructor and the student, supports the student's sense of ownership. It also points out to the 
student exactly what was lacking if the grade is less than an 'A'. [l]n the few instances where some 
 aspect of the contract was not ful- filled and the grade was lowered, there was no complaint whatever 
from the students. They understood that they were expected to fulfill certain requirements, had been 
unable or disinclined to meet the requirements, and were surprisingly willing to accept the 'penalty' 
of a lowered grade. [1] Specific details ~he contract  The contract, here, is an actual document 
binding not only the student to a plan of action but also the instructor as well. It should be thoroughly 
discussed and then written by both the instructor and the student during preliminary meetings. These 
meetings should be held prior to registration for the project. The contract should outline as specifically 
as possible the major details of the project as well ~s indicate exactly what is required, by the stu- 
dent, to attain various final grades. The con- tract is to be signed by both the instructor and the student, 
binding both to a specific course of study. Figure 1 shows a sample contract. Interim results  Papers. 
At least two drafts should be submitted for review before the final version is handed in. These drafts 
should show significant progress towards completing the paper in the time aLlot- ted. If it is indicated 
by the drafts that the final paper may be far less than satisfactory, the instructor may either simply 
point this out, or reopen discussion of the contract, possibly even creating an addendum to the contract 
to lessen its requirements, though the latter should be avoided if possible. Products. A product is 
a project's result that is to be used by others in ways that a paper is not used. A test version of the 
product being developed should be submitted at least once during the project's time frame. Again, if 
the test version indicates that a student is falling far behind, the instructor can choose from the options 
discussed above. Final submission The final submission should show extensive use of various resources, 
a true grasp of the materi- al and definite original thought. It should include all details listed in 
the contract. It should be useful to others, therefore being more than a mere exercise. It should also 
indicate that the student has grown both intellectually as well as in character. Conclusions The term 
realistic, therefore, indicates a project that goes beyond what a student is exposed to in the classroom, 
or in general aca- demic surroundings for that matter. A realistic project tries to mimic conditions 
found in the business work place, whether that work place is a company or a research institution. To 
be realistic, the student needs to feel both a sense of ownership as well as responsibil- ity towards 
the project. This can be attained by allowing the student to actually have created the project during 
discussions with the instructor. If a project is designed as described above it will definitely prepare 
a student for what lies ahead after college is over. 246 (1) (2) (3) References Amsden, S., "Have You 
Ever Tried Contracting for Grades?", En61ish Journals Vol. 59, No. 3, 1970, pp.1279-82. Gillett, W., 
"The Anatomy of a Project Ori- ented Second Course for Computer Science Majors", SIGCSE, Vol. 12, No. 
l, 1980, pp. 25-31. Perkins, T. E. and Beck, L. L., "A Project- Oriented Undergraduate Course Sequence 
in Software Engineering", SIGCSE~ Vol. 12, No. l, 1980, pp. 32-39. (4) Petersen, C. G., "The Evolution 
of a Project-Oriented Compiler Writing Course", SIGCSE~ Vol. 17, No. l, 1985, pp.ll6-119.  (5) Sanders, 
D., "Managing and Evaluating Stu- dents in a Directed Projects Course", SIGCSE, Vol. 16, No. l, 1984, 
pp.15-26.  (6) Satti, H. L., "A Project-Based Course in Ccmpiler Construction", SIGCSE~ Vol. 18, No. 
l, 1986, pp.ll4-119.  (7) Schiper, A. et. al., "A Paged-Operating- System Project", SIGCSE, Vol. 16, 
No. l, 1984, pp. 34-41.  PROJECT CONTRACT Ii agree to the following grade/requirements schedule. I 
have discussed this schedule with my instructor and agree to it as the basis for my grade. I am attempting 
to earn credits during the , 19 seme-~ter Grade Requirements D C B B+ A- A S tude nt Date Instructor 
Date Figure i : Sample Student Project Contract. The require- ments for obtaining the various grades 
are filled in by both the instructor and the stu- dent. 247 
			