
 0-7803-5897-X/99/$10.00 Copyright 1999 IEEE a paging method that takes into account the viewpoint and 
speed of the user. Quite recently Chiang et. al. [9] have developed an interactive technique for out-of-core 
isosurface extraction from volume data. They developed a meta-cell technique for partitioning the original 
data and an indexing scheme for efficiently making isosurface queries into the metacells, which reside 
on disk, to bring in the appropriate data for constructing the isosurface. All the above out-of-core 
techniques consider the paging of continuous volumetric or terrain data. None considers application to 
collections of discrete 3D objects, as we do here. The need to handle scalably large collections of buildings 
has come to the fore because there are improved methods to extract such data [10] and because applications 
requiring accurate display of urban data (such as emergency response, urban planning, or urban warfare) 
are growing in importance. 3 PlACING 3D OBJECTS IN A GEOSPATIAL HIERARCHY The forest of quadtrees has 
proven capability for handling global terrain [1, 2]. When considering buildings or other geospatial 
collections of objects, we would like to build on this structure, at least at the top level. If we have 
several cities in our global dataset, we want to quickly determine that the viewer is navigating towards, 
say, Los Angeles and does not need detailed data for Bombay, Houston, or even San Francisco. Further, 
as the user navigates the greater LA area and gets close enough to view individual blocks of buildings 
in, say, Anaheim, we don t want to page in and individually test buildings from Pasadena. On the other 
hand, when the user can discern individual buildings or groups of buildings, it is more appropriate to 
use methods focused on managing detail for the individual buildings or groups. The question is: at what 
level should this change-over be made? We present below an analysis of when this should occur. In the 
following we show how large collections of buildings or other objects can efficiently fit into the geospatial 
hierarchy. A full exposition of detail management for the groups of buildings is beyond the scope of 
this paper, but we show where such methods would fit and implement some simple techniques. The top level 
hierarchy is shown in Fig. 1. The earth is divided into 32 zones, with each zone containing a quadtree 
[2]. For the buildings or other objects, the quadtree goes to a certain level after which there is a 
non­quadtree detail management scheme. What should this level be? Let us assume a quadcell of side Lq. 
(The bounding box and bounding dimension in Figs. 1 and 2 would be of order Lq.). Now let s assume an 
object with maximum dimension Lo. If Lo < Lq, then only the 8 surrounding quadcells might contain objects 
that would extend into a central quadcell. In fact if we divide the central cell into 4 quadrants and 
further assume that all objects are placed in the quadcells that contain their centers, the maximum number 
of quadcells whose objects could overlap this quadrant would be 4, the central cell plus the 3 nearest 
quadcells to the quadrant. Our approach is to go as deeply as possible using the very efficient quadtree 
but not to permit more than 4 neighboring (or linked ) cells for considering overlapping objects, since 
there will be increased overhead from keeping track of the links and from having to consider all the 
objects in the linked cells. The collection of objects in the linked cells would have to be considered 
in view frustum culling, collision detection, and many other operations. Thus we choose cells for which 
Lo < Lq but these dimensions are close in size. For buildings in an urban setting, Lo could be about 
50 meters, the dimension of a typical city block. If a typical building is the size of a house, say 10 
meters on a side, we would have to consider on average no more than 100 or so buildings for 4 linked 
cells. Note that occasionally we will have to consider linked cells that could be in multiple quadtrees. 
The hierarchy permits a simple but effective detail management process. Object pointers are loaded at 
the quadlevel determined as described above. Accompanying the pointer is the object location and a bounding 
dimension obtained from the largest dimension of the object bounding box. Using the viewpoint, object 
location, and bounding dimension, the system finds a maximum size for the object in screen space in terms 
of pixels. (See Fig. 2.) However, what about extended objects such as a stadium, the Pentagon, the Vehicle 
Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space Center, or very large objects created via detail management? The 
latter might require considering several blocks as one object. If we use the largest such object in the 
database to determine the leaf node level of the quadtree, we might also end up with cells containing 
several hundred smaller objects. To obviate this problem we have discrete representations of such large 
objects at successive levels of the quadtree, each representation carrying its own list of linked cells. 
Thus if we flew from outer space down towards an urban area, we might first see a phototextured shape 
representing the downtown area, which would then be replaced by more detailed shapes representing collections 
of blocks and tall landmark buildings, and finally these would be replaced by shapes for individual buildings. 
Although the present system switches between discrete representations, one can imagine a more sophisticated 
process with more continuous switching of detail. Since such large objects are relatively small in number, 
we can handle them reasonably efficiently even though they carry their own lists and descriptions. Also 
such representations usually occur before the appearance of large numbers of smaller objects. When considering 
small buildings at urban densities, however, we use our more automated and compact linked cell mechanism. 
 4 HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE FOR OPTIMIZED PAGING As discussed above our global structure is divided into 
32 zones, each 45o x 45o [1,2]. Each quadrant has its own quadtree; all are linked so that objects or 
terrain crossing quadrant boundaries can be rendered correctly. To improve performance, the system is 
divided into multiple threads that can run in parallel. In particular, there is an independent rendering 
thread, which has a "triple buffer" of display lists. One of the display lists contains what the renderer 
is currently drawing, one is used by the scene manager to buffer graphics commands, and the last contains 
data that are ready to be displayed. Both the object and terrain paging threads have a server and manager. 
The object server loads pages from disk while the manager decides which cells should be loaded (taking 
into account user viewpoint and navigational speed) and passes it along to the scene manager. The object 
server and manager communicate with the scene manager and the rest of the system via shared caches, so 
that communication is limited to small request messages and acknowledgments. This communication path 
supports a demand-paging approach such as that of Cox and Ellsworth [7]. When data are needed for a node 
in the quadtree, the scene manager allocates space in the shared cache and sends a message via a shared 
memory priority queue to the object manager. Message priorities in this queue are changed dynamically 
according to the importance of the associated request as determined by the terrain manager. Thus, requests 
that gradually become less important sift towards the end of the queue and get serviced only when no 
higher priority requests remain in the queue. The underlying disk management system has a file structure 
with files aligned with the quadnodes in the set of linked quadtrees. Put together, all this makes the 
object and terrain visualization system quite scalable. Tens to hundreds of gigabytes of data may be 
made available for visualization, either locally or remotely. Object Page Scheduling. We have found that 
the above page priority procedure sometimes falls short when handling global data. Users of such data 
frequently fly quickly from a global view where the terrain elevation and imagery data are at 8 Km resolution 
to views close to the ground where the data are at 1 M resolution or higher, and there may be hundreds 
or more buildings in view. If the user flies in too fast, the traversal of linked quadtrees by the terrain 
manager falls well behind the user s navigation. The process can stall in this case, and the pages for 
the scene currently in view can take quite long to arrive. Unfortunately the system cannot just jump 
to the appropriate position in the quadtree. The quadtree has to be traversed to get important properties 
information, especially quadcell linking data but also geospatial bounding boxes and other data, that 
are necessary to determine if the object data should be displayed or not. To address this problem we 
created a modified version of the separate set of indexing trees used in the terrain paging system [1]. 
This separate structure provides properties information but is lightweight so it can be traversed quickly. 
Large segments of the indexing trees reside in main memory for fast access. With the flexibility of this 
scheme we can skip one or more levels before paging in object data. A predictive mechanism is instituted 
based on user navigational speed and viewing direction to help predict where the terrain manager should 
skip. Since the scene manager is receiving continuous updates from the user via the user interface, it 
can use these in its requests to the object manager. The scene manager can, for example, expend more 
detail on buildings or other objects in the center of the screen. 5 BUILDING DISPLAY RESULTS We present 
results for a collection of 471 textured buildings on our global terrain database. The terrain has worldwide 
coverage at 8 Km, U.S. data at 1 Km, Georgia at 100 M, and several insets ranging from 10 M to 0.5 M. 
The total size of the terrain alone is 1.5 GB. The 471 buildings are for downtown Atlanta and are thus 
placed on top of high resolution terrain data at 1 M resolution. When buildings are added without the 
hierarchical paging structure, the frame rate drops from 15-20 frames per second to 7 frames per second, 
even on the SGI Infinite Reality. We have lately developed faster object rendering (not used in the results 
of this paper), but frame rate still slows considerably when buildings are loaded. The frame rates indicated 
in Figs. 3-7 (the first number in the lower left corner) were obtained on an SGI Infinite Reality with 
4 R10000 processors, 1 GB of memory, and 27 GB of disk. All results depicted were obtained on continuous 
fly-in or fly-out with no pauses (except for the skyline in Fig. 7 where there was a pause during switch 
from fly-in mode to parallel-to-the-earth mode). The fly-in rate was such that one could navigate from 
a whole earth view at over 10,000 Km to 10 M above the earth (in an area with high resolution data) in 
30 seconds. For the results presented in Fig. 4, any object with bounding dimension greater than 1 pixel 
is loaded and displayed, using the procedure in Sec. 3. This conservative approach works well; the largest 
buildings in the database don t appear until the user navigates to about 160 Km away from them. No buildings 
are paged in until this point, and frame speed does not slow perceptibly until the buildings are paged 
in. (See Figs. 4, 6 and 7.) This shows the efficient scalability associated with our hierarchical paging 
process. Buildings in groups of any size could be placed all over the earth and neither performance nor 
memory load would be affected till the user is relatively close to them. Of course we could also apply 
a more sophisticated boundary dimension that would take into account orientation of the object. Note 
that the hierarchical paging works for any objects including those representing collections of buildings. 
We have used this to do simple detail management. We have preprocessed the buildings to produce 3 levels 
of detail, a shape representing the extent and simplified skyline for the whole collection of buildings, 
and two other sets of objects representing portions of the building collection. These objects were placed 
at appropriate (higher) levels of the quadtree in Fig.1. A threshold of 1 pixel was set for these objects 
and 10 pixels for the individual buildings. When the underlying buildings are paged in the higher level 
objects disappear. By comparing Figs. 4 and 5, one sees that this permits significantly higher frame 
rates until the viewer is much closer to the buildings than before, while still retaining detail about 
the location and shape of the building collection. Additionally, the hierarchy aids in culling when the 
viewer is panning or flying around the buildings. Comparing Figs. 6 and 7 with Fig. 4 shows this clearly 
as the former have higher frame rates because some of the buildings are culled. Buildings not close to 
the view frustum are not even paged in. This makes feasible the handling of extended building collections 
that are much larger than the one considered here. In fact, we are planning to test such an extended 
collection by replicating the current set of buildings several times side-by-side. 6 CONCLUSIONS AND 
FUTURE WORK We have presented results for real-time visualization of out-of-core collections of 3D objects. 
This is a significant extension of previous methods and shows the generality of hierarchical paging procedures 
applied both to global terrain and any objects that reside on it. Applied to buildings, the procedure 
shows the effectiveness of using a screen-based paging and display criterion within a hierarchical framework. 
The screen-based tolerance is adjustable and directly provides a control for image quality. The results 
demonstrate that our method is scalable since it is able to handle multiple collections of buildings 
(e.g., cities) placed around the earth with full interactivity and without extensive memory load. Further 
the method shows efficient handling of culling and is applicable to larger, extended collections of buildings. 
Finally, the method shows that levels of detail can be incorporated to provide improved detail management. 
We plan to extend object detail management by providing more accurate levels of detail, as depicted in 
Fig. 1. Our goal will be automatic procedures that can be applied during preprocessing. We will also 
consider dynamic control of levels of detail for building and other features (such as streets and trees) 
beyond the quadtree hierarchy. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was performed in part under contract DAKF11-91-D-004-0034 
from the U.S. Army Research Laboratory. We would like to thank Larry Tokarcik and his team at the Army 
Research Laboratory for supplying data used in this work. We would also like to thank the reviewers, 
whose comments improved the clarity of the paper. REFERENCES 1. Douglass Davis, T.Y Jiang, William 
Ribarsky, and Nickolas Faust. Intent, Perception, and Out-of-Core Visualization Applied to Terrain. Report 
GIT-GVU­98-12, pp. 455-458, IEEE Visualization 98. 2. Peter Lindstrom, David Koller, William Ribarsky, 
Larry Hodges, and Nick Faust (1997). An Integrated Global GIS and Visual Simulation System. Report GIT-GVU-97-07. 
 3. N.M. Brenner. Fast Fourier Transform of Externally Stored Data. IEEE Trans Audio and Electroacoustics 
17(2), pp. 128-132 (1969). 4. A. George and H. Rashwan. Auxiliary Storage Methods for Solving Finite 
Element Systems. SIAM J Scientific and Statistical Computing 6(4), pp. 882-910 (1985). 5. J.W.H. Liu. 
On the Storage Requirement in the Out­of-Core Multifrontal Method for Sparse Factorization. ACM Trans. 
Math. Software 12(3), pp. 249-264 (1986). 6. S.K. Ueng, C. Sikorski, and K.L. Ma. Out-of-Core Streamline 
Visualization on Large Unstructured Meshes. Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 3(4), 
pp. 370-379 (1997). 7. M. Cox and D. Ellsworth. Application-Controlled Demand Paging for Out-of-Core 
Visualization. Proceedings, IEEE Visualization 97, pp. 235-244 (1997). 8. J.S Falby, M.J. Zyda, D.R. 
Pratt, and R.L. Mackey. NPSNET: Hierarchical Data Structures for Real-Time Three-Dimensional Visual Simulation. 
Computers &#38; Graphics 17(1), pp. 65-69 (1993). 9. Y. Chiang, C. Silva, and W.J. Schroeder. Interactive 
Out-of-Core Isosurface Extraction. IEEE Visualization 98, pp. 167-174 (1998). 10. Tony Wasilewski, Nickolas 
Faust, and William Ribarsky. Semi-Automated and Interactive Construction of 3D Urban Terrains. Accepted 
for publication, Proceedings of the SPIE Aerospace/Defense Sensing, Simulation &#38; Controls Symposium 
(1999).  Figure 1 Hierarchical &#38; object levels of detail Figure 2 Screen-based threshold using 
bounding dimension    Figure 7 View of buildings in flying mode 
			