
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. A ang, W. R. .Lilegdon, 
and D. Goldsmaa RECENT ADVANCES IN SIMULATION FOR SECURITY PRICING Phelim Boyle Mark Broadie Paul Glasserman 
School of Accountancy Columbia Business School Columbia Business School University of Waterloo 415 Uris 
Hall 403 Uris Hall Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1 New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027 ABSTRACT Computational 
methods play an important role in modern finance. Through the theory of arbitrage­free pricing, the price 
of a derivative security can be expressed as the expected value of its payouts under a particular probability 
measure. The resulting in­tegral becomes quite complicated if there are several state variables or if 
payouts are path-dependent. Sim­ulation has proved to be a valuable tool for these cal­culations. This 
paper summarizes some of the recent applications and developments of the Monte Carlo method to security 
pricing problems. INTRODUCTION The increase in complexity of financial models and securities in recent 
years has led to greater atten­tion to computational methods in the financial in­dustry. Numerical methods 
are routinely used for a variety of applications, including the valuation of se­curities, the estimation 
of their sensitivities, risk anal­ysis and stress testing of portfolios. Simulation is a useful tool 
for many of these calculations, evidenced in part by the voluminous literature of successful ap­plications. 
Examples include the stochastic volatil­it y applications in Duan (1995) and Hull and White (1987); the 
valuation of mortgage-backed securities in Schwartz and Torous (1989); the valuation of exotic options 
in Kemna and Vorst (1990); and the valu­ation of interest-rate derivative claims in Carverhill and Pang 
(1995) and Rltchken and Sankarsubrama­nian (1995). We focus on the use of simulation in pricing deriva­tive 
securities, also called contingent claims. These are securities, such as options or futures, whose pay­outs 
are determined by the value of certain underly­ing assets. The prices of derivative securities can be 
represented as expectations with respect to an appro­priate probability measure involving the underlying 
assets. If the number of underlying assets is large, or if the rule by which the derivative security 
derives its value is sufficiently complex, simulation becomes an attractive means for computing the price. 
The representation of derivative security prices as expectations is a consequence of a deep result of 
finan­cial theory; see, e.g., Duffie (1992) for background. Briefly, under a condition called market 
completeness, a derivative security can be replicated through trad­ing in the underlying assets. The 
absence of arbi­trage thus entails a relation between the price of the derivative security and those 
of the underlying assets. It turns out that, to preclude arbitrage, the price of the derivative security 
must be the expected value of its discounted payouts with respect to an equivalent martingale measure, 
also called a risk-neutral proba­bility. This is the probability measure under which the discounted underlying 
assets become martingales; i.e., all assets have the same expected rate of return, which must then be 
the riskless rate. To make this more concrete, we consider the Black-Scholes option pricing model. A 
typical model in continuous-time finance of the evolution of the price St of a stock or other asset is 
the stochastic differen­tial equation dS=@ dt+QSdW, (1) in which p is the rate of return, g is the volatility, 
and W is a standard Brownian motion process. Under the risk-neutral measure, the drift p is replaced 
by the risk-free rate, r, thus making e t St a martingale. An option to buy the stock at time T at price 
K (called the strike price) will pay (ST K)+ at time T. The current price of the option is the expected 
present value of this payout with respect to the risk-neutral measure; i.e., it is C = E[e- ~(S~ K)+], 
the expectation taken with ~ = r in (l). 212 Security This particular expectation can be evaluated in 
closed-form, resulting inthecelebrated Black-Scholes formula (see, e.g., Hull 1993). For purposes of 
il­lustration, we nevertheless point out how simulation would be used to compute the expectation. It 
fol­lows from (1) that ST has a lognormal distribution. Specifically, under the risk-neutral measure, 
it admits the representation ST = floe( -~ 2)T+ =z, (2) where Z is a standard normal random variable. 
Sub­stituting independent samples Z1, . . . . Zn from the standard normal distribution into (2) yields 
indepen­ dent samples S$), i = 1, . . . . n, of the terminal stock price. An unbiased estimator of the 
option price is then given by From this simple example, we may abstract the fol­lowing general steps 
in pricing by simulation: o Simulate sample paths of the underlying state variables (e.g., underlying 
asset prices and inter­est rates) over the relevant time horizon. Simu­late these according to the risk-neutral 
measure. o Evaluate the discounted cash flows of a security on each sample path, as determined by the 
st ruc­ture of the security in question. o Average the discounted cash flows over sample paths.  In 
the example above, the paths consisted simply of the terminal values ST i) . More generally, (as we will 
see shortly) a pricing problem may require simulating a discrete-time approximation to the continuous-time 
process modeled by (l). The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec­tion 2 discusses the use 
of some variance reduction techniques. Section 3 examines the application of low discrepancy sequences 
(quasi-Monte Carlo methods). Section 4 discusses the estimation of risk measures. Section 5 touches on 
further topics of current inter­est. VARIANCE REDUCTION In this section, we discuss the implementation 
of three specific variance reduction techniques in security pric­ing problems. The met hods we discuss 
are antithetic variates, cent rol variates, and moment matching. Pricing 213 2.1 Antithetic Variates 
This method is more notable for its widespread famil­iarity among finance professionals than for its 
eficacy. Its popularity is no doubt due to its simplicity. Consider, again, the problem of computing 
the Black-Scholes price of a call option, as discussed around (3). Though there is no need to use simu­lation 
in this case, it serves as a useful illustration. In this setting, the implementation of antithetic vari­ates 
is particularly simple; for if Z~ has a standard normal distribution, then so does Zi. The price ~$) 
obtained from (2) with Zt replaced by Zi is thus a valid sample from the terminal stock price distribu­tion. 
Similarly, each ~i = e- T max{O, 5$) -K} is an unbiased estimator of the option price, and therefore 
so is Because ~, +v uses twice as many samples as ~, it is preferred only if 2var[dAv]< Var[d], which 
simplifies to Cov[Ci, &#38;i] < 0. That this con­dition is in fact met is a simple consequence of the 
monotonicity of the mapping from Z{ to C%. More elaborate options may depend on the en­tire path of stock 
prices rather than just the ter­minal value ST. In this case, it becomes necessary to simulate a discrete-time 
approximation {S~,, j = o,.. . ,m} of the path {St, O < t < 7 }.Each Stj+l can be generated from the 
preceding price Sij and a normal variate Zj+l according to (2), with T re­placed by tj+l tjin the exponent. 
An antithetic path can then be generated using Zl,.. ., Z~ in place of Zl,. . . ,Zm. For some further 
examples of the application of an­tithetic in finance, see Boyle (1977), Clewlow and Carverhill (1994), 
and Hull and White (1987). 2.2 Centrol Variates The use of control variates to reduce variance is well­known 
in simulation and has attracted some interest in financial applications. We describe two particu­larly 
effective examples specific to the financial set­ting. Our first example is an application to Asian op­tions 
proposed by Kemna and Vorst (1990). The pay­off on an Asian option depends on the (arithmetic) average 
price of the underlying asset. An example of an Asian option pricing problem is the computation of where 
T ~A=+ St dt. /o As always, the expectation is taken with the rate of return on S equal to the risk-free 
rate r; i.e., the ex­pectation is with respect to the equivalent martingale measure. There is no closed-form 
expression for PA because there is no simple characterization of the distribution of 3A. Even in discrete 
time, the distribution of an average of lognormal random variables does not admit a simple expression. 
In contrast, the geometric mean is itself lognormally distributed, resulting in a tractable expression 
for Based on this observation, Kemna and Vorst (1990 )_replaced the straightforward estimator PA = e- 
T(S.4 2 )+ with the control-adjusted estimator  PA+ (PG ~G), where P~ = e- T(~~A K)+ .ABecause of 
the strong correlation between PG and PA, they achieved sub­stantial variance reduction using this approach. 
A further reduction in variance could presumably be obtained by optimizing the coefficient on (PG PG 
), implicitly taken to be 1 in their implementation. The martingales inevitably present in a security 
pricing simulation provide another source of control variates. The simplest of these in an option pric­ing 
simulation is the underlying asset itself. Because {e- tS,} is a martingale, we have ~[e- T&#38;] = So, 
so (e rT&#38; So) provides a simple control. If there are multiple underlying assets, then multiple 
controls are readily available. Clewlow and Carverhill (1994) have taken this ob­servation a step further. 
They simulate a discrete­time approximation {St,, j = O, . . . . m} of the asset price and build a control 
variate from the increments ASj = S~,~l St,. They choose the coefficients on these increments to approximate 
the change in the option price resulting from AS9. Specifically, they use the derivative of the option 
price with respect to the underlying asset. This approach mimics the trad­ing strategy used to replicate 
(or hedge) the option. and Glasserman As the time increment used in the discrete-time ap­proximation 
decreases to zero, the hedging strategy exactly replicates the option, ultimately resulting in a zero-variance 
simulation estimate. A possible weak­ness of this approach is the difficulty of computing the derivative 
of the option price at each time step. For further applications of the control variate technique in financial 
simulation, see Boyle (1977), Broadie and Glasserman (1993), Carverhill and Pang (1995), Duan (1995), 
and Ritchken and Sankarsubra­manian (1995). 2.3 Moment Matching Next we describe a variance reduction 
technique pro­posed by Barraquand (1994), who termed it quadratic resampling. His technique is based 
on moment match­ing. As before, we introduce it with the simple ex­ample of estimating the call option 
price on a single asset and then generalize. As before, let Zi, i = 1. . . . . n, denote independent 
standard normals used to drive a simulation. The sample moments of the n Z s will not exactly match those 
of the standard normal. The idea of moment matching is to transform the Z s to match a finite number 
of the moments of the underlying population. For example, the first moment of the standard normal can 
be matched by defining .Z=zi z, i=l, . . ..n. (4) where 2? = ~~=1 Zi/n is the sample mean of the 2 s. 
Note that the ~~ s are normally distributed if the Zi s are normal. However, the ~, s are not independent. 
As before, terminal stock prices are generated from the formula &#38;(i) = SOe( -~ )~+ fi2 , i=l, . . 
..n. An unbiased estimator of the call option price is the average of the n values d~ = e T max(~T(i) 
 K, O). In the standard Monte Carlo method, confidence intervals for the true value C could be estimated 
from the sample mean and variance of the estimator. This cannot be done here since the n values of ~ 
are no longer independent, and hence the values ~% are not independent. This points out one drawback 
of the moment mat thing method: confidence intervals are not as easy to obtain. Indeed, the sample variance 
of the 6, s is usually a poor estimate of Var[~i]. Equation (4) shows one way to match the first mo­ment 
of a distribution with mean zero. If the under­lying population has mean pz, transformed Z s can be generated 
using ~, = Z. 2 + ,LLZ. The idea can Security easily be extended to match two moments of a distri­bution. 
In this case, an appropriate transformation is 2, = (Zi z):+vz, 2=1, . . ..?2. (5) where sz is the sample 
standard deviation of the Zt s and Cz is the population standard deviation. Of course, for a standard 
normal, pz = O and crz = 1. An estimator of the call option price is the average of the n values ~~. 
Using the transformation (5), the 2i s are not nor­mally distributed even if the Zi s are normal. Hence, 
the corresponding ~i are biased estimators of the true option value. For most financial problems of practical 
interest, this bias is likely to be small. However, the bias can be arbitrarily large in extreme circumstances 
(even when only the first moment of the distribution is matched). This can happen, for example, if the 
transformation (4) changes the support of the 2 s. From (2), the mean and variance of the terminal stock 
price ST are also known, so the moment match­ing idea could be applied to the simulated terminal stock 
values ST(i). Our (limited) numerical experi­ence does not provide consistent evidence for choos­ing 
between these moment mat thing methods. Both methods tend to outperform antithetic, but control variates 
seem most effective of all. This is not surpris­ing, since it can be shown that moment matching is asymptotically 
equivalent to using moments as con­trols wit bout optimizing the coefficients. LOW DISCREPANCY SEQUENCES 
 Many studies have found that for the computation of integrals in moderate dimensions, quasi-Monte Carlo 
based on low discrepancy sequences outperforms ordi­nary Monte Carlo based on random inputs. Typically, 
the error in Monte Carlo decreases at rate 0(1/fi), whereas the error using low discrepancy sequences 
de­creases at rate O((log n)d/n), where d is the dimen­sion. For background on low discrepancy methods, 
see Niederreiter (1992) and Spanier and Maize (1994). These methods have recently been applied to finan­cial 
simulation problems with considerable empirical success. Specific applications are more fully described 
in papers by Birge (1995), Joy, Boyle, and Tan (1995) and Paskov (1994). These suggest that the integrals 
involved in security pricing may be well suited to quasi-Monte Carlo. There are two reasons why se­curity 
prices might lend themselves better to quasi-Monte Carlo than do other classes of integrals. The first 
is that the integrands tend to be fairly smooth, and it is generally recognized that smoothness helps 
Pricing 215 in using quasi-Monte Carlo. The second reason is that the dimension of pricing problems is 
often linked to the length of the time horizon over which a security has payouts, and payouts in the 
distant future are significantly discounted in computing a price. Thus, many of the higher dimensions 
may contribute little to the value of the integral which potentially reduces the effective dimension 
of the problem. Next we test standard Monte Carlo versus the low discrepancy sequences of Faure, Sobol 
, and Halton. We estimate the price of a discretely sampled geomet­ric average Asian option, which is 
given by C = E[e- T(S K)+], where ~ = (~~=1 S3)ljd and S1 is the asset price at time jT/d. Since ~ 
is lognormally distributed, an exact formula is available for C. We generate 500 test problems by selecting 
random problem parameters. For each test problem, we compute price estimates based on n = 50,000 sample 
paths of the asset price using the four methods. Root-mean-squared (RMS) relative error results are shown 
in the next figure for problems of dimension d = 10, 50, and 100. t . .4 ~ Monte Carlo ,,, g 0.8 - ,. 
-, .. 3.= ,.. g o~ ,.. ,.. $ ~ ,/. o 04 ~.Fym ,/ 2 --------­ -­ ,/. ~ --------­ --%. 02 - .+, .­ ., Sobd 
 01 102030405060 708090100 Dmenwon Results for the Halton sequence were not compet­itive and are suppressed. 
RMS error for standard Monte Carlo is nearly independent of the problem di­mension. The error with the 
Sobol method grows smoothly with the problem dimension and grows er­ratically for the Faure method (though 
this could be an artifact of the value of n). These results are broadly consistent with existing literature. 
Bratley, Fox, and Niederreiter (1992) con­clude that quasi-Monte Carlo is unlikely to outper­form ordinary 
Monte Carlo in dimensions higher than about 12, but their test problems could be more dif­ficult than 
those that typically arise in a financial context. Paskov (1994) reports successful application of Sobol 
sequences in the evaluation of a 360 dimen­for such a high dimensional problem. sional integral arising 
from the pricing of a collateral­ ized mortgage obligation. He uses much larger values of n and this 
could explain the better performance The application of low discrepancy methods in fi­nance is not immune 
from other shortcomings associ­ated with these met hods: there are no simple, reliable error bounds or 
termination criteria. 4 ESTIMATING RISK MEASURES Most of the discussion in this paper centers on the 
use of Monte Carlo for pricing securities. In prac­tice, the evaluation of price sensitivities is often 
as import ant as the evaluation of the prices themselves. Indeed, whereas prices for some securities 
can be ob­served in the market, their sensitivities to parameter changes typically cannot and must therefore 
be com­puted. Since price sensitivities are important mea­sures of risk, the growing emphasis on risk 
manage­ment systems suggests a greater need for their effi­cient computation. The derivatives of a derivative 
security s price with respect to various model parameters are collectively referred to as Greeks, because 
several of these are commonly referred to with the names of Greek letters. (See, e.g., Chapter 13 of 
Hull (1993) for background.) Perhaps the most important of these and the one to which we give primary 
attention is delta: the derivative of the price of a contingent claim with re­spect to the current price 
of an underlying asset. The delta of a stock option, for example, is the derivative of the option price 
with respect to the current stock price. An option involving multiple underlying assets has multiple 
deltas, one for each underlying asset. In the rest of this section, we discuss various approaches to 
estimating price sensitivities, especially delta. 4.1 Finite-Difference Approximations Consider the 
problem of computing the delta of the Black-Scholes price of a call option; i.e., computing .=g, where 
C is the option price and SO is the current stock price. There is an explicit expression for delta, so 
simulation is not required, but the example is use­ful for purposes of illustration. A crude estimate 
of delta is obtained by inde~endently generating two discounted option payoffs, C(SO) and C (SO + ~), 
from initial prices So and So + c (according to (2)-(3)) and computing the finite-difference ratio A 
= rl[qso + 6) 6(s0)]. (6) Repeating this many times and averaging we obtain an estimator converging 
to 6-1 [C (SO+6) C(so)], (7) where C(. ) is the option price as a function of the current stock price. 
This discussion suggests that to get an accurate estimate of A we should make e small. However, be­cause 
we generated ST and ST(e) independently of each other, we have Var[A] = f-2(Var[d(S0 +6)] +Var[C(SO)]) 
= 0(6-2), so the variance of ~ becomes very large if we make ~ small. To get an estimator that converges 
to A we must let c decrease slowly as n increases, resulting in slow overall convergence. A general result 
of Glynn (1989) shows that the best possible convergence rate using this approach is typically n l t4. 
Replacing the forward difference estimator i: (6) with the central difference (2e) 1 [C(SO + c) C(SO 
 e)] typically im­proves the optimal convergence rate to n lj3. These rates should be compared with n 
~12, the rate ordi­narily expected from Monte Carlo. Better estimators can generally be obtained using 
the method of common random numbers, which, in t~is context, simply USESthe same Z for ~(So ) and C(SO 
+ c). Denote by A the finite-difference approx­imation thus obtained. For fixed e, the sample mean of 
indep~ndent rep~cations of A also converges to (7). But if C(SO) and C(SO + e) are positively correlated 
when simulated with common random numbers, then Var[A] < Var[~]. That they are in fact positively correlated 
is easily verified in this example. The impact of this variance reduction is most dra­matic when e is 
small. A simple calculation shows that, using common random numbers, ,?@(so + e) C5(SO)12]= 0(62), (8) 
and therefore that Var[c-l{~(SO + c) ~(So)}] = O(l); i.e., the variance of A remains bounded as e * 
O, whereas we saw previously that the variance of &#38; in­creases at rate 6 2. Thus, the more precisely 
we try to estimate A (by making e small) the greater the benefit of common random numbers. Moreover, 
this indicates that to get an estimator that converges to A we may let e decrease faster as n increases 
than was possible with A, resulting in faster overall con­vergence. An application of Proposition 2 of 
L Ecuyer and Perron (1994) shows that a convergence rate of n If 2 can be achieved. Security The dramatic 
success of common random numbers in this example relies on the fast rate of mean-square convergence of 
C(SO + c) to C(SO ) evidenced by (8). This rate does not apply in all cases. It fails to hold, for example, 
in the case of a digital option paying a fixed amount B if ST > K and O otherwise. The price of this 
option is C = e TTBP(ST > K); the obvious simulation estimator is ~(SO) = e rTBl{s.>~], where 1{ . } 
denotes the indicator of the event { . }. Because d(So ) and C(SO + e) differ only when ST < K < ST(6), 
we have E[lqs(l + e) qso)y] = 0(6), compared with O(C2 ) for a standard call. As a re­sult, delta estimation 
is more difficult for the digi­tal option, and a similar argument applies to barrier options generally. 
Even in these cases, the use of common random numbers can result in substantial improvement compared 
with differences based on in­dependent runs. 4.2 Direct Estimates Even with the improvements in performance 
obtained from common random numbers, derivative estimates based on finite differences still suffer from 
two short­comings. They are biased (since they compute differ­ence ratios rather than derivatives) and 
they require multiple resimulations: estimating sensitivities to d parameter changes requires repeatedly 
running one simulation with all parameters at their base values and d additional simulations with each 
of the param­eters pert urbed. The computation of 10 50 Greeks for a single security is not unheard of, 
and this repre­sents a significant computational burden when mul­tiple resimulations are required. Over 
the last decade, a variety of direct meth­ods have been developed for estimating derivatives by simulation. 
Direct methods compute a derivative estimate from a single simulation, and thus do not require restimulation 
at a perturbed parameter value. Under appropriate conditions, they result in unbiased estimates of the 
derivatives themselves, rather than of a finite-difference ratio. Our discussion focuses on the use of 
pathwise derivatives as direct estimates, based on infinitesimal perturbation analysis. The pathwise 
estimate of the tru~ delta dC/dSo is the derivative of the sample price C with respect to SO. More precisely, 
it is dti = liioc-l[d(so + 6) qso)], dSo Pricing provi~ed the limit exists with probability 1. If 
6( S.) and C(SO + ~) are computed from the same Z, then provided ST # K, we have dk ded&#38; ST TTl{ST>K}~. 
(9) =&#38;%=e dSo At ST = K, C fails to be differentiable; however, since this occurs with probability 
zero, the random variable d~/dSo is almost surely well defined. The pathwise derivative d6/dSo can be 
thought of as a limiting case of the common random numbers finite-difference estimator in which we evaluate 
the limit analytically rather than numerically. It is a di­rect estimator of the option delta because 
it can be computed directly from a simulation starting at So without the need for a separate simulation 
at a per­turbed value So. This is evident from the expression in (9). The question remains whether this 
estimator is unbiased; that is, whether de dC dSo = dSo 4Y *[-1 The unbiasedness of the pathwise estimate 
thus re­duces to the interchangeability of derivative and ex­pectation. The interchange is easily justified 
in this case; see Broadie and Glasserman (1993) and Fu and Hu (1993) for this example and others. The 
utility of this technique rests on its applicabil­ityy to more general models. In Broadie and Glasser­man 
(1993), pathwise estimates are derived and stud­ied (both theoretically and numerically) for Asian op­tions 
and a model with stochastic volatility. For ex­ample, the Asian option delta estimate is simply e T% 
so {S> K} where ~ is the average asset price used to determine the option payoff. Evaluating this expression 
takes negligible time compared with restimulating to esti­mate the option price from a perturbed initial 
stock price. The pathwise estimate is thus both more accu­rate and faster to compute than the finite-difference 
approximation. These advantages extend to a wide class of problems. As already noted, the unbiasedness 
of pathwise derivative estimates depends on an interchange of derivative and expectation. In practice, 
this generally means that the security payoff should be a pathwise continuous function of the parameter 
in question. The standard call option payoff e r~ max{O, ST ~} is continuous in each of its parameters. 
An example where continuity fails is a digital option with payoff B with B the amount received if the 
stock finishes in the money. Because of the disconti­ nuity at ST = K, the pathwise method (in its sim­ 
plest form) cannot be applied to this type of option. The problem of discontinuities often arises in 
the estimation of gamma, the second derivative of an op­tion price with respect to the current price 
of an un­derlying asset. Consider, again, t~e standard call op­tion. We have an expression for dC/dSo 
in (9) involv­ing the indicator l{s~ >K}. This shows that d~/dSo is discontinuous in ST, preventing us 
from differenti­ating pathwise a second time to get a direct estimator of gamma. To address the problem 
of discontinuities, Broadie and Glasserman (1993) construct smoothed estima­tors. These estimators are 
unbiased, but not as sim­ple to derive and implement as ordinary pathwise esti­mators. Broadie and Glasserman 
also investigate the use of the likelihood ratio method for derivative es­timation. This method differentiates 
the probability density of an asset price, rather than the outcome of the asset price itself. The domains 
of this method and the pathwise method overlap, but neither contains the other. When both apply, the 
pathwise method generally has lower variance. Overviews of these methods can be found in Glasserman (1991), 
Glynn (1987), and Rubinstein and Shapiro (1993). For discussions specific to fina­ncial applications 
see Broadie and Glasserman (1993) and Fu and Hu (1993). e T1{ST>K} , FURTHER TOPICS We conclude this 
paper with a brief discussion of other recent developments in the application of Monte Carlo methods 
to security pricing. There have recently been some advances made on the problem of pricing American contingent 
claims by simulation. These are securities whose cash flows de­pend on decisions of the owner as well 
as on the path of the underlying asset or assets. (When no decisions are involved, the security is called 
European. ) Pricing an American contingent claim involves determination of an optimal policy and of the 
present value of a se­curity s payouts under that policy. The optimization involved makes this a difficult 
problem for simulation. Other numerical methods, however, face difficulties when the dimension of the 
problem is large. Tilley (1993), Grant, Vera, and Weeks (1994), Barraquand and Martineau (1995), and 
Broadie and Glasserman (1995), have proposed simulation-based methods to price American-style securities. 
Reider (1993) and Nielsen (1994) have explored the possibility of using importance sampling to speed 
up the computation of option prices. This technique changes the underlying probability measure to give 
greater weight to paths with otherwise low proba­bility. The resulting estimate is then weighted by a 
likelihood ratio to eliminate bias resulting from the change of measure. Reider s implementation changes 
the drift in a process with continuous state space; Nielsen s changes the transition probabilities in 
a bi­nomial lattice. Both techniques show potential for variance reduction. An important issue in any 
security-pricing simu­lation (but one that we have not addressed) is the approximation of a diffusion 
by a discrete-time pro­cess. Kloeden and Platen (1992) discuss a variety of methods for constructing 
discrete-time approxi­mations with different orders of convergence. For any such scheme, decreasing the 
time step can be expected to give more accurate results, but at the expense of greater computational 
effort. Duffie and Glynn (1993) analyze this trade-off and characterize asymptotically optimal time steps 
as the overall com­putational effort grows. REFERENCES Barraquand, J. 1994. Numerical Valuation of High 
Dimensional Multivariate European Securities, working paper, Digital Equipment Corporation, Paris, France 
(to appear in Management Science). Barraquand, J., and D. Martineau. 1995. Numerical Valuation of High 
Dimensional Multivariate Amer­ican Securities, working paper, Salomon Brothers International Ltd. (to 
appear in Journal of Finan­cial and Quantitative Analysis). Birge, J.R. 1995. Quasi-Monte Carlo Approaches 
to Option Pricing, working paper, Department of In­dustrial and Operations Engineering, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Boyle, P. 1977. Options: A Monte Carlo Approach, Journal of Financial 
Economics, Vol. 4, 323-338. Bratley, P., B.L. Fox, and H. Niederreiter. 1992. Im­plementation and tests 
of low-discrepancy se­quences, ACM Transactions on Modelling and Computer Simulation, Vol. 2, No. 3, 
195 213. Broadie, M., and P. Glasserman. 1993. Estimat­ing Security Price Derivatives by Simulation, 
PaineWebber Working Paper Series in Money, Eco­nomics, and Finance #P W-93-11, Columbia Busi­ness School 
(to appear in Management Science). Broadie, M., and P. Glasserman. 1995. Pricing American-Style Securities 
Using Simulation, work­ing paper, Columbia University. Carverhill, A., and K. Pang. 1995. Efficient and 
Flex­ible Bond Option Valuation in the Heath, Jarrow and Morton Framework, working paper, School of Business, 
Indiana University. Clewlow, L., and A. Carverhill. 1994. On the Simula­ tion of Contingent Claims, 
Journal of Derivatives, vol. 2, 66-74. Duan, J.-C. 1995. The GARCH Option Pricing Model, Mathematical 
Finance, Vol. 5, 13-32. Duffie, D. 1992. Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
New Jersey. Duffie, D., and P. Glynn. 1993. Efficient Monte Carlo Simulation of Security Prices, working 
paper, Stan­ford University (to appear in Annals of Applied Probability). Fu, M. C., and J.-Q. Hu. 1993. 
Sensitivity Analysis for Monte Carlo Simulation of Option Pricing, work­ing paper, University of Maryland 
(to appear in Probability in the Information and Engineering Sci­ences). Glynn, P.W. 1989. Optimization 
of Stochastic Sys­tems via Simulation, in Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference, The Society 
for Computer Simulation, San Diego, California, 90-105. Glasserman, P. 1991. Gradient Estimation via 
Per­turbation Analysis, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, Mass. Grant, D., G. Vera, and D. Weeks. 
1994. Path-Dependent Options: Extending the Monte Carlo Simulation Approach, working paper, Anderson 
School of Management, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-6471. Hull, J. 1993. Options, 
Futures, and Other Derivative Securities, 2nd edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. Hull, 
J., and A. White. 1987. The Pricing of Options on Assets with Stochastic Volatilities, Journal of Finance, 
Vol. 42, 281-300. Joy C., P.P. Boyle, and K.S. Tan. 1995. Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods in Numerical Finance, 
working pa­per, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1. Kemna, A. G. Z., and A.C.F. 
Vorst. 1990. A Pricing Method for Options Based on Average Asset Val­ues, Journal of Banking and Finance, 
Vol. 14, 113 129. Kloeden, P., and E. Platen. 1992. Numerical Solu­tion of Stochastic Differential Equations, 
Springer-Verlag, New York. L Ecuyer, P., and G. Perron. 1994. On the Conver­gence Rates of IPA and FDC 
Derivative Estima­tors, Operation Research, Vol. 42, 643-656. Niederreiter, H. 1992. Random Number Genera­tion 
and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods, CBMS-NSF, Vol. 63, SIAM, Philadelphia, Pa. Nielsen, S. 1994. Importance 
Sampling in Lattice Pricing Pricing Models, working paper, Management Sci­ ence and Information Systems, 
University of Texas at Austin. Paskov, S.P. 1994. New Methodologies for Valuing Derivatives, working 
paper, Department of Com­puter Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027. Reider, R. 1993. An 
Efficient Monte Carlo Tech­nique for Pricing Options, working paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. 
Rltchken, P., and L. Sankarsub­ramanian. 1995. Volatility Structures of Forward Rates and the Dynamics 
of the Term Structure, Mathematical Finance, Vol. 5, No. 1, 55 72. Rubinstein, R., and A. Shapiro. 1993. 
Discrete Event Systems, Wiley, New York. Schwartz, E. S., and W.N. Torous. 1989. Prepayment and the Valuation 
of Mortgage-Backed Securities, Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, No. 2, 375-392. Spanier, J., and E.H. Maize. 
1994. Quasi-Random Methods for Estimating Integrals using Relatively Small Samples, SIAM Review, Vol. 
36, No. 1, 18­ 44. Tilley, J.A. 1993. Valuing American Options in a Path Simulation Model, Transactions 
of the Society of Actuaries, Vol. 45, 83-104. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES PHELIM BOYLE holds the J. Page R. Wadsworth 
Chair in Finance at the University of Waterloo in Wa­terloo Canada. His research interests span topics 
in computational finance and actuarial science. He has held visiting positions at several universities 
through­out the world and is on the editorial board of a num­ber of finance journals. He holds a Ph.D. 
from Trinity College Dublin and is a fellow of the Institute of Ac­t uaries. MARK BROADIE joined the 
faculty of the Columbia University Graduate School of Business in 1983. His current research interests 
include portfolio optimization and the pricing of derivative securities. He holds a Ph.D. from Stanford 
University and a B.S. from Cornell University. PAUL GLASSERMAN joined the faculty of the Columbia University 
Graduate School of Business in 1991. Prior to that, he was a Member of Techni­cal Staff in the Operations 
Research department of AT&#38;T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, NJ. He holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University 
and an A.B. from Princeton University.  
			