
 Recommendations for Changes in Advanced Placement Computer Science Owen Astrachan, moderator Duke University 
ola@cs.duke.edu GaJl Chapman College Board gchap- man @ collegeboard.org Rich Kick Hinsdale High School 
r-kick@helios.district86.k12.il.us Fran Trees Westfield High School ftrees @ compuserv.com Ursula Wolz 
College of New Jersey wolz@tcnj.edu Robert (Corky) Cartwight Rice University cork@cs.rice.edu David 
Gries University of Georgia gries@cs.uga.edu Cay Horstmann San Jose State University cay@ horstmann.com 
 Henry Walker Grinnell College walker@ math.grin.edu  Committee Charge In 1999 a committee was convened 
to make recommenda- tions to the College Board about the Advanced Placement Program in Computer Science. 
The committee is charged with examining the entire course description for Advanced Placement Computer 
Science and making recommenda-tions about the course as it reflects corresponding college and university 
courses. Formally, the charge is The Advanced Placement Computer Science (APCS) Ad Hoc Committee's charge 
is to make recommendations to the APCS Development Committee on the future direction of APCS, including 
recommendations for changes in the APCS curriculum, and exploring alternative delivery lan- guages based 
in part on a survey of college departments to be conducted in summer 1999 to see what language is likely 
to be used in the introductory computer science courses in the next 3 to 4 years. Background In 1981 
the APCS Development Committee recommended the use of Pascal in an AP course whose first exam was given 
in 1984. This decision was controversial; BASIC was in widespread use and serious consideration was given 
to a language-neutral exam and course. In 1985 an ad-hoc committee made recommendations on changing the 
exam format, essentially creating two courses that correspond roughly to CSI and CS2. In 1995 an ad-hoc 
committee was convened to make recommendations on how best to incorporate C++ into the AP course and 
exam. The deci- sion to adopt C++, made in 1994, was decidedly controver- sial. The ad-hoc committee 
made recommendations on a subset of C++ and on classes similar to those in the stan- dard library, but 
which were safe for novice programmers to use. Presentation Panelists will give brief presentations about 
the key issues facing the committee. The results of two surveys will be discussed as appropriate. One 
survey, conducted on behalf of the College Board, polled CS departments regarding language use and appropriate 
language changes in the first year. The second survey polled SIGCSE members and AP teachers about several 
issues pertinent to the first year of computer science. More than half of the time allotted for the presentation 
will be devoted to questions and comments from the audience. Among the key issues the panel is deliberating 
are the fol- lowing. This list is neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. How much of object-oriented design 
and pro-gramming should be part of the first year?  What data structures are basic to the first year 
and how should they be covered (e.g., use vs. imple- mentation)?  What libraries should be an intrinsic 
part of first year courses?  To what extent should testing and verification be part of the first year? 
 416 
			