
 Redirect, Pipe, and stdio in MS-DOS Arthur Zachai Tenley Design, Inc. ABSTRACT This paper describes 
the results of efforts to develop MS-DOS application programs which provide acceptable I/O redirection. 
The characteristics considered "acceptable" are defined, and compared with results obtained from some 
 compilers. Problems related to writing character I/O routines and their solutions are described. 
i. Introduction This paper describes the development of character input and output routines for use 
with MS-DOS to create "filter" programs. These routines have been used to write several very simple, 
but very versatile and useful utility programs such as "repl", "grep", and "wc". Small programs like 
these, widely used in non- MS-DOS environments, have proven to be useful in code development, text preparation, 
and general system Support. While MS-DOS provides redirection and pipe capability, the compilers tested 
were not capable of generating code which resulted in acceptable behavior of filter programs. 2. The 
Copy Filter "cp" as a Test Program A filter to copy characters from stdin to stdout, "cp", was used 
to explore the characteristics of the MS-DOS stdin and Permission to copy without fee all or part of 
this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or disl ributed for direct commercial 
advantage, t he ACM copyright noliee and Ihc lille of Ihe publlcalion and its date appear, and notice 
is given Ihal copying is by permission of Ihe Association for Compming Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or Io republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1986 ACM 0-89791-211-4 / 86 / 
1200-0249 75¢ stdout. The body of the "C" version of "cp" is: while ((c=getchar() != EOF) putchar(c); 
 The behavior of this program, when compiled by four "C" compilers or MS-DOS, was considered unacceptable 
for several reasons. A few examples of the resulting characteristics are listed below. -getchar echoes 
the character, putting double characters on the screen and (in some cases) to the redirected output file, 
 -getchar will not return until the "return" key is pressed, -getchar continues to read the last character 
of a redirected file, never returning EOF, -putchar buffers characters passed until a newline character 
is passed, -putchar('\t') places a funny character on the screen, -etc. Two of the compilers used 
provided two different header files for use with programs performing I/O to "stdio". The compiler documentation 
explains that one should be used for redirected I/O, and the other for console I/O. While this allows 
redirection, it also requires recompilation. Redirected or console I/O, of course, should involve only 
one version of a program. Similar disfunction was experienced with three Pascal compilers and a BASIC 
compiler. The problems encountered with "cp" are related to the implementations of functions putchar 
and getchar, and they will also cause similar problems with any other filters. These problems perpetrated 
the investigation presented in this paper, which resulted in the development of replacements for these 
routines. 3. flow We Would Like "cp" to Perform The first step in implementing getchar and putchar 
is to list the desired performance of the routines. The getchar properties are summarized in the "desirable" 
column of Table i. The properties can be grouped into two categories: Input from the console; and input 
from a file when stdin is redirected. When reading from the console, getchar should always wait for 
a keystroke, and return after one keystroke. If the key was a control-C, the calling process should be 
terminated. The end-of-file condition that returns a value of -i must be supported, and is assigned to 
the control-Z key. The key should not be echoed. When reading from a file, getchar may buffer the file, 
but still return one character each time it is called. The end-of-file value of -i should be returned 
if, and only if, the physical end of the file has been reached. Subsequent calls following an end-of-file 
condition should return the end-of-file value without side effects. A control-C keyboard entry should 
terminate the calling process to allow the user to exit from error conditions such as endless loops, 
incorrect file specifications, or other interactive reactions. No character found in a file should terminate 
the calling process. Characters read from the file should not be echoed. When writing to a file, putchar 
should output the passed character without regard to its meaning. When writing to the screen, putchar 
should expand the tab character to spaces to the next tab stop, and move the cursor one column to.Ithe 
left for the backspace character. The putchar function should also respond to the keyboard entry of 
control-C by terminating the calling process. This requirement may seem out of place in putchar, but 
MS-DOS provides no keyboard support to a process environment other than that coded within the process 
 itself. For example, in a "clean" MS-DOS environment, the "C" program fragment: while(l); can be 
terminated by the user only by a power-down of the machine. Thus, taking advantage of any call to DOS 
to check for a user requested termination is considered prudent. 4. DOS Functions Available for use 
as "getchar" The DOS function calls which return a character from stdin were evaluated with respect 
to the criterion discussed above. The desired result is shown in the first column of Table i, along with 
the results of each DOS function call. (In MS-DOS, a system call is made by placing the DOS function 
number in the AH register, parameters in various other registers, and executing an INT 21H instruction.) 
There is no match between the desired performance and any of the DOS functions, although if 3F is used 
for reading files, and 08 is used for reading the keyboard, the desirable performance will be achieved. 
 5. Using IOCTL to Determine the Redirect Condition Since getchar must use different DOS calls depending 
on whether or not stdin has been redirected, getchar must determine if stdin has been redirected prior 
to actually getting the next character. This is accomplished using the DOS function 44H, the IOCTL call. 
The IOCTL function can return information about a "channel", including whether it is a file or a device. 
Since stdin is defined as channel zero, a call to IOCTL for channel zero will indicate that it is a file 
if stdin has been redirected, and a device otherwise. A global file/device flag is used, initialized 
by the application load, such that getchar normally calls IOCTL only once in the life of an application. 
After the first call to getchar made by an application, getchar will only check the file/device flag 
to determine which DOS function to use. (If the application modifies the redirect condition, it must 
also clear the getchar file/device flag.) 6. Adding a Buffer for Speed If getchar determines that stdin 
has been redirected, the next character returned will be the next character in the file, and should not 
depend on the last character passed to stdout as in an interactive session. (This assumption may not 
be totally valid, as one may choose to write an application which creates it's own input stream.) Although 
DOS provides a buffer for files, adding a local buffer to getchar results in a significant increase in 
speed when reading from files, just from the reduced overhead of the DOS call for each character. 7. 
Returning "Function" Keys The PC keyboard, as well as the DOS functions in Table i, are capable of returning 
all of the 256 possible "characters" codes. Most of the keys are mapped to their ASCII codes, but a few 
are mapped to a two-byte sequence. Examples of single keys that return two bytes are the ten function 
keys and the cursor keys. The keys and key sequences which are not assigned an 8-bit code, return a byte 
value of zero, indicating that the second byte of the two byte sequence must be read. The second byte 
is a "scan code", which is also an 8-bit code. The DOS application program is responsible for performing 
a second call to the DOS function to obtain the 8-bit scan code if the first call returned a zero. To 
allow getchar to obtain a single value for a single keystroke or key chord, we may take advantage of 
the definition of getchar being an integer returning function. The most common use of the integer definition 
is to allow the end- of-file condition to be a unique code, having the integer value of -i. This implementation 
of getchar returns integers greater than 255 for "keys" which have no 8-bit code assigned. The value 
returned by getchar is the scan code as the eight most significant bits, with the low eight bits set 
to zero. The getchar function makes the second DOS call if necessary, transparent to the caller. programmer 
must be aware of is that characters accepted by the "C" code fragment: while((c=getchar()) != '\n') 
; will include the first character of the 0xD, 0xA pair. This has not proven to be a problem, although 
there is a hidden danger: The characters accepted above may be printed, followed by printing the single 
'\n' character, and appear to operate as though the '\n' convention were being used. The 0DH would have 
been included in the string of accepted characters, with the 0AH added by printing '\n' Pseudo Code 
for getchar: static file or device = 0; buffer[n]; getchar() IF NOT file or device THEN file or device 
= ioctl() ENDIF IF file or device = file THEN IF buffer empty read into buffer using 3F ENDIF IF buffer 
empty THEN return -i ELSE return next character in buffer ELSE wait for keyboard character using 08 
IF character = 0xlA THEN return -i ELSE IF character NOT zero THEN return (int)character ELSE wait 
for keyboard character using 08 return character * 255 ENDIF 8. The '\n' Problem, and a Compromise 
Solution In the PC/MS-DOS environment, a new line is represented as the 0xD, 0xA character pair (carriage 
return, line feed). If getchar and putchar are to be replaced, it would be convenient to adopt the convention 
of the single character 0xA as the new!ine. The convenience is significant in the case of "C" statements 
 such as: printf("\nHello"); but would result in text file incompatibility with most other MS-DOS 
products. By accepting the two character convention, the only problem the 9. DOS Functions Available 
for use as putchar There are only three MS-DOS functions for character output to stdout: 02, 06, and 
 40H. In terms of the desirable characteristics of putchar, they are much better behaved than the input 
functions, and function 40}{ meets all the criterion. i0. Add a Buffer and Flush it on "spawn()" or 
"exit()" Since function 40H is used for both file and console output by putchar, it would seem that 
putchar need not determine the redirect condition as getchar did. To increase the speed of putchar, however, 
 251 adding a buffer requires the redirect check. The buffer can be used only if the output has been 
redirected, when the user need not (or cannot) see the result of each call to putchar. A flush() routine 
must be provided to support the use of a buffered putchar, since a program may terminate while there 
are still characters in the buffer. In order to maintain application code compatibility with non-MS-DOS 
systems, the call to flush() should be added to the compiler supplied exit() and spawn() routines. Since 
the exit() routine is easier to implement than spawn(), and very simple filter programs can be implemented 
without spawn(), only the exit() has been implemented. The details are not presented here. Pseudo-code 
for putchar: static file or device = 0; buffer[n] ; putchar(char) IF NOT file or device THEN file 
or device = ioctl() ENDIF IF file or device = file THEN store char in buffer IF buffer NOT full THEN 
 return ELSE output buffer contents using 40H ENDIF ELSE output char using 40H ENDIF return. 
flush() output buffer contents using 40H return II. Attempts to Add the New Functions to DOS The getchar 
and putchar routines are often used in very small programs. The cp program executable file, for example, 
is 600 bytes in length, of which 350 bytes is putchar and getchar. If these routines could be added to 
DOS, each application program could be reduced in size by 350 bytes. Three methods of providing these 
routines as system functions have been considered: -Writing a DOS Device Driver, -Replacing interrupt 
vectors, and -Adding a new interrupt. The first method provides a DOS compatible mechanism for adding 
code to the system. Unfortunately, the entry point to any DOS Device Driver which operates on single 
characters is by device name. Since writing the "C" statement: c = getchar("stdin"); is considered 
unacceptable for compatibility reasons, this method has been rejected. The second method involves adding 
code to the system to replace the intenrupts which would have been called by compiler generated code 
for getchar() and putchar(). The Device Driver technique can be used to install the code, but would not 
support any "named" device. The danger involved in this method is that the implementation provided by 
the compiler may not be known, hence replacing interrupts cannot guarantee compatibility with the compiler. 
 The third method would install the code as in the second method and assign new interrupt vectors as 
the entry points to getchar and putchar. Each compiler would then need a getchar and putchar library 
routine to invoke the resident getchar and putchar. The calling routines must be coded in assembly language, 
but are quite simple. For example: TEXT SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC 'CODE' ~UBLIC GETCHAR GETCHAR PROC NEAR 
 INT 55H ;NEW GETCHAR ENTRY RET GETCHAR ENDP --TEXT ENDS END is all that is required for one popular 
MS-DOS "C" compiler. The danger with this method lies in the "open architecture" of the MS-DOS environment. 
It is so open that there is no convention for assigning or choosing interrupt vectors. This flexibility 
feature of the Intel processor has been largely ignored by third party vendors since the potential for 
conflict is considered too great. 12. Conclusion The following list of filters have been implemented 
using the new getchar and putehar routines described. repl hex field grep b2ihex ihex2b entab detab 
tee wc send Although a DOS compatible method of 252 providing getchar and putchar as system calls 
remains illusive, the programs are small enough so that the overhead of including the routines in each 
program is not a significant problem. The addition of a few small tools to the MS-DOS environment has, 
for the author, resulted in an acceptable alternative to an operating system costing nearly ten times 
more than MS-DOS. Table i. Character Input Function Characteristics DOS Function Number Desired 01 
06 07 08 3F Return when one character Y Y Y Y Y Y is struck on KBD Waits for CR on KBD n n n n n y 
 Program abort on CTRL-Z (\xlA) from KBD n(5) n n n n n(4) from file n n n n n n(4) Program abort on 
CTRL-C (\0x3) from KBD y y n n y y from file n y n n y n Program abort on CTRL-C from KBD when redirected 
y y n n y y Echo the character from KBD n y n n n y from file n y n n n n Flag indicates past EOF when 
redirected y(5) n(1) y(2) n(1) n(1) y(3) No te s : I. Waits for character forever. 2. Returns character 
not ready flag.  3. Returns count and error flag.  4. Can be YES if IOCTL used to set ASCII mode. 
 5. Returns (integer) -I if past EOF or CTRL-Z from KBD.  
			