
 RELEVANCE AND CONTRIBUTING INFORMATION TYPES OF SEARCHED DOCUMENTS IN TASK PERFORMANCE Pe~i Vakkari 
Department of Information Studies 33140 University of Tampere, Finland Mail Pertti.Vakkari@uta.fi ABSTRACT 
 End-users base the relevance judgements of the searched documents on the expected contribution to their 
task of the information contained in the documents. There is a shortage of studies analyzing the relationships 
between the experienced contribution, relevance assessments and type of information initially sought. 
This study categorizes the types of information in documents being used in writing a research proposal 
for a master's thesis by eleven students throughout the various stages of the proposal writing process. 
The role of the specificity of the searched information in influencing its contribution is analyzed. 
The results demonstrate that different types of information are sought at different stages of the writing 
process and thus the contribution of the information also differs at the different stages. The categories 
of the contributing information can be understood as aspects of topicality. Keywords Field/empirical 
studies of the information seeking process, embedding search within larger tasks, cognitive models and 
IR, situational relevance 1. INTRODUCTION The usefulness of the searched information is typically evaluated 
on the basis of its contribution to a task [9,15]. Thus, relevance can be conceptualized as involving 
the relationship between a person's information problem or need and the information that could solve 
the problem [16]. However, most of the studies on the effectiveness of IR systems rely on the conception 
of relevance as the direct match between query terms and document terms in a system. This relation is 
commonly called topicality [17]. Studies on human relevance assessments in IR show that people use other 
criteria than just topicality in the sense of direct match in evaluating the output of the system [2, 
12, 23 25]. The notion of topicality itself also seems to vary depending on the stage of the users' task 
[23]. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted w=thout fee prey)dad that COplea are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advan- tage end that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specif)c perm=ssion and/or 
e fee. SIGIR 2000 7/00 Athens, Greece &#38;#169; 2000 ACM 1-58113-226-3100/0007... $ 5.00  A document 
selection model by Wang and Soergel [24] summarizes well the pursuits of user-oriented relevance research. 
In this model a document is represented by a set of document information elements [DIEs]. DIEs are processed 
to judge a document on the basis of several criteria. The criteria are, in turn, applied to judge document 
values. Finally, the document values form the basis for the document selection decision. Wang and Soergel 
emphasize that the model assumes that the user wants to pursue a document only if s/he perceives some 
value in the document. Empirical research has covered certain features of users' relevance judgements 
in document selection in IR. The use of DIEs, typically bibliographic records, as a basis for inferring 
relevance assessments has been studied e.g. by Barry [1] and Wang &#38; Soergel [24]. The criteria applied 
by users to predict the value of documents have been analyzed e.g. by Barry [2] and Park [12]. The value 
of the documents has been studied by Vakkari &#38; Hakala [22] and by Wang &#38; Soergel [24]. Most of 
the studies have analyzed judgements at a certain point in time leaving open the question of how relevance 
evaluations change during task performance. We can expect that subjects' changing understanding of the 
task is also reflected in their information needs and relevance judgements. There are a few longitudinal 
studies, which attempt to answer this question [3, 221. Several studies [7, 20, 2 I, 24] emphasize that 
the ultimate aim for choosing and using a document is its contribution for some purpose. End-users search 
for information to use it in resolving a problem or to make progress with the task at hand. They have 
a more or less developed mental model of the type of information required and they use this when assessing 
the expected contribution of the documents found [20, 23]. It is through this mental model that they 
try to infer from the clues provided by the document representation, whether the document would in fact 
contribute to their task. Thus, they assess the elements of the document representation from the angle 
of the expected and desired use of the document. If the users base their inferences from document clues 
on their expected use of the information, then the clues should contain elements that signal their potential. 
A prerequisite in designing DIEs to support document selection is to study what users expect from the 
information they need and what types of information contribute to their tasks. If we could categorize 
the expected uses of information by subjects, it might provide clues for designing more suitable representations 
of documents for their retrieval. There are a few empirical, studies that have analyzed the expected 
utility of documents [23, 24, 25]. The desired utility provides users with a basis in their construction 
of relevance criteria and in making inferences from clues. The studies have produced preliminary results 
about the utility of documents in relation to relevance assessments. The aim of this study is to categorize 
the types of information sought at different stages of task performance and relate these categories to 
the experienced relevance and contribution to the task of the found documents. We then analyze what types 
of information students search for in the process of writing a research proposal for a master's theses. 
The types of information searched for are related to the categories of contribution derived from the 
documents obtained. In addition the assessed degree of relevance of the documents is related to the type 
of contribution. Thus, this study will deepen our understanding of how relevance assessments are related 
to the usefulness of documents for a particular task. Next we will analyze earlier empirical studies 
on relevance criteria and the utility of documents as experienced by the users. The results from longitudinal 
studies on the change of relevance criteria will also be presented. We will then sketch the research 
design and research questions of this study. After that we will present the empirical results and conclude 
by relating them to the existing research tradition. 2. EARLIER EMPIRICAL STUDIES The point of departure 
of this study is that people construct mental models of their tasks. These representations develop as 
people proceed in the tasks. [6, 13]. The models orient them to select relevant documents with contributing 
cognitive elements [11, 20, 21]. Thus, people search, select and use information based on their prior 
knowledge. The focus of the search and selection process depends on how much the subjects know about 
the task. The less the prior knowledge, i.e. the more vague the mental model, the more fuzzy the relevance 
criteria, and the less will be the ability to identify useful sources [23]. Studies show that as people 
proceed in their task and become more knowledgeable, the more strictly they assess the relevance of the 
information found [18, 23, 25]. Spink &#38;al [18] have shown that the less the persons knew about the 
problem they researched, the greater the number of items were judged as partially relevant. Results by 
Vakkari &#38; Hakala [23] and Wang &#38; White [25] suggest that the more the persons knew about the 
task, the fewer references were accepted as relevant.  2.1 Relevance and topicality In the following 
analysis of the earlier findings the approach to relevance criteria is the expected usefulness of the 
information in the documents. Most of the studies have not taken this explicitly into account. They have 
identified a number of relevance criteria typically derived from the users' explanations of their situation 
and decisions [!, 16]. They indirectly include the usage orientation of the subjects. One central finding 
is that the criteria most frequently mentioned by users, regardless of the type of situation, is information 
content [4, 16]. In information content the most important dimension is topicality, i.e. what the document 
is about as the user sees it with respect to his/her task [1, 23, 24]. A positive estimation of topicality 
acts as a premise for further processing of the document representation for the final choice in document 
selection [7, 24]. Bateman's [4] factor analysis suggests that topicality forms its own dimension among 
users' 11 most popular relevance criteria. Other criteria are loaded into three factors reflecting other 
dimensions of relevance criteria. Although topicality is the most important criterion for task- evoked 
IR, it does not warrant the decision to select a particular document [7, 24]. Although subjects basically 
search for information about the topic, they often express their need, and thus, their criteria in terms 
of an aspect of the topic. [7, 23] They might look for theories, specific conceptualizations or categorizations 
or methods for their task. These expressions are inferences about the needed information types based 
on their current mental model of the task. 2.2 Longitudinal studies Kuhlthau [11] has shown that the 
stages in the task performance differentiate the types of information required. In the initiation, topic 
selection and exploration stages people are looking for general background information for framing the 
task. Before finding a focus, their thoughts about the task are general and undifferentiated, and their 
actions involve seeking background information. After the focus has been formed, thoughts about the task 
become clearer and more directed. This guides the searcher to seek pertinent, focused information. When 
studying relevance criteria used by students in different phases of design of their research proposals 
Vakkari and Hakala [23] demonstrated, that not only were the students searching for documents on the 
topic in general, but also about particular aspects of it. Topicality as such was constantly the most 
important criteria for choosing references throughout the process. Although less frequently mentioned, 
the required types of information played a systematic role in choosing references. References to general 
and theoretical information were searched for in the pre-focus stages. Their significance diminished 
in the post-focus stages. The role of methodological information increased as the process proceeded. 
When the students assessed the relevance of the found documents, the above described trends concerning 
references corresponded to trends of document judgements with the exception that the significance of 
information types as criteria compared to topicality as such grew considerably. It is evident that full 
texts provide a better basis than references for assessing the usefulness of the information. Wang and 
White [25] studied how academic researchers select documents from on-line databases, consult or read, 
and cite them during a research project. They found that the most important selection criteria in all 
these stages were topicality and the orientation/level of the documents. Orientation/level refers to 
the intended audience [academic etc.] and type of information. The results showed that compared to topicality 
the significance of the orientation of the documents grew when the researchers proceed from document 
selection to citing stage. If orientation is interpreted as an aspect of topicality including information 
types, it seems that researchers are able to take into account the intended use of the information increasingly 
through the research process. Wang and Soergel [24] define document value as the user's perception of 
the desirability or potential utility of a document. They found that functional value dominated among 
researchers when they chose documents from a printout of a search from a database. The functional value 
is the perceived utility of documents to make a contribution to the specific task in hand. Wang &#38; 
Soergel [24] found that the functional value was correlated with the topicality and orientation/level 
of the document. Thus, topicality, and orientation interpreted as information types seem to predict the 
potential of a document to contribute to the task in hand. These results suggest that although topicality 
as such is the most important relevance criterion during task performance, the aspects of topicality 
in terms of the types of information required play a significant role in the search for and selection 
of references and especially in selecting and consulting documents. The results also suggest that it 
is the expected contribution of the information that mostly structures relevance judgements and the selection 
of documents. 3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND QUESTIONS Although the use of the relevance criteria seems to depend 
on the intended contribution of the information, there is a shortage of attempts to analyze and categorize 
contribution types as expressed by the users. 3.1 Research questions The type of information needed 
also depends on the domain of the subject [8]. It is reasonable to suppose that after conducting several 
studies in particular domains it would be possible to construct a general classification of types of 
contributing information. This study aims to categorize and analyze the contribution of information on 
one domain, in the process of writing a research proposal for a master's theses. The specific research 
questions are: what type of information students are searching for in the different stages of the process 
 how the information obtained contributed to the task in its various stages  how relevant the students 
experienced the contributing information types  * what is the relation between the specificity of the 
information sought and the experienced contribution of that information 3.2. Data The study subjects 
were 11 students from a Department of Information Studies that attended a seminar on preparing a research 
proposal for a master's theses. It took place over four months during the spring term of 1999. At the 
beginning of the seminar they selected a topic and by the end they had come up with a research proposal. 
Data for describing the students' understanding of the task, search tactics and relevance assessments 
was collected in several ways during the process. They were asked to make a search form LISA data-base 
three times.during the seminar: at the beginning, in the middle and when they were finishing the proposal. 
The aim was to get data in the pre-focus, focus formation and post-focus phases according to Kuhlthau's 
[11] model. A pre- and post-search interview was conducted in each case. The former measured the participants' 
thoughts and actions as well as their state of knowledge about the topic at the respective stages of 
the process. They were also asked what kind of information they were searching for and what they expected 
from the results. In the post-session interview, the students were asked to assess the relevance of 
the found references. In the second and third round they were also asked to assess the relevance of the 
documents they had obtained. Moreover, the students wrote a research diary recording their ideas and 
thoughts as well as a structured search diary recording ideas sought, documents found, document sources, 
and their relevance and contribution in terms of useful information for the proposal. They delivered 
the diaries three times, at the end of the three first month, with the exception of two students who 
delivered only two sets of diaries. The analysis of information sought and type of contribution as well 
as the relevance of the information is based on the diaries. The constructed categories are a combination 
derived from data and an earlier classification scheme created in Vakkari 86 nakala [23].  4. RESULTS 
In general, all the participants proceeded in their task according to Kuhlthau's [1 I] model at varying 
paces. In the first search session, the students were moving from topic selection to exploration of the 
topic. In the middle of their task they were typically exploring the topic and trying to formulate a 
research problem. By the end of the project most of the students had been able to construct a focus and 
they were at the collection or presentation stage. In the following analysis the data from research and 
search diaries is connected to the pre-focus, focus- forming and post-focus stages of the process. 4.1 
Types of information sought In the search diaries students were asked to record what kind of information 
or ideas they were searching for from documents, where they found the documents, how relevant they were, 
and how the texts contributed to their work. First we will analyze what types of information students 
sought for their proposal at different stages of the task. The analysis is based on the documents selected 
from the searches. The types of information were categorized according to the specificity of the information 
sought. This was partially based on the categories by Kuhlthau [11]. In this study we classify the types 
of information into general background information, faceted background information and specific information. 
General background information is information which cannot be described in detail and which is used to 
frame the task at hand. The students expressed it typically by requesting "information about my topic 
[e.g. internal communication] in general". Faceted background information is information about the broad 
sub-fields of the topic, which has not been expressed in detail. Number of Pre-focus stage Focus-formation 
stage Post-focus stage documents selected BG ]FBG SP Total BG FBG SP Total BG FBG I SP Total r Sum 40 
20 8 68 14 28 20 62 2 2 '42 46 % 59 29 12 100 23 45 32 100 5 5 [91 I101 Mean 3,6 1,8 0,7 6,1 1,6 3,1 
2,2 6,9 0,3 0,3 I[4,7 5,3 BG = General background information; FBG = Faceted background information; 
SP = Specific information Table 1. Number of documents selected containing information types searched 
for at different stages of writing the research proposal [%]. The students typically requested it as 
a sub-field of the topic [e.g. obstacles in internal communication]. Specific information refers to information, 
which has been expressed in detail uncovering the central variables of the task at hand [e.g. Intranet 
as a means for facilitating internal communication]. The results show that in the pre-focus stages the 
students selected documents mostly for general background information [table 1]. The share of general 
background information sought decreased as the writing of the proposal proceeded. The proportion of faceted 
background information was about 30 % at the beginning of the process. This increased in the middle of 
the process to become the most sought after information type at that stage. However, its importance, 
as also that of the role of general background information had become insignificant by the end of the 
project when the students had formed a focus. The significance of the specific information increased 
as the writing process proceeded. In the pre-focus stage it was infrequently looked for by the students, 
but towards the end it was almost the only type of information they pursued. As the students became more 
knowledgeable about their task, their information needs differentiated so that they could express them 
in greater detail. In the early stages when their image of the problem was vague, they were looking for 
background information to create a framework for the proposal. By the end of the process after focus 
construction, they were able to express their information needs in specific terms. The results confirm 
Kuhlthau's [11] model, which predicts that in the pre- focus stages people are looking mostly for background 
information and in the post-focus stages mainly for pertinent information. 4.2 Contributing information 
types The students were asked to describe in search diaries the contribution of the documents they had 
obtained. The categorization for the contributing information types was created by combining categories 
emerging from the data with ideas by Kuhlthau [1 i] and a classification of citation types by Suhonen 
&#38; Rautio [19]. The latter differentiate between citations that include theoretical, methodological 
or empirical contribution. In our classification theoretical contribution includes theories, models and 
conceptual frameworks as well as definitions obtained from the documents. Methodological contribution 
includes support m the use of methods or research techniques. Empirical contribution presupposes the 
provision of empirical research results. Additionally background and focused information was included 
in the classification. Background information was used by the students to orientate towards the topic. 
They articulated its contribution typically by using broad subject terms or terms that referred to the 
function of the information like "I got ideas for problem formulation", "background information", or 
"it brought some new point of views". Compated to theoretical information background information was 
not as structured. Focused information was articulated by the students by using narrow subject terms. 
It helped them to understand differentiated relations between varibles within the topic. Compared to 
theoretical information it seemed to contain only parts of theories describing specific relations between 
variables. This classification also contained the categories "facts" and "cases". "Facts" refer to information 
that provides facts, e.g. a section of an act or the date of birth of a person. "Cases" refer to information 
that gives examples or information of cases: sometimes students were looking for cases analogous to their 
own project. At the beginning when the students chose the topic and began to explore it, the information 
in the acquired documents that contributed most was background information and theories [table 2]. To 
a certain extent facts were also experienced as being useful in this phase. However, most of the facts 
included acts that could have also been categorized as background information. In this exploration stage, 
methodological sources or focused information were not perceived as being useful by the students. In 
the focus formation stage documents containing background information or theoretical information contributed 
the most, although their share had decreased. The significance of documents providing methodological 
and focused information as well as cases had increased. Towards the end of the process students most 
frequently experienced sources that contained focused information or empirical research results to be 
useful. In particular the role of focused information grew significantly and correspondingly the usefulness 
of background information and theoretical sources declined heavily. Texts on methods were useful to some 
extent at this stage too. The results show that the contributing information types were Contributing 
information in documents Background information Theories Methods Cases Facts Empirical results Focused 
information Total Pre-focusstage In = 54 ! 39 28 6 2 15 4 7 101  Focus forrn~ion stage [n = 56] 30 23 
14 9 7 - 16 99 Post-focusstage In y 38] I1 13 13 5 i8 39 99  Table 2. The share of documents containing 
contributing information types at the stages of writing the research proposal [%]. Number of I Background 
[ Theories Methods Cases Facts Empirical Focused Total documents information results information Relevant 
10 18 12 4 13 6 I I 74 Partially 31 14 6 2 1 3 17 74 relevant Total 41 32 18 6 14 9 28 148 Table 3. 
The relevance of documents and their contribution. Number of documents. systematically connected to the 
stages of writing the research proposal. In the initial stages when the students were choosing and exploring 
the topic, they most frequently found background information and various conceptualizations to be useful. 
We suppose that background information was used more at the topic selection stage for giving an overview 
of the general topic. Theoretical sources were probably utilized more at the topic exploration stage 
for comparing various conceptualizations in building a framework for the proposal. In the beginning the 
mental model of the students was vague and undifferentiated. They were ignorant of their problem and 
unable to articulate it. in detail. That is why they needed mostly background information and different 
models in order to structure and frame their research topic. In the focus formation, their representation 
of the problem became more structured. The students still considered background information and theories 
as contributory, but sources containing methodological advice and focused information grew in importance. 
By the end of the project when the mental model of the students was most structured, they were able to 
use focused information and found this type of information the most frequently contributing. The significance 
of empirical research findings also grew probably because the students were able to relate their own 
ideas to the earlier body of research. At this stage there was not such a great need for general information. 
 4.3 Relevance of the contributing information types The students were asked to assess the degree of 
relevance of the documents in their search diaries. In the following we will relate the relevance assessments 
to the contribution types of the documents. If the documents contributed to the task, their relevance 
was estimated at least as partial. Thus, the degrees of relevance have been differentiated into partially 
relevant and relevant. Because of the small size of the sample, the data from the different stages are 
combined [table 3]. Background information was judged in three out of four cases as partially relevant 
by the students. Documents containing theories and conceptualizations were estimated to be partially 
relevant or relevant almost as frequently. Sources providing information on methods and on empirical 
research results were considered relevant in two thirds of the cases. Documents containing facts were 
judged almost always as relevant. Texts providing focused information were assessed in four cases out 
of ten as being partially relevant. As the results showed [cf. tables 1 and 2] background information 
was mostly sought and used at the beginning of the process. In this phase the mental representation of 
the problem by the students lacked information on central variables and their relations. Consequently, 
the ability of the students to differentiate between relevant and irrelevant sources was low. Any documents 
representing some connection to the problem would do. This fact explains the result that the students 
judged most of the background documents as partially relevant. This result is in line with the findings 
of Spink &#38; al [18] and Vakkari &#38; Hakala [23]. The less knowledgeable the persons are of their 
task, the more documents they judge as partially relevant. It might be that sources containing methodological 
information or empirical results were assessed mostly as relevant, because they were frequently sought 
after and frequently used sources once the students had been able to form a focus. At that stage they 
had a focused mental model which enabled them to search and find more focused information. This interpretation 
cannot be applied to focused information although that was the type mostly sought towards the end of 
the process when the students were most knowledgeable: still, focused information was judged mostly as 
partially relevant. The check in the data showed that the stage of the process did not differentiate 
the relevance estimations. Thus, it is not so that focused information would have been judged as partially 
relevant at the beginning and relevant at the end of the process. Searched Type of contribution information 
types Background information Theories Methods Cases Facts Empirical I results Focused information Total 
General background information 23 13 I 2 44 Faceted background information 15 I 1 6 7 1 10 50 Specific 
[information 3 8 12 2 7 6 16 54 ! Total 41 32 18 6 14 9 28 148 Table 4. The specificity of information 
sought and contribution type. Number of documents.  4.4 Information sought and types of contribution 
Next we will analyze how the contributing information types were dependent on the specificity of the 
information searched for [table 4]. When the students looked for general background information they 
used the documents they found almost exclusively either as background information or for conceptualizing 
their task. When they searched for faceted background information, the found documents were typically 
used as background information or providing theories for research. However, facts and focused information 
were also obtained to some degree from these sources. When the students sought specific information they 
derived mostly focused or methodological knowledge from the documents they were using. From these they 
could also find useful models, facts and empirical research results. Background information was typically 
of no use. When the students searched for general background information -typically at the beginning 
of their search process -they selected and used sources, which contained two types of information, either 
background or theoretical information. When they were looking for focused background information or specific 
information they accepted as contributive more diverse types of information that were also more evenly 
distributed. 5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The findings are based on a longitudinal case study with a 
restricted number of study subjects. The results are tentative and aim to provide structure to a less 
surveyed field. The results describe types of information sought and contributing in one particular domain. 
The study subjects were students writing their research proposal for masters' theses. We can suppose 
that the results reflect to a certain extent the whole domain of academic research. The results show 
that the students' mental model of their task develops and becomes progressively more structured during 
the stages of the research proposal writing. This model systematically differentiates their search for 
information in terms of the specificity of information, the types of contribution they construe from 
the information in documents, and their assessments of the relevance of the information. At the beginning 
their representation of the task is undifferentiated. It leads them to look mostly for general background 
information. The contribution of the found documents consists typically of background information about 
the topic as well as models and conceptualizations for it. It is supposed that background information 
is used more at the topic selection stage and theories and models more at the topic exploration stage. 
Most of the texts obtained are assessed as being partially relevant, because the students are unable 
to discriminate 'clearly what is not relevant at this stage. In the focus formation stage the students 
frequently searched for faceted background information. The documents obtained typically support the 
process by providing still more background information and theories, but to a lesser extent. Texts with 
methodological advice or information about cases have gained more footing. Towards the end of the process 
the students are searching mainly for specific information. They use the documents they have obtained 
to provide them with focused information and empirical research results. The finding that the stage of 
the task performance process predicts to a great extent the type of information sought and the categories 
of contribution confirms and elaborates Kuhlthau's [11] model of the information search process. The 
categorization of the contributing information types deepens the information use aspect of the model 
especially in the latter part of the search process. This study broadens our knowledge about the usefulness 
of the documents searched for by categorizing the students' experienced contribution of the information 
they provide. Wang and Soergel [24] found that for their current research project scholars looked for 
documents that had functional value, i.e. that could contribute to their task. Topicality and the orientation 
of the documents seemed to predict best the usefulness of those documents. Vakkari &#38; Hakala [23] 
showed that the information type w.as a significant criterion in assessir~g the relevance of the documents. 
The results of our study suggest that it is possible to construct tentative categories for contributing 
information types at least for the domain we studied. It seems that these categories can be understood 
to a great extent as being facets of topicality if topicality is what the document is about as the user 
sees it with respect to the task at hand. The results also suggest, that it is not only the topicality 
as such, but these aspects of topicality that are decisive when the subjects judge the relevance and 
usefulness of the documents [cf. 23]. The results confirm that what is experienced as contributive information 
depends on the mental model of the subject, and consequently, on the phase of task performance process 
[of. 21 ]. The contributing information types occur in varying degrees at different stages of the task 
performance. At the beginning background information and various conceptualizations are sought and found 
to be useful. These two types of information accounted for over two thirds of all the cases. As the subjects 
proceed in the process the role of these types of information decreased and methodological information, 
empirical research results as well as focused information were experienced as being more useful. Thus, 
as the mental model became more structured, and the students could shape more clearly their research 
problem, they were able to search for and use more categories of information. The interaction between 
information systems and the users is most efficient when the users are able to articulate their request 
clearly, i.e. when they have developed a clear mental model of the task [5, 10, 22]. In these cases the 
users do not need as much support from the system for searching and assessing the relevance of the references 
found. More support is needed in the initial stages of the task when users are struggling with their 
anomalous state of knowledge. The results of this study suggest that searchers with an unstructured mental 
model need guidance to sources that contain mostly two types of information: general background information 
or various conceptualizations and frameworks about the topic. Indices that signal these types of information 
in document representations would be useful for users in the early stages of their task. In addition, 
links to textbooks, reviews, encyclopedias and other sources of general information would be of help 
in finding contributing information when subjects select and explore their task. The categorization of 
the contributing information was based on the experience of the subjects. It does not include the traits 
of DIEs, because the subjects did not refer to them when speaking about the contribution. Connecting 
the types of contributing information with DIEs would support systems design to provide users with tools 
for signaling useful information. An analysis of this connection is the logical further step of the study. 
6. REFERENCES [1] Barry, C. (1994), User-Defined Relevance Criteria: An Exploratory Study. JASIS 45(3): 
149-159. [2] Barry, C. (1998), Document Representations and Clues to Document Relevance. JASIS49(14): 
1293-1303. [3] Bateman, J. (1998), Changes in Relevance Criteria: A Longitudinal Study. Proceedings of 
the 61st ASIS Annual Meeting, 35: 23-32. [4] Bateman, J. (1999), Modeling the Importance of End-User 
Relevance Criteria. Proceedings of the 62st ASIS Annual Meeting, 36: 396-406. [5] Belkin, N. (1980), 
Anomalous States of Knowledge as Basis for IR. Canadian Journal of Information Science 5: 133-143. [6] 
Gavin, H. (1998), The Essence of Cognitive Psychology. London: Prentice Hall Europe. [7] Harter, S. 
(1992), Psychological Relevance and Information Scienece. JASIS 43(9): 602-615. [8] Hj0rland, B. &#38; 
Aibrechtsen, H. (1995), Toward a New Horizon in Information Retrieval: Domain Analysis. JASIS 46(6): 
400.-425. [9] lngwersen, P. (1996), Cognitive Perspectives of Information Retrieval Interaction: Elements 
of a Cognitive IR Theory. Journal of Documentation 52(1): 3- 50. [10] Kuhlthau, C. (1991), Inside the 
Search Process: Information Seeking from the Users' Perspective. JAS1S 42 (5): 361-371. [11] Kuhlthau, 
C. (1993), Seekmg Meaning. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. [12] Park, T. (1993), The Nature of Relevance in Information 
Retrieval: An Empirical Study. Library Quarterly 63(3): 318-351. [13] Patel, V. &#38; Ramoni, M. (1997), 
Cognitive Models of Directional Inference in Expert Medical Reasoning. In: [14] Feltovich, P. &#38; Ford, 
K. &#38; Hoffman, R. (Eds.), Expertise in Context: Human and Machine. Menlo Park (Calif.): AAAI Press, 
67-99. [15] Saracevic, T. (1975), Relevance: A Review of the Literature and a Framework for Thinking 
on the Notion in Information Science. JASIS 26: 321-343. [16] Schamber, L. (1994), Relevance and Information 
Behavior. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 29, (M. Williams, Ed.) Information Today, 
Medford, NJ., 3-48. [17] Schamber, L. &#38; Eisenberg, M. &#38; Nilan, M. (1990), A Re- examination of 
Relevance: Towards a Dynamic, Situational Definition. Information Processing &#38; Management 26(6): 
755-776. [18] Spink, A. &#38; Greisdorf, H. &#38; Bateman, J. (1998), From Highly Relevant to Non Relevant: 
Examining Different Regions of Relevance. Information Processing &#38; Management, 34(5): 599-622. [19] 
Suhonen, P. &#38; Rautio, P. (1981), Yhteiskuntatieteiden tietovirrat ja suomalainen tutkija (Information 
Flows in Social Sciences and the Finnish Researcher). Academy of Finland. Publications 2/1981. [20] Sutton, 
S. (1994), The Role of Attorney Mental Models of Law in Case Relevance Determinations: An Exploratory 
Analysis. JASIS 45(3): 186-200. [21] Vakkari, P. (1999), Task Complexity, Problem Structure [23] Vakkari, 
P. &#38; Hakala, N. (2000), Changes in Relevance and Information Actions. Integrating Studies on Criteria 
and Problem Stages in Task Performance. Journal Information Seeking and Retrieval. Information of Documentation, 
September 2000. Processing &#38; Management 35(6): 819-837. [24] Wang, P. &#38; Soergel, D. (1998), A 
Cognitive Model of [22] Vakkari, P. (2000), Cognition and Changes of Search Document Use during a Research 
Project. Study I. Terms and Tactics during Task Performance: A Document Selection. JASIS49(2): 115-133. 
Longitudinal Study. Proceedings of the RIAO'2000 ConJbrence. Paris: C.I.D., 894-907. [25] Wang, P. &#38; 
White, M.D. (1999), A Cognitive Model of Document Use during a Research Project. Study II. Decisions 
at the Reading and Citing Stages. JASIS 50(2):98-114.   
			