
 RESPECTING DIVERSITY: DESIGNING FROM A FEMININE PERSPECTIVE Sheila Kieran-Greenbush Columbia University 
Academic Information Systems Academic Consulting Services 612 West 115 Sfreet New York, New York 10025 
Abstract What is afeminine perspective? Should we be afraid to admit that women approach design differently 
than men? Should men feel fhreafened by fhis differenf perspective? The answer lies in respecting and 
accepfing diversify. Women look af fhe fofalify, the entire picture. They are concerned wifh fhe what 
ifs , the who could beaflected , the humanistic view They are fhe mediafors and negofiafors of the ~amily; 
they wanf everyone to succ=d. So when fhey d~ign, fhey visualize fhe whole; fhey look for the interactions; 
fhey search for the impacf and fhe impacted. The technology is important, buf it is only part of a complete 
picture which h greafer than the sum of ifs parts. This view may not be unique fo women but if is women 
who mosf offen sfafe if. The question is what happens when women functioning as technology designers 
bring thk perspective to the table. The computer~ld is a relatively young field and thus many women have 
become compufer professionals such as programmers, analysts and managers. We enjoy working wifh compufing 
and technical colleagues. However, we also find it dijjlcult fo have our perspective freafed as le~ timate 
and valid. Whaf does fhaf mean, you ask? A woman s perspective --is there such a fhing as a woman s perspective? 
Designing for wmpufing is designing for computing --there is just one way. Or is there redly just one 
way? If you p ve ihe same problem to several different developers (male) and ask them to design a solution 
m thout collaborating with each ofher,-you will be gben several difierent solutions. Each developer will 
approach the problem from their own perspective and design the solution emphasizing what they feel is 
important. Each desism will solve the problem but each will be slig~tly diflerenf. Add women fo fhe group 
of developers and repeat fhe same experiment and you will find the deigns more distinctly di@rent. The 
quesfion is nof so much why (fhough fhaf is interesting in ifs own right) buf how fo creafe an environment 
in which both perspectives, male and female, are accepfed and respected. THE CARE APPROACH Women deal 
with life using the care approach according to Dr. Carol Gilligan chair of the Psychology Department 
mature concerned with and nurturing, working and using their intuition They are the negotiators at Harvard. 
Women being fair, being supportive together, being emotive and personal experience. and mediators when 
 dealing with people and daily occurrences. If they are playing a game and there is a disagreement, they 
will first try to negotiate a settlement. If that fails, they may say let s change the rules. This is 
fair: everyone gains something and no one looses everything. Their desire to work together leads them 
to want to work collaboratively and cooperatively. They create a web of connection -­to paraphrase Carol 
Gilligan they see a web of interconnections between people... Women want to beat the center of connections; 
.. women look to affection, relationships, responsibilities and caring for a community of others. (Turkle, 
1988, p. 51) In addition, women are socialized to be less aggressive and assertive. For example, they 
are Permission to copy w thout fee all or part of this material b granted provided that the co~ es are 
not made or distributed for direcf commercial advantage, the ACM copyright no ficeand the title of fhepublicatwn 
and its dafe appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association of Computing 
Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific pmmission. Copyright 1991 
ACM 0-89791-454-61911001 OIO171...$I.5O . Looking for Answers 00000000 eooe . e ACM SIGUCCS xx 1991 
 _f7~ taught not to interrupt a conversation, which later can become a problem for them. They are in 
a meeting at work and want to interject their own point of view into the group discussion. Many women 
will try to interrupt the group conversation. At first, they will probably be tentative and when they 
are not recognized they will become more assertive. When they finally are recognized, they monopolize 
the conversation with volume and intensity, resulting in an perceived image of an overly aggressive female. 
As they have not learned how to interrupt a conversation effectively, they are often not successful, 
become frustrated and annoyed and may even loose their tempers. They are then viewed as being overly 
emotional. (This has been documented in several research studies.) Women learn to look for nuances, and 
subtleties; they are sensitive to what is said and not said, and they listen with all their senses. Thus 
mothers know what is happening in another room without being there. For women, there is no one right 
way; there are many ways all which may achieve the purpose. As mediators and nurturers, they aware that 
there maybe many alternatives and support trying those alternatives. They look at the whole picture often 
trying to determine what might happen the what ifs. Hence, mothers seem to always be anticipating potential 
problems. Wear your raincoat. It s going to rain. Women often draw upon their persoml experience and 
act intuitively. Some researchers have suggested that wornan develop understanding by learning the details 
first and then proceeding to develop the conceptual knowledge. Thus subjects such as science and mathematics 
which stress form and distancing from the object of study are not as accessible to women. Women need 
to be connected to what they study, to draw upon their personal experience, and to view the total picture. 
Their needs can beat odds with the emphasis for objectivity and form of science, mathematics and computing. 
  THE JUSTICE APPROACH Men grow up with a different perspective. Dr. Gilligan has labeled their approach 
the justice approach. Men are concerned with justice, following the rules, competition, autonomy, objectivity, 
and control. Men are socialized to take control, to not show emotion, and to be competitive. They see 
the world as organized hierarchically each person in their place and autonomous. They see control as 
the means to protect themselves and to gain what they desire. The encouragement for men to engage in 
sports teaches them to compete against other. Many of those sports are aggressive football, soccer, 
wrestling --stressing, through example, competing aggressively to win. The organization of teams encourages 
men to see the importance of being the best, being at the top (the hierarchical construction of group) 
 the team captain is often the best player. Men are encouraged and mentored to follow the lead of those 
men who are successful copy the best players as they have the right way to do it. Men are encouraged 
to be risk takers; they are seen positively for taking risks and negatively if they shy away from taking 
risks. Thus boys are more likely to speak up in class. This gains them notice and stature even though 
they risk being wrong. From a certain age on, men are told not to show emotions ­-don t cry if you are 
hurt, only sissies cry. Men are socialized to be objective and unemotional. Men are not expected to become 
involved with people but to be involved with things. The emphasis for men upon rules and organization, 
especially hierarchies, leads them to see the world as compartmentalized, to value specialization. The 
emphasis of the sciences and mathematics on objectivity and stress upon form (following the rules) is 
consistent with their view of life.  VIEW OF COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY Accepting that men and women approach 
life from different perspectives, then it follows (to be logical) that they view technology, in particular 
computing, differently. Some research on this subject has only begun and most has been related to education, 
especially in the K-12 level. In a paper for American Educational Research Association, Dr. Honey (1991) 
and her colleagues wrote: On the whole, women saw technological instruments as people connectors, communication, 
and collaboration devices. Their technological fantasies were often embedded in human relationships and 
they served to integrate their public and private lives. . . . The men, in contrast, tended to envision 
technology as extenswns of their power over the physical universe. Their fantasies were often about absolute 
control, tremendous speed and unlimited knowledge. ..  Looking for Answers 172 ACM SICUCCSXIX1991 
 . .. . The female view of technology as tool to enhance human interactions and communications develops 
out of their view and approach to life. The male view of technology as a mean of control and power grows 
out their approach to life. The different view and involvement with technology is also influenced by 
the social expectations of boys and girls. Girls are not expected or encouraged to know or be knowledgeable 
about technology. While boys are expected and encouraged to learn how things work, to play with technology 
and to understand it. This set of expectations inhibits and limits girls from actively being developers, 
designers and controllers of technology. This has been confirmed by a large body of research (Berner, 
1984; Carter &#38;Kirkup, 1990; Cockbum, 1988; Kramarae, 1988) This view also affects males. When these 
expectations are communicated, either overtly or subtly, by authority figures such as teachers, men come 
to view women negatively--not capable with technology. In turn then, when adult men and women work together 
on technology projects, the men have difficulty perceiving women as capable, competent peers. Thus the 
group cannot function as colleagues providing support, working collaboratively and respecting the ideas 
of the other members. If women are viewed negatively, then their ideas, their contributions are viewed 
negatively. The affect of the same communication on women is to make them timid about technology they 
will not be involved. Also, as women are socialized to be non-risk takers, they will not take the risk 
of loosing the connection to others (particularly women) by showing interest in technology. Thus fewer 
girls and thus women enter the fields relating to technology such as computing. Everyone looses in this 
model men and women. These are broad brushstroke pictures of the approaches of men and women. Not every 
manor every woman exhibits all these characteristics. But if you think about yourself and others you 
know of the opposite gender you will see that they do show many of these traits. Understanding these 
different perspectives is the first step to accepting them. Neither perspective is better than the other; 
they are both valid and require respect. Systems designed with both the male and female perspective are 
more comprehensive, accessible and interesting. Looking for Answers ****e* 00*0 .**.  AN ILLUSTRATION 
 I can best illustrate the differences by drawing upon a personal experience (a female trait). I had 
occasion to review the design of an interface for campus-wide information system. The system s engine 
would be on the central Unix host which is accessible over the network or via terminal emulation. The 
public equipment is non-graphics terminal connected asynchronously and over the network from the Mats 
and Next s in the student labs. The system can also be accessed from personal systems which could be 
anything from a terminal to a workstation using either communication connectivity method. My main concerns 
were . The interface screen should be same for all methods of access. This mean that the design could 
not take advantage of graphics as many of the users would not have systems which supported graphics. 
 The system has to be self-documenting. The users should not have to have documentation to use it.  
The system needed to allow the user to access the information in the as many ways as possible without 
overloading the network or system  o The engine for the system would still operate on the Unix host. 
 The users should have the sense that they were in constant contact with this system. This meant that 
there should be little response delay-time and where there had to be a delay, there would be a screen 
informing the user. The systems had to be easily maintainable and modifiable. As new feature and services 
would constantly be added, the design had to modularized. As the searching paradigm was in place, there 
was no consideration of changing this. Thus the design review was limited to the user interface only. 
 Working with a male colleague, we decided first to pilot test the present interface. Based upon the 
results, we would then decide what need to be done. I suggested we test with some average users and interview 
the users afterward to illicit their reactions. My colleague did not feel using outside tester was necessary. 
He felt that we could do the testing ourselves. As our users based spanned the spectrum of hackers to 
computer neophytes, I felt we had to gather reactions from all parts of the o. ACM SIGUCCS XIX 1991 
 173 spectrum, particularly from the computer phobic population. If we limited the testing to only our 
technical colleagues, I felt, we would not encounter the same problems as our general users as we use 
computers all the time. We compromised by having members of the staff test it. The staff members had 
not used the system and ranged in experience from using an application to some development work, They 
found that the existing system confusing; the users did not know what they were to do. For examples, 
on the selection screen, one tester found: Undefined (or shall I say non-intuitive) terms: what is an 
Event Type; what does Choose mean (typing? clicking? touching?) Conflicting information: I see Event 
Types and then I see Choose Type. Are these different? Actually, they are not. This clouds the user s 
choices and leads to ambiguity in decision making. Everything is shoved to the bottom of the screen. 
The placement of the options suggests that the Event Type is the most important selection. I don t think 
that is the case. The other choices are down played on the screen, but they hold equal importance in 
my mind. Why is Start Search appear as a button and the Choose Date, bc~~on, and Type choices not? By 
choosing on them, don t they result in a function being performed? Generally, the testers, who were male 
and female, found the system useful but not easy to use. They were not sure what they should do next 
or in what order. We both agreed that the user interface needed to be made simpler and clearer more 
intuitive. (In retrospect, I suspect we both had different ideas about what intuitive meant.) It was 
in the next step of the design process that gender differences created problems. I set out to determine 
what were all the types of questions a user might ask (the what ifs ). When I suggested this, my colleague 
looked at me in dismay -- What do you mean? You re making too much of this. I explained that I was trying 
to think as the user might --be in their shoes. (The feminine trait of being connected to the subject.) 
Finally, we agreed that I would try to outline the different ways the information might be searched and 
he would try to sketch out some ideas for simplifying the screens. So I began to ask the types of questions 
I thought I might want to know. For example, I m a student and I want to go to an event this coming Friday 
 174. ACM SKZJCCSXIX1991 Oe*ee***@OeeO night. Question: What is happening on Friday night this week? 
Example 2 I would like to listen to some music at lunchtime on the main campus. Question What musical 
events are held on the main campus between 12 and 2 pm? Example 3 I will be at the university every Thursday 
afternoon, so let s see if there are event I might want to attend. Question want to know all the events 
every Thursday evening during the semester? Example 4: I work on the uptown campus and am interested 
in European history. I wonder if there are any lecture I might like to attend. Question: I want to know 
what lecture are being given on the uptown campus on European history? Example 5: For one of my classes, 
I have to review an art event each week. Question: What art events are happening during this semester 
and where? When we met to discuss our individual efforts, we decided first to develop an outline for 
the screens. We agreed that the number of screens the user had to go through was not a critical issue. 
If the user felt they were making progress with each screen, they would not be annoyed by having to go 
through so many screens. We also felt that the user should be actively involved in the process by answering 
a question on each screen. The basic information which had to be combined was: date, event, locations 
and duration (semester, day, week). Our screen outline consisted of 12 basics screens which could be 
used in different combinations. There were selection screens for each category, display screens for the 
information and a please-wait-for-processing screen. During this process, there was little contention 
or difference of opinion. We were both approaching the topic from the same general perspective. We then 
proceeded to order the screen to match the various categories of questions I had developed. For each 
type of question, we would test the order of the screening by using the paper copies as a storyboard. 
We were trying to see if all my questions could be answered. Initially, my colleague was reluctant to 
join in the process. He could not understand my instance that we try every possible path as he could 
not see the value to the effort. I would not give up this testing and the atmosphere of cooperation seemed 
to deteriorate. When we walked through the first question, I did all the work and asked all the questions. 
On the second question, he began to work with me. We found at this point that we needed to consider navigation 
aspects such wanting to restart. By the third iteration, he and I were actively engaged in 00 . Looking 
for Answers the process and having a good time. We were laughing and even doing some role playing to 
make it more fun. I was glad to see the change and the improvement in our working relationship. I had 
been annoyed at his resistance to what I was doing. I felt that he did not value my efforts. He was annoyed 
that I had insisted we go through this process. His reluctance to engage in the process and my annoyance 
made working together difficult for a time. Had we each been aware of the other s needs and perspectives, 
the difficult period might not have occurred or at least been shorter and less divisive. This is but 
one example. If you think about your own work experiences in a mixed gender environment, you can probably 
remember other instances where there has been contention for what seem trivial reasons. Also, the example 
here relates to the design process not the end product. Is there an identifiable impact on the end product 
is an open question? As the research continues, there may be some answers. However, as women often feel 
intimidated and will not stand their ground, their influence on the design process and the end product 
is limited. I would propose that a review of present systems would show that the design teams were male 
dominated. This does not mean that the products are not good but perhaps they could have been richer 
had the environment been more supportive of diversity. This does not mean that the design team did not 
work as a team but perhaps the experience could have been more enriching had the environment been more 
supportive of diversity. What I have described are generalizations about women and men. Writing as a 
women, I found it hard to understand the male perspective for it is at odds with my approach to living. 
I have tried to be fair and I hope I have succeeded. The writing of this paper has made me aware of my 
own bigotry. Hopefully, I can maintain that awareness. Honey, M.,Moeller, B., Brunner, C., Bennett, D., 
Clements, P., Hawkins, J. (1991). Girls and Design Exploring the Questions of Technological Imagination. 
Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association. Turkle, Sherry (1988). Computatioml 
reticence why women fear the intimate machine. Cheris Kramarae (cd.) Technology and Women s Voices: Keeping 
in Touch. New York, NY: Routledge &#38; Kegan Paul. (29-40). Looking@ Answers  *9***** 00000 ACM 
SIGUCCS XIX 1991 175  
			