
 Seeking Activity: On the Trail of Users in Open and Community Source Frameworks Owen G. McGrath Educational 
Technology Services U.C. Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720 omcgrath@berkeley.edu ABSTRACT Usage data captured 
and logged by computers has long been an essential source of information for software developers, support 
services personnel, usability designers, and learning researchers [1,2]. Whether from mainframes, file 
servers, network devices, or workstations, the user event data logged in its many forms has served as 
an essential source of information for those who need to improve software, analyze problems, monitor 
security, track workflow, report on resource usage, evaluate learning activities etc. With today s generation 
of open and community source web­based frameworks, however, new challenges arise as to how, where, and 
when user activity gets captured and analyzed. These frameworks flexibility in allowing easy integration 
of different applications, presentation technologies, middleware, and data sources has side effects on 
usage data: fragmented logs in a wide range of formats often bestrewn across many locations This paper 
focuses on common issues faced especially by academic computing support personnel who need to gather 
and analyze user activity information within heterogeneous, distributed open source web frameworks like 
Sakai and uPortal. As described in this paper, these kinds of challenges can be met by drawing upon techniques 
for coordinated distributed event monitoring along with some basic data mining and data visualization 
approaches. In particular, this paper describes a work-in-progress to develop an approach towards building 
a distributed capture and analysis systems for a large production deployment of the Sakai Collaboration 
and Learning Environment in order to meet a wide range of tracking, monitoring, and reporting log analysis 
in one university setting. Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.1 [Management of Computing and Information 
Systems]: Project and People Management systems analysis and design. General Terms Management, Human 
Factors. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7 10, 2007, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010 
$5.00.  Keywords Usage patterns, data mining, data visualization, log analytics, open and community 
source, higher education. 1. INTRODUCTION For decades, automatically generated logs have been a vital 
source of information within academic computing. From timeshare minicomputers to lab-based workstations, 
logs have provided data at the heart of acquisition, recharge, licensing, security, usability, and capacity 
planning processes [3]. In the Internet era, web log data becomes an even more essential source of information 
for these same reasons together with the added urgency of supporting round-the-clock, remote access [4]. 
Tracking users interactions with course material, assessment tools, and on-line communications environments 
is crucial. Tools for making sense of usage within these system depend heavily on the underlying web 
technology. Monitoring features available to administrators and instructors in commercial products like 
BlackBoard s course management systems, for instance, rely extensively on the front-facing web server 
logs as a record of the student s access at the course site, tool, document, and assignment levels. Adding 
a new wrinkle to the usage analysis problem is the trend within higher education towards creating community 
source application frameworks. While open source software in general has a long and fascinating relationship 
with higher education, the more recent community source movement involves open source software being 
built by and for higher education institutions [5]. Academic institutions are increasingly involved in 
collaborative efforts to develop open source alternatives to commercial applications such as repositories, 
portals, e-portfolios, and learning management systems [6]. This shift in the locus of software development 
away from commercial companies and into loosely organized consortia of higher education institutions, 
however, ends up with noticeably different processes [7]. Behind open and community source projects such 
as Sakai, uPortal, and the OSP e-Portfolio are evolving organizations still in experimenting with management 
structures that might allow them to coordinate distributed software development better. Many of the same 
simplicity principles simple services, loose­coupling, lightweight data standards that make these community 
source possible present challenges to building out full-featured web analytic tools customarily found 
in commercial systems. In particular, the lightweight distributed design can make it more difficult to 
develop elaborate features in areas such as user event logging and analysis. In order to facilitate the 
development of new tools by a loose-knit community of developers, these consortia aim at minimal requirements 
and overhead for applications to plug into the framework. Attempts at building Sakai tools to analyze 
and display usage information have not met with much success. In contrast, commercial course management 
and portal vendors like BlackBoard tend to enjoy full control over a monolithic code base. They are able 
to build out richer log analysis functionality for monitoring user s access to tools and content by using 
server­based plug-ins, event monitoring modules, and hidden reporting scripts on page content. Achieving 
this level of functionality requires a great deal of control over the framework and tool design as well 
as over the content systems that get accessed . The challenges to the log analysis process as described 
in this paper point to issues that are faced specifically in projects like Sakai where open source development 
of framework and tools is widely dispersed at institutions with varied goals. In part, any successful 
log analysis process in the Sakai context must resort to harvesting and processing usage outside of Sakai 
itself. Collecting, transforming, and analyzing disparate log information through data mining and visualization 
processes opens up the possibility for finding patterns, clusters, associations and commonalities. When 
it works, this approach can result in surprising insights about near and long-term usage patterns, thereby 
giving support personnel, usability researchers, instructional designers, and many other decision makers 
a handle on what is really going on in their local institution s portal or learning management system. 
 2. PROBLEM BACKGROUND 2.1 Analysis of Web User Patterns Many of the approaches put forward in the contemporary 
literature of web session analysis focus on how to develop comprehensive profiles of e-commerce customers 
[8]. Typically, what gets analyzed are the so called clickstream trails left behind by people visiting, 
browsing, and/or shopping in an on-line shopping website. These visitors navigational patterns are then 
pored over extensively in order to classify them based on the activities, roles, and timing involved. 
Behaviors are organized into groupings that might shed light on how to improve a site s business activity. 
As a result, site visitors especially those who are identified as repeat customers might be presented 
with a specially tailored content that includes an opportunity to consider buying suggested items. Customers 
behavior patterns can also lead to further iterative refinement of the overall site structure when analysis 
reveals, for instance, that abandoned shopping cart patterns are due to navigational complexity. In short, 
the e­commerce log analysis process involves fairly calculated, uni­dimensional focus on site visitors 
in the shopping context where the proposed system will eventually improve sales. Like a shopkeeper who 
quietly follows customers through the aisles in order to build up an understanding of their buying practices, 
the log analyst seeks ways to turn visitors into shoppers and repeat customers into spendthrifts. Thanks 
to statistical analysis and machine learning heuristics, key profiles and associations discovered in 
the behavior patterns across thousands of web site visits results in a detailed specification of rules 
and features needed in order to capture more business. Finally, a major outcome of the process is that 
the profiles and patterns can be used to create customized user experiences shopping suggestions and 
referrals based on a customer s profile. 2.2 Higher Education Processes On-Line While e-commerce oriented 
approaches still dominate, some recent entries in the user web analytics field reflect growing interest 
in understanding the activities carried out on-line in education-related web applications [6]. As more 
teaching, research, administrative processes are moved on-line, there arise both needs and opportunities 
for tracking, analyzing, evaluating and improving these on-line extensions of the institution. Important 
to making these on-line environments work is an increasing demand on institutions to document educational 
outcomes. Even as the distance between students faculty, and administrators increases on-line, demands 
for more detailed and rigorous accounting of teaching activities, curricular progress, and learning outcomes 
are increasing. Before the advent of large cross-institutional open source projects, e-learning tracking 
and reporting functionality was typically provided by software vendors. An educational technology group 
at a college or university could confine its efforts to meeting the mandates and needs of the local institution 
by using the reporting features of the commercial systems. For open source applications, questions arise 
as to how this information should be captured and managed, how to ensure that these issues are ever included 
in the development process, or how to address these needs in other ways (e.g., data mining) when they 
re not. 2.3 Higher Education Data Mining Trends Educational data mining encompasses a wide range of 
research methodologies and approaches [9]. A literature review of the field is beyond the scope of this 
short paper, but a fair generalization can be made that much of the inquiry and practical wisdom developed 
center on applying statistical techniques to large data sets, typically those pulled together from disparate 
sources. Data mining processes in a higher education setting have served as the basis for discovering 
categories and characteristics in student populations [10]. Useful for institutional planning, monitoring 
and decision making, data mining analyses can yield insights at different levels of granularity, such 
as identifying predictors for graduation rates, course articulation problems within a particular major, 
or individual students who might benefit from special forms of or tutoring [11]. In the specific context 
on-line learning environments, a data mining project might examine clusters of similarities across thousands 
of on-line sessions to reveal useful characteristic aspects of students interaction with content [12]. 
These analyses can identify common conceptual error sequences that can inform pedagogical questions, 
such as whether subgroups of students share similar difficulties, or how the content and sequencing might 
be re-ordered. By pointing to needed revisions to the instructional design of the on-line course, these 
analyses can lead to improved and more tailored educational presentations [13]. Obviously, for the approaches 
to succeed, the issue of what gets logged and what tools are available to analyze those logs becomes 
crucial. Usage logs are at center stage throughout the data mining process.  3. CASE STUDY: SAKAI USER 
SESSIONS 3.1 Log Shortcomings in Open Source Unlike the commercial educational systems described earlier, 
the current generation of community source collaboration environments developed in the past few year 
tend to lack full­featured usage tracking tools. Consortia of higher education institutions building 
open source software with and for each other face unique organizational and project management issues. 
A large cross-institutional project such as the JA-SIG uPortal, for instance, consists of scores of institutions 
around the world using and contributing to a shared code base. Implementations for the uPortal software 
range from information portals for an entire campus to tailored learning environments for specialized 
populations of learners [14]. To facilitate distributed development, the uPortal framework design places 
few requirements on developers who might want to create or integrate a new tool. By minimizing the overhead 
of portlet creation and re­writes, however, the uPortal framework offers very little out-of­the-box functionality 
in the area of usage reporting. Figure 1. A typical Sakai course site. 3.2 Sakai CLE s Usage Data Sources 
A similar situation exists in the Sakai Project. Whether configured for use as a course management system 
or more generic collaboration environment, the Sakai platform offers a basic set of tools along with 
the capacity to easily add or adapt new tools. The code base can be downloaded by anyone anywhere for 
free. And many pre-existing web applications have been adapted to work in a loosely-coupled fashion. 
Yet, while the Sakai end-user sees a harmonious arrangement of tools that interoperate and share a common 
interface style, the behind-the-scenes view of Sakai in operation reveals a piecemeal and heterogeneous 
affair. In particular, responsibility for logging information about users interaction with Sakai is largely 
left up to individual tool developers. Moreover, the actual logging of this data is spread across several 
locations in a typical production installation. Worst of all, Sakai like uPortal provides no core tools 
for analyzing the data. Each user in Sakai is assigned to membership in system-wide roles (e.g., instructor, 
teaching assistant, student) and every time they log in, they see a personal workspace and collection 
of course sites to which they belong. Moving within a particular course site, the user has access to 
content and tools (e.g., calendar, group discussion, email archive, chat, quizzing, and a gradebook). 
After logging into the Sakai framework and using tools and accessing content, the user eventually logs 
out. But while the user might experience a fairly seamless experience, the Sakai code and underlying 
technologies record these sessions in a somewhat haphazard way. In a typical production installation, 
for instance, the user s contact and interactions are logged in a web server s various logs, a Tomcat 
server log, and many tables of a relational database. 3.3 Preparing &#38; Visualizing Session Data Because 
Sakai provides no core tools for collecting and analyzing such information, copies of the usage data 
must be gathered and studied externally in order to yield even the simplest basic usage information. 
On the bright side, the effort required in aggregating and preparing log data for external analysis can 
have a double payoff, as this work is almost always a requirement of any data mining process as well 
[15]. While basic reports and summary statistics can be generated from a few sources, a more complete 
picture requires aggregating and preprocessing the data. At some Sakai schools, this step involves harvesting 
the various data sources and bringing them together in a data warehouse. Here the preparation involves 
resolving not just variations between file formats but more fundamental differences in information models. 
Merging semi-structured common log format files, status messages generated by Java classes, and structured 
relational data captured in a SQL database requires transformations such as de-normalization, dimensionality 
reduction, and variable re-coding. At this stage differences in logging approaches across Sakai tools 
also becomes painfully obvious. Not all tools even log activity in the database, and among those that 
do so, discretion over defining what qualifies as an event and when to log it has been left to the developer. 
Nevertheless, once the various data sources are merged into large flat files of instances and attributes, 
an exploratory phase can help chart a course for data mining techniques, such as clustering, classification, 
and association approaches. At this early stage, summary statistics and visualizations of the data also 
serve as first steps towards getting to know the data. Furthermore, the sheer size of the user activity 
data generated by a Sakai production system can easily outstrip the capacity of basic spreadsheet capabilities. 
For a university setting with 25,000 students accessing material in any of 1,500 course sites, the various 
user activity data captured can easily grow in excess of a 200 megabytes per day. In a typical spreadsheet 
application, that volume of data does not lend itself well to looking at long term trends across semesters. 
In the case of Sakai user session data, for instance, questions that arise from finding initial connections 
within and across the dataset might point to access time and content location patterns as starting points. 
Visualizing the data in an exploratory fashion is a first step towards organizing prioritizing questions 
to pose. In the Sakai usage case study of this paper, all the summary statistics, exploration, and data 
mining are carried out in an open source data mining system called the WEKA Toolkit [16]. Figure 1. 
WEKA Scatter plot matrix of session data. The approach of using a data visualization system for exploring 
user activity allows a data mining analyst to get an overview of the number of ranges for samples, how 
many samples fall within those ranges, outlier residence, and groupings within class/attribute pairs. 
A scatter plot matrix display can be used to provide a quick check for possible relationships among variables. 
Sizing and coloring controls make it is also possible to drill down into any of the plots for further 
analysis. 3.4 Looking at Session Clusters In the area of clustering algorithms, the WEKA Toolkit provides 
several techniques (including k-means, EM and BIRCH) that work particularly well with huge multi-dimensional 
data sets. Clustering algorithms look for inherent similarities in data and create collections of groupings 
on large data sets. Clustering analysis makes a good first step in data mining, as the various techniques 
available can be tuned across a range of variables in processing huge datasets [17]. Selecting a semesters 
worth of session instance data from the flat file as input to the clustering algorithm, one can choose 
a seed value for number of clusters desired or use the default. Results for a K-means clustering algorithm 
on 5 clusters deliver five sets of statistics covering mean session time and the percentage assignments. 
After inspecting the results, one might re-run the clustering with varied initial cluster seeds and with 
subsets of the variables involved. In the case, of for evaluating participants session durations, three 
main clusters emerge around groupings that reveal quick visits (less than 3 minutes), medium visits ( 
averaging 8 minutes), and extended visits (averaging 21 minutes). The main goal of this clustering analysis 
phase is simply to generate initial groupings from the usage data. For convenience sake, these initial 
three clusters are referred to here as humming bird , blue bird , and pelican as mnemonic nicknames for 
short, medium, and long duration sessions. The clustering approach to analyzing user session data provides 
a quick gauge for measuring users session duration patterns among of the hundreds of thousands of sessions 
in a semester. After the exploratory phase, this rough partitioning can then used to pose more sophisticated 
and interesting questions such as whether particular session types are more prevalent in particular course 
sites and what sort of content and tools characterize the different course site clusters. One might also 
wonder about patterns within sessions, such as common activity sequences. 3.5 Session Event Associations 
As an aid in answering such questions, the WEKA Toolkit provides functions for applying association rules 
as a method of revealing co-occurrence relations among and across item sets. The goal of an association 
analysis is to discover affinity patterns in sequences of data, i.e., things that tend to go together. 
Unlike in clustering where items are grouped based on their inherent similarity, an association rule 
discovery can often find surprising pairings of sequences within large data sets. Sometimes referred 
to as market basket analysis, association analysis can give results that resemble correlations. In the 
case of Sakai usage data, participants activities, as revealed by event messages logged during each session, 
can be mined for associations. Figure 1. WEKA apriori association output and options. Looking at cross-classified 
counts of tool activity events in the pelican cluster, for example, reveals cases where the session activities 
that co-occur are unsurprising: content reads go together with content reads, login events go together 
with announcement reads. But the analysis also reveals some less obvious co­occurrences: wiki editing 
events often co-occur with discussion forum read events within sessions. Since the significance of any 
association is very easy to overstate, their true usefulness here comes into play mainly when they are 
in exploratory fashion. Sakai tool activity associations in their own right mean very little until combined 
with some further empirical investigation of, say, the course sites in which they occur. For example, 
a major challenge to cultivating institutional best practices for using a system like Sakai is knowing 
how instructor are using it in the first place. With hundreds of instructors, thousands of sites, and 
tens of thousands of students, it can be very difficult to know how tools are actually being taken up 
and used. The clusters and associations offered up through WEKA Toolkit data mining essentially become 
a launch pad for collecting, analyzing, and inquiring further about how features and content are being 
accessed. With this information as a starting point for understanding usage of the system, more traditional 
techniques direct observation, polls, interviews can be pursued. Though not to be relied upon solely 
for documenting activity, the data mining results can offer quick and focused access to the usage patterns 
that, if confirmed, ultimately help inform planning and support decisions. 3.6 Mining &#38; Visualization 
Opportunities While the main goals of clustering and association mining analyses here is to discover 
inherent groupings and co-occurrence within across the large usage data sets with many variables, the 
particular usage data captured in Sakai s various distributed logs make other data mining and data visualization 
approaches very attractive as well. Hierarchical clustering techniques produce not simply distinct groupings 
but also multiple levels of sub­groupings. The technique has been applied in other web data mining contexts 
to analyze user pathways through content [18, 19]. Bayesian analysis has often been used on learning 
management system usage data as means of classifying individuals who requiring assessment support by 
tutors [20]. Finally, another potential use of usage data mining would be for identifying usability issues 
in Sakai that need to be addressed [21]. Usability remains a major challenge for community source projects 
in general, so the ability to discover and prioritize common navigational pitfalls is important. Even 
without data mining information, many usability-related feature requests are already initiated by comments 
made by instructors to Sakai member institution s support personnel. If, in turn, these many requests 
could be validated and analyzed against data mining results, solutions and priorities might be easier 
to identify. While the WEKA Toolkit mining algorithms described above provide ways to explore huge system 
usage data sets, its graphical capabilities are limited to traditional approaches to numerical display. 
Beyond focused presentations of data subsets, the visualization capabilities in WEKA as well as many 
spreadsheet and statistical packages reveals basic obstacles encountered in presenting huge amounts of 
data on a screen. The dimensionality ­-- with attributes ranging across users, sites, activity types, 
content structure, time cycles etc. -- of the data usually outstrip the display capabilities of most 
traditional graphical coordinate systems. Problems of over-plotting and dimensional clutter are particularly 
common in time-based data sets like those in this project. In recent years, innovative efforts to overcome 
these limitations have spawned visualization techniques such as the parallel coordinate plot type found 
in Mondrian [22]. Rather than trying to represent multiple dimensions by using orthogonal axes, the parallel 
coordinate plot creates equal sized segments with the axes as uniformly spaced vertical lines. These 
plots are commonly used in visualizations for stock performance and commodity pricing trends. For visualizing 
the Sakai system s complex usage patterns, it is possible to plot the cluster results from WEKA so that 
associations among variables show up very obviously. Highlighting particular temporal relations and historical 
changes for clusters, such as mean value across several semesters is possible as well. Figure 2. Mondrian 
parallel coordinate plot of session data. Other visualization capabilities being explored by data mining 
projects within the Sakai community involve giving instructors views onto students resource access patterns 
via innovative Mosaic plots.  4. CONCULSION This paper has been intended mainly as an overview of how 
efforts to address the particular usage reporting needs of one Sakai production system are being by using 
basic techniques and tools of exploratory data mining and visualization. Even with these mining techniques 
in hand, gathering and comprehending usage activity through log analysis remains a very time consuming 
challenge. So far, the combination of data visualization tools and log analysis processes described has 
enabled a basic set of exploratory approaches to pattern discovery in the enormous amounts of data involved. 
For this project, the next arena of analysis to be explored is in exploiting other techniques for visualization, 
such as data animations. By visualizing user activity represented many dimensions, trends and patterns 
might be easily discernable and their contexts better understood. This process would, of course, still 
involve careful coordination and empirical investigation. If successful, the results can lead towards 
a repeatable process that truly leverages the potential and promise of data mining and visualization. 
Singly or together data mining and visualization offer potential benefits for assisting those in higher 
education who are responsible for implementing and deploying on-line environments in support of teaching 
and learning. For internet-based services in higher education to keep up with the increasingly high standards 
that institutions place on them, the analytical tools and processes we employ will need ever greater 
power and flexibility. With a little creativity and resourcefulness, we ourselves can learn to exploit 
new and freely available innovative technologies to meet the challenges. 5. REFERENCES [1] Ivory, M.Y., 
and Hearst, M.A. The State of the Art in Automating Usability Evaluation of User Interfaces , ACM Computing 
Surveys, 33(4): 470-516, 2001. [2] Adam, S. K. and Simpson, W. F. 2003. Strategies for managing the execution 
of unauthorized programs on a university computer network. J. Comput. Small Coll. 19, 2 (Dec. 2003), 
145-154. [3] Borenstein, N. S. 1996. CMU s Andrew project: a retrospective. Commun. ACM 39, 12es (Dec. 
1996), 298. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/272682.272717 [4] Smith, J. 2005. LabDisplay: bringing computer 
lab management into the new millennium. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM SIGUCCS Conference on User 
Services (Monterey, CA, USA, November 06 - 09, 2005). SIGUCCS 05. ACM Press, New York, NY, 343-348. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1099435.1099513 [5] Wheeler, B.C. Open Source 2007: How Did This Happen? Educause 
Review. 39(4), 12-27. [6] Olsen, Florence. Sharing the Code: More colleges and universities see open-source 
software as an alternative to commercial products , The Chronicle of Higher Education: Information Technology, 
August, 2003. [7] McGrath, O. G. 2006. Balancing act: community and local requirements in an open source 
development process. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM SIGUCCS Conference on User Services (Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada, November 05 -08, 2006). SIGUCCS 06. ACM Press, New York, NY, 240-244. DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1181216.1181270 
[8] Sen, A., Dacin, P. A., and Pattichis, C. 2006. Current trends in web data analysis. Commun. ACM 49, 
11 (Nov. 2006), 85­ 91. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1167838.1167842 [9] Romero, C. and Ventura, S. 
2007. Educational data mining: A survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Syst. Appl. 33, 1 (Jul. 2007), 135-146. 
DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2006.04.005 [10] Chen, C., Hsieh, Y., and Hsu, S. 2007. Mining 
learner profile utilizing association rule for web-based learning diagnosis. Expert Syst. Appl. 33,1 
(Jul. 2007), 6-22. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2006.04.025 [11] Daradoumis, T., Martínez-Monés, 
A., and Xhafa, F. 2006. A layered framework for evaluating on-line collaborative learning interactions. 
Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 64, 7 (Jul. 2006), 622-635. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.02.001 
[12] Berendt, B. and Spiliopoulou, M. 2000. Analysis of navigation behaviour in web sites integrating 
multiple information systems. The VLDB Journal 9, 1 (Mar. 2000), 56-75. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s007780050083 
[13] Paganelli, L. and Paternò, F. 2002. Intelligent analysis of user interactions with web applications. 
In Proceedings of the 7th international Conference on intelligent User interfaces (San Francisco, California, 
USA, January 13 - 16, 2002). IUI 02. ACM Press, New York, NY, 111-118. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/502716.502735 
[14] McGrath, O. G. 2002. Building an instructional portal: channeling the writing lab. In Proceedings 
of the 30th Annual ACM SIGUCCS Conference on User Services (Providence, Rhode Island, USA, November 20 
- 23, 2002). SIGUCCS 02. ACM Press, New York, NY, 199-203. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/588646.588693 
[15] Larose, D.T. 2006 Data Mining Methods and Models. Wiley-Interscience. Hoboken, NJ. [16] Ian H. Witten 
, Eibe Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Second Edition (Morgan Kaufmann 
Series in Data Management Systems), Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, 2005. [17] Markov, 
Z. and Larose, D. T. 2007 Data Mining the Web: Uncovering Patterns in Web Content, Structure, and Usage. 
Wiley-Interscience. Hoboken, NJ. [18] Nurmela, K., Lehtinen, E., and Palonen, T. 1999. Evaluating CSCL 
log files by social network analysis. In Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Computer Support For Collaborative 
Learning (Palo Alto, California, December 12 - 15, 1999). C. M. Hoadley and J. Roschelle, Eds. Computer 
Support for Collaborative Learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences, 54. [19] Wang, W. 
and Zaïane, O. R. 2002. Clustering Web Sessions by Sequence Alignment. In Proceedings of the 13th international 
Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (September 02 - 06, 2002). DEXA. IEEE Computer Society, 
Washington, DC, 394-398. [20] E. Gaudioso and L. Talavera (2006). Data mining to suport tutoring in virtual 
learning communities: Experiences and challenges. In Data mining in e-learning, Advances in Management 
Information Series, vol. 4. C. Romero and S. Ventura, eds., p. 207-226, WitPress. [21] Amelung, C. (to 
be published December 2007). Using Social Context and E-Learner Identity as a Framework for an E-Learning 
Notification System. International Journal on E-Learning. [22] M. Theus. Interactive Data Visualization 
using Mondrian. Journal of Statistical Software, 7(11), 2002.  
			