
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. SIMULATION BASED CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT LEARNING SYSTEM Anil Sawhney André Mund 2007 
Kohrman Hall Construction Engineering and Management Western Michigan University Kalamazoo, Michigan 
49008-5064, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT Incorporation into construction engineering and management curricula of 
tasks that improve the abilities of students to manage the complex dynamics, pressures, and demands of 
construction sites is becoming critical to meet the demands of the construction industry. These goals 
are, however, difficult to incorporate using traditional educational tools. This paper reviews the role, 
in construction engineering and management education, of computing and information technology in general 
and of simulation in particular. The paper provides an overview of a Simulation Based Interactive Construction 
Management Learning System currently being developed at Western Michigan University (WMU) as part of 
a three-year project funded by the National Science Foundation and Western Michigan University. INTRODUCTION 
AND BACKGROUND Preparing students for the challenges of managing large construction projects is an important 
responsibility and a difficult task (Tatum 1987). The instruction methods used in majority of construction 
engineering and management curricula rely, for the most part, on traditional methods such as exposing 
students to applied science courses. These traditional teaching methods, however, are often not fully 
capable of providing students with all the skills necessary to solve the real world problems encountered 
in construction (AbouRizk and Sawhney 1994) or conveying complex engineering knowledge effectively. Also, 
curricula often convey knowledge in fragments in a series of courses (Fruchter 1996 and Fruchter 1997). 
Ideally, visits to construction sites or site training would constantly complement the more conventional 
classroom instructional tools. However, there are various complicating issues that make it impossible 
to rely on the sites. Foremost, the instructor cannot control the availability of a project at the necessary 
stage of completion. Also, visits of larger groups to construction sites may not be welcome, involve 
risk, and are unpractical (Echeverry 1996). Finally, the high cost of site training is a further impediment 
to its extensive use for construction education (AbouRizk 1993, AbouRizk and Sawhney 1994). Computing 
and information technologies in general and simulation in particular have the potential to act as excellent 
tools to complement construction engineering and management education. 2 CHALLENGES ADDRESSED BY THE 
RESEARCH The challenges of education/instruction are manifold and range from issues related to the enhancement 
of the learning abilities of students to curricula integration and the inclusion in the curricula of 
hands-on, real-world experiences. The following paragraphs describe some of these challenges as well 
as some potential solutions to shortcomings. The improvement of the learning abilities of students: 
Generally, one of the most important findings of research efforts directed at identifying features that 
enhance student learning is that students learn more effectively and permanently when they can actively 
participate in the learning process (Chi et al. 1989). It is thus important to provide possibilities 
for the students to actively use and explore the new concepts as they learn them. Computing technologies 
such as course material on floppy disks or CD-ROM and the Internet can be helpful in complementing the 
instruction. Further, computerized (simulation) games that can respond to the user s actions allow for 
a learning experience to take place (AbouRizk and Sawhney 1994).  Knowledge fragmentation: Current curricula 
do not give students a holistic view of their field of study. A  typical undergraduate program in civil 
engineering includes curricular components such as mathematics and basic sciences, humanities and social 
sciences, engineering sciences, civil engineering design, and civil engineering core courses (ABET 1993). 
Also, the conventional civil engineering curriculum, implemented at most U.S. universities, focuses on 
unlinked and independent core and support courses that convey knowledge in fragments. Often students 
neither retain nor are able to utilize knowledge acquired in previous courses (Bertz and Baker 1996). 
To address these shortcomings, there is the need to develop curricular instruments that will require 
students to pool their knowledge to solve authentic real-world problems. Project-based learning, where 
learning evolves around real-world projects that span various disciplines, can also be implemented to 
address these shortcomings. Providing hands-on experience: The incorporation of a practical element in 
construction engineering and management is of foremost importance. However, as discussed above, several 
factors complicate or even prevent the use of extensive site training. Computer­based games that simulate 
the environment of construction, with all its complex and dynamic relationships between different factors, 
can, however, bridge the gap between the classroom and the construction site by allowing the students 
to take actions and learn from the responses to these actions. The research being conducted by the authors 
will lead to the development of an integrated educational framework for the construction engineering 
and management program at Western Michigan University, which will be ultimately applicable to civil and 
construction engineering programs at other universities. Figure 1 shows the proposed integrated educational 
framework in relation to the civil and construction engineering program. The Interactive Learning System 
will be used as an instructional tool for the key courses identified in the figure to introduce practical 
construction management concepts. The proposed framework will address the challenges listed above. While 
the Interactive Construction Management System integrates both the Internet and simulation, the projects 
and systems found in literature can generally be distinguished by their use of either the Internet or 
simulation. The following paragraphs briefly summarize recent developments in the area of application 
of Internet and simulation for construction engineering and management education. Recently researchers 
have started exploring the instructional opportunities provided by the Internet. Fruchter and Krawinkler 
(1995), Fruchter (1996), and Fruchter (1997) describe the development, implementation, and testing of 
a new and innovative computer integrated Architecture Engineering Construction (AEC) course that takes 
a multi-site, cross-disciplinary, project- and team­oriented approach to instruction. Dymond (1996) portrays 
the use of WWW in undergraduate civil engineering education at the University of Wisconsin Plattevile. 
A notable effect of the use of the WWW for instruction, the author mentions, is the increased enthusiasm 
of the students. Construction Design Management Project  Construction Construction Scheduling Estimating 
 Figure 1: Proposed Integrated Educational Framework Numerous examples of use of gaming and simulation 
to enhance construction engineering and management education exist in literature. The origin of construction 
games can be followed back to Au and Parti (1969) who suggested that computerized games involving economic, 
social, and technological decisions could be used for the education of engineers and planners. Halpin 
(1976) presented a model for the project gaming system CONSTRUCTO that generates close to real life game 
scenarios. These hypothetical projects can be planned, monitored, and controlled by the students. Harris 
and Evans (1977) developed a simulation game for the site managers in road construction. The game focuses 
on planning and controlling the construction of a stretch of pre-defined road. The required decisions 
involve resource and labor allocations. AbouRizk (1993) describes the development and implementation 
of a stochastic construction bidding game for construction engineer training and for experimenting with 
various bidding strategies. Ferose et al. (1994) present the design, development, and implementation 
of two simulation-based computer-assisted instruction modules. The first illustrates the principles of 
fluid flow between two reservoirs, while the second simulates the typical tendering and project management 
situation. Samek and Landry (1997) describe the use of software packages, including simulation, to produce 
a series of models of simple but descriptive nature, to be used in entry-level courses or as review in 
follow-on courses to aid students in visualizing certain principles. OVERVIEW OF THE CONSTRUCTION  MANAGEMENT 
LEARNING SYSTEM The Construction Management Learning System is an Internet based system that makes use 
of simulation and practitioner involvement to incorporate practical experiences in the construction and 
civil engineering curricula. The Interactive Learning System uses an interactive and adaptive learning 
environment to train students in the area of planning of construction processes. The system is process 
oriented and mimics the challenges faced by a construction manager on a real life project. It allows 
students to apply their knowledge of construction materials and methods, estimating, scheduling, resource 
allocation and utilization, fleet size determination, productivity and cost calculations, and decision 
making in relation to construction processes. Thus, with this system, adequate experience of the complexity 
of the dynamics of a construction site is provided to the students. While the Interactive Construction 
Management System integrates both the Internet and simulation, the projects and systems found in the 
literature can generally be distinguished by their use of either the Internet or simulation. Figure 2 
provides the conceptual model of the Interactive Construction Management Learning System. The key features 
of the proposed Interactive Learning System are: 1. The system uses Internet as its launching medium. 
Students utilizing the World Wide Web (WWW) browser will be able to undertake interactive sessions of 
the learning system from remote locations. The internet-based approach will also result in effective 
dissemination of the system. 2. The system internally utilizes discrete event simulation, gaming, and 
stochastic methods to provide an interactive system that mimics the real construction processes.  3. 
It also utilizes multimedia databases to provide students with an interesting view of the selected construction 
processes and equipment. 4. Practical content relevant to construction processes and equipment is included 
in the system. Practitioner involvement clearly allows students to learn more about the construction 
management profession.  Figure 2: Conceptual Model One of the key features of the Interactive Construction 
Management Learning System is the utilization of Internet as a launching medium. The authors believe 
that this feature will allow successful utilization of the tool by construction and civil engineering 
students. Figure 3 provides the implementation details for the system. The three main databases of the 
system are implemented as part of a single relational database management system (RDBMS) that complies 
with the object database connectivity (ODBC) protocol. The RDBMS is connected to the main program with 
the help of JAVA database connectivity (JDBC) to ODBC bridge drivers. The actual database features of 
the system are programmed using the JDBC Application Programming Interface (JDBC API) and JDBC manager. 
The construction simulation modeling toolkit and output module is programmed using the JAVA programming 
language a programming language for developing Internet applications. The research team plans to utilize 
existing process interaction based discrete event simulation engine such as JavaSim (Buss and Stork, 
1996), SimJava (McNab and Howell 1996), or JSIM (Nair et al. 1996). The benefit of this approach is that 
these engines have been developed using JAVA programming language and as such can be directly linked 
to the main program, thus providing seamless integration. Web clients (students or users accessing the 
Interactive Learning System) will connect to the main JAVA based application through the hyper text transfer 
protocol (HTTP) over the internet by using standard WWW browser such as Microsoft Internet Explorer, 
Netscape Navigator, Mosaic, and HotMetal. The main program will process all transactions between the 
WWW clients and the Interactive Learning System. JD BC-O D BC Bridge Drivers ODBC  JDBC API and M anager 
 Java Based Application Output Module Construction Simulation Modeling Toolkit Figure 3: Implementation 
Plan  INTERNAL STRUCTURE As can be seen from the above section, a few key features distinguish the Interactive 
Construction Management System from those described in the literature. These include the use of the Internet 
and simulation, a combination of active learning technologies and increased practitioner involvement. 
Interactive Construction Management Learning System is composed of the following components: 1. Construction 
Process Database: The repository contains a number of construction processes from residential, building, 
heavy engineering, and industrial construction. Visual as well as textual explanations of the processes 
are supplemented with multimedia elements. 2. Construction Equipment Database: This component contains 
information pertaining to equipment specifications, productivity, operation use, and manufacturer.  
3. Construction Scenarios Database: A number of real­world scenarios are provided for the interactive 
simulation and gaming mode of the system. This database is linked to the Construction Process Database. 
 4. Construction Simulation Tool Kit: This element acts as a controlling module for the system. It provides 
support for the development of the simulation model during an interactive session, executes the simulation 
model and provides the result of the simulation study to the students (user). 5. Output Module: The 
module is used to provide the user with the response of the system.  5 UTILIZATION OF THE INTERACTIVE 
LEARNING SYSTEM A critical factor in the success of the Interactive Learning System is the student interaction 
process. The system can be utilized in the construction materials and methods, construction estimating, 
construction scheduling, and construction project management courses. Additionally, the system will be 
utilized in other civil engineering courses, introductory pre-engineering courses and demonstrations 
to prospective transfer students. Figure 4 provides overview of the student interaction process. As seen 
in the figure the Interactive Construction Management Learning System permits the students to use it 
in three different modes: 1. Mode 1: Browse through the construction process database. This will permit 
students to learn about construction technologies and methods, equipment and material usage, and the 
underlying tasks and their sequence. 2. Mode 2: Equally, the student can also browse through the construction 
equipment database and obtain information regarding the general specifications of the equipment, performance 
factors, equipment use and technology. 3. Mode 3: This mode is the interactive simulation and gaming 
mode. The system provides the student with real life construction scenarios, and permits him/her to develop 
and implement a solution, study the response of the system, and then iteratively improve the solution. 
A number of steps have to be followed by a student in this mode. At the outset, the student selects a 
problem scenario from the existing list displayed by the system. The system then provides the user with 
detailed explanations and data related to this scenario. In a second step, the student will then proceed 
to collect data and develop a solution for the chosen  scenario. This can be done using the construction 
process and construction equipment databases. The following step requires the user to implement his/her 
solution by developing a simulation model. The Interactive Learning System utilizes the Cyclic Operations 
Network (CYCLONE) modeling methodology (Halpin 1976) for the development of the simulation model. Finally, 
in the last step, the student collects the information generated by the execution of the simulation model. 
Steps 2 and 3 can be repeated to improve and eventually optimize the solution. Alternatively, the student 
can select an altogether different construction method as his/her solution and then proceed with steps 
2 to 4. Construction Process Database  Construction Equipment Database  Output Module Figure 4: Student 
Interaction Process The utilization of the Interactive Learning System intends to provide a problem-based 
cooperative learning environment for construction engineering and management education. It provides students 
with a practical laboratory and an opportunity to understand practical applications of the technical 
skills learned in the classroom. Further, students will benefit from practitioner involvement, will have 
the chance to improve their team skills, gain knowledge on construction equipment, construction processes 
and techniques, construction simulation, and the various interactions between these. It is planned to 
integrate the learning system into a series of courses in the undergraduate curriculum. Strategies to 
integrate the learning system into the curriculum of the following disciplines will be developed as part 
of this research project: 1. Civil Engineering - both at the lower and upper level of the undergraduate 
curriculum 2. Construction Engineering and Management- both at the lower and upper level of the undergraduate 
curriculum  3. Two-year Transfer Degree Programs in civil and construction engineering 6 CONCLUSION 
The summary of the ongoing efforts and applications of computing for instruction clearly show the trends 
in education using computing and information technology. These tends are altogether understandable given 
the challenges educators and students face in instruction/learning nowadays. The Internet Based Interactive 
Construction Management Learning System also clearly caters to these needs by providing a system that 
permits active and interactive modes to improve learning effectiveness, a multi-disciplinary approach 
including knowledge on construction equipment, construction processes and techniques, construction simulation 
and the various interactions to reduce fragmentation and improve the students use of their knowledge, 
and simulation to improve the students understanding of the dynamics and complexities of the construction 
site. The value of such a tool in the current engineering environment can clearly be recognized, especially 
if one considers the simultaneous use of practitioner involvement from which students can profit in manifold 
ways ranging from guidance to improved industry knowledge. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This project was supported, 
in part, by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. DUE 9752425). Opinions expressed are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of the Foundation. REFERENCES ABET (1993) Criteria for Accrediting 
Programs in Engineering in the United States Engineering Accreditation Commission, Accreditation Board 
for Engineering and Technology, New York, NY. AbouRizk, S. M. (1993) Stochastic Simulation of Construction 
Bidding and Project Management Microcomputers in Civil Engineering, Vol. 8, pp. 343­ 353. AbouRizk, S. 
M. and Sawhney, A. (1994) Simulation and Gaming in Construction Engineering Education ASEE/C2E2/C2EI 
Conference, Edmonton, Alberta, June 1994. Au, T. and Parti, E. (1969) Building Construction Game General 
Description Journal of the Construction Division, ASCE, Vol. 95, No. CO1: 1-9. Bertz, M. and Baker, N. 
C. (1996) CELL A Vertically Integrated Learning Resource Proceedings of the Third Congress on Computing 
in Civil Engineering, Anaheim, June 1996, pp. 348- 354. Buss, A. H. and Stork, K. A. (1996) Discrete 
event simulation on the world wide web using JAVA 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, Coronado, CA, December 
1996. Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., And Glaser, R. (1989) Self-explanations: 
How Students Study and Use Examples in Learning to Solve Problems Cognitive Science, Vol. 13, pp. 145­ 
182. Dymond, R. (1996) WWW and Multimedia in Undergraduate Civil Engineering Proceedings of the Third 
Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, Anaheim, June 1996, pp. 341- 347. Echeverry, D. (1996) Multimedia-Based 
Instruction of Building Construction Proceedings of the Third Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, 
Anaheim, June 1996, pp. 972- 977. Ferose, T., Prasard, S., Friesen, J., and Zollman, D. (1994) Computer-assisted 
Instruction in Civil Engineering Proceedings of the First Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, 
Washington, D.C., June 1994, pp. 1647-1654. Fruchter, R. (1996) Multi-Site Cross-Disciplinary A/E/C Project 
Based Learning Proceedings of the Third Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, Anaheim, June 1996, 
pp. 126- 132. Fruchter, R. (1997) The A/E/C Virtual Atelier: Experience and Future Directions Proceedings 
of the Fourth Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, Philadelphia, June 1997, pp. 395- 402. Fruchter, 
R. and Krawinkler, H. (1995) A/E/C Teamwork Proceedings of the Second Congress on Computing in Civil 
Engineering, Atlanta, June 1996, pp. 441- 448. Halpin, D. W. (1976) CONSTRUCTO An Interactive Gaming 
Environment Journal of the Construction Division, ASCE, Vol. 102, No. CO1, pp. 145-156. Harris, F. C. 
and Evans, J. B. (1977) Road Construction Simulation Game for Site Managers Journal of the Construction 
Division, ASCE, Vol. 103, No. CO3, pp. 405-414. McNab, R. and Howell F. W. (1996) "Using Java for Discrete 
Event Simulation" in proceedings of Twelfth UK Computer and Telecommunications Performance Engineering 
Workshop (UKPEW), Univ. of Edinburgh, 219-228 Nair, R. S., Miller, J. A., and Zhang, Z. (1996) JAVA-Based 
Query Driven Simulation Environment 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, Coronado, CA, December 1996. Samek, 
J. V., and Landry, K. A. (1997) Dynamic Visualization in the Classroom Using Computer Simulation Proceedings 
of the Fourth Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, Philadelphia, June 1997, pp. 281-288. Tatum, 
C. B. (1987) Balancing engineering and management in construction education Journal of Construction Engineering 
and Management, ASCE, Vol. 113, No. 2.  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES ANIL SAWHNEY received his Bachelor of Engineering 
degree from India in 1987 and a Master of Building Engineering and Management degree from School of Planning 
and Architecture, New Delhi in 1990. He completed his Ph.D. studies at the University of Alberta in June 
1994. Since then he has been working as an Assistant Professor of Construction Engineering and Management 
at Western Michigan University. His research interests are mainly focused on construction simulation 
techniques and use of computers in construction education. ANDRÉ MUND received his Bachelor of Engineering 
degree from UAL in Portugal in 1994. Prior to beginning his Master of Science studies in Construction 
Management at Western Michigan University in 1997 he worked for a contractor in Berlin, Germany, from 
1994-1997. Since his arrival at Western Michigan University he has been working first as a teaching and 
now as a research assistant in the Construction Management program. He is interested in the area of heavy 
construction equipment selection and computing and information technology applications in construction. 
			