
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. SIMULATION OF A LARGE-SCALE BREWERY DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM K. Heinz Weigl ESLA Scheibengasse 
5 A-1190 Vienna, AUSTRIA  ABSTRACT This paper describes a simulation model of a large beverage distribution 
center. The brewery distribution center has a volume of 71,600 cubic meters and contains about 8,000 
pallets. Every day 1,800 pallets are handled in or out of the system, and the object of this study was 
to verify the functionality of the automated storage and retrieval system and integrated conveyor system 
including elevators connecting five levels of the distribution center. The complex system is modeled 
with the powerful simulation software Arena®. A brief discussion of the results is also given. INTRODUCTION 
 During the conceptual design stage of a project to install a new AS/RS at the Eichhof Brewery in Luzern, 
Switzerland, the client, main contractor, and automation equipment supplier decided to use computer simulation 
as a tool to test the validity of the system design. The equipment included a complex conveyor system 
over 250 meters in length with more than 150 drive units over five levels dealing with up to 1,800 pallets 
per day. This, combined with a new AS/RS for storage, covered an area of around 3,900 sq. meters. The 
Distribution Center is shown in Figure 1. The brewery distribution system is required to store beverage 
bundles (supplied from production, train, or trucks) and to consign for delivery via train and trucks. 
The core of the distribution center is a four-level conveying system, conveying up to 800 different products 
into and out of a 7,600 pallet AS/RS system. The conveyor system is designed for a daily performance 
of 1,800 pallets in normal operation. Four automatic narrow-aisle cranes are installed in two aisles, 
each moving 300 pallets an hour. Ten rail wagons and 30 trucks are loaded and unloaded every day. Euro 
pallets with different products are moved according to a load table starting from three different input 
stations, production, trucks and train as shown in Figure 10, over elevators, powered roller conveyors, 
crossings, and transfer units to the identification point (I-Point) are shown in Figure 9. The reason 
is to identify paired pallets (same product, and AS/RS area) for transport via elevators to the pickup 
station of the narrow-aisle crane. Only pallets with the same product and area can be picked up together 
by the narrow-aisle crane, shown in Figure 8. This is also a requirement for the output movement from 
the store to the consignment area and train loading. The goal of the simulation study was to identify 
the following: . Measure the utilization of individual elements of the system, such as the elevators, 
rail-guided vehicles, and narrow-aisle cranes . Identify bottlenecks and highlight integration effects 
. Highlight congestion in individual sections of the conveyor system . Examine breakdown scenarios . 
Analyze strategies to increase pair pallet movement of narrow-aisle cranes  Figure 2: Animation of 
the Main Conveyor System The detail of the conveyor system with two crossing sections and individually 
powered segments in level 1 is shown in Figure 3. The capacity of the powered rolling conveyors F24, 
F25, F17, and F18 is designed for eight pallets; each unit is divided into three individually powered 
sub-units moving two and four pallets synchronously. Pallets of the same type are transported in pairs 
by either elevator SF3 or SF4, unloaded onto conveyors F15 or F16, and move over crossing section K5 
to either F17 or F18. An example of the detailed movement and its phases is shown in Figure 4. Each section 
of rolling conveyors F17 or F18 is an individually powered segment moving one or two pairs of pallets 
at the same time. This detailed situation was modeled with Arena s powerful BLOCK/UNBLOCK combination 
for each individually powered conveyor unit. Two levels connected with the two elevators SF3 and SF4 
were designed as shown in Figure 3. Both levels have two pickup and two drop-off stations for the narrow-aisle 
cranes RGB1-RGB4.  CARRYING OUT THE SIMULATION STUDY The simulation tool Arena (including the Input 
and Output Analyzers) was used to perform the simulation study. The main steps of the study are as follows: 
. Analysis of the input data . Design of the model concept . Development of the simulation model . 
Analysis of output data  Different load tables with the product range, plant dimensions, detailed performance 
data of the individual transport equipment (such as velocities, accelerations, decelerations, drop-down, 
and pickup times), as well as the complex logic of the crossing sections were analyzed. This data was 
stored in a database accessible via a menu system before starting the simulation runs. Prior to starting 
the model, a detailed concept was developed based on architectural and functional drawings and the model 
detail required by the end user. The complex logistics of pickup, drop-down and movement operations RGB2 
F24 K7 F25 RGB4 F26 F27 Aisle 2 Aisle 1 SF3 SF4 F15 F16 RGB1 F17 K5 F18 RGB3 Figure 3: Crossing Section 
with Individual Powered Segments  of elevators, conveyors, and narrow-aisle cranes required development 
of models for each individual component to establish the necessary detail to provide the required characteristics. 
A 3D AutoCAD® drawing, shown in Figure 2, was made which showed a simplified view of the storage area 
and a more detailed view of the core conveyor system. Each section of the conveyor offers space for a 
certain number of pallets and is divided into individually powered segments moving individual and paired 
pallets to the next destination. The logic for the elevators was designed to move two pallets synchronously 
in reverse direction in order to save pickup times on one end of the elevator. This was necessary due 
the system load and the available space on some rolling conveyor segments. RGB Figure 4: Detail and 
Phases of Movement on F17 Complex control logic is also required at the I-point, where a scanner identifies 
all input pallets and controls the definition of the storage area and the allowed pair mix of pallets, 
preventing single-pallet movements of the narrow­aisle crane. The 3D movement of the narrow-aisle crane 
was split into three independent elements, each carried out by a guided transporter in x, y, z direction 
and then synchronized. A random-number-based calculation of the storage position (depending on the type 
of pallet) was carried out. The crane was modeled using three Arena transporters (Transfer panel) to 
deal with the three elements of movement, since the narrow-aisle crane has to move different distances 
with different velocities after picking up the pallets, depending on the storage area and level of the 
conveyor system. Figure 5 shows the principle of the concept of the narrow-aisle movement.  Storage 
system AB C BA RGB1 RGB2 Pick up Drop Station Station To the Conveyorsystem Figure 6: Schematic Picture 
of Storage and Aisle 1 To I-Point Figure 5: Concept Movement of Narrow-Aisle Crane The synchronization 
of the individual movement in horizontal and vertical directions, each with individual velocities, acceleration, 
and deceleration, is modeled with control entities and a MATCH block. Loading and unloading times are 
also taken into account. The storage system is divided for each aisle into sections A, B, and C served 
by one narrow-aisle crane (NAC). (See Figure 6.) Pallets from the three different sources are scanned 
at the I-point. One major requirement of the end user was that there should never be a situation when 
the main conveyor from the production line is blocked by incoming pallets from the train or trucks. A 
specific logic was designed to cover this requirement of the system. The rotation table located at the 
crossing section feeds the main conveyor from production and the conveyor served by an elevator from 
the truck area. The rotation table blocks or unblocks the movement of an even number of pallets coming 
from the production line, depending on the congestion factor of the input conveyor (Figure 7). To model 
this, a sub-model with one of Arena s continuous features (the DETECT block) was developed to create 
(dependent on the actual congestion factor) a controlled entity, setting the allowed number of pairs 
of pallets coming from the production main conveyor. Different congestion factor values were evaluated 
during the experimentation phase. Turning Unit From Production Rework Elevator From Trucks Figure 
7: Schematic Picture of the Rotation Table The system was designed to offer an efficient material­handling 
system with scope for future expansion.  Figure 9: Conveyor System with I-Point  THE SIMULATION MODEL 
AND RESULTS OF THE STUDY The simulation model is broken down into different sub­models describing the 
complete system. Figure 2 shows the animation of the core conveyor-elevator system with different levels. 
From the main level, where the scanner is positioned, the pallets move in pairs via two elevators to 
the next two levels above, feeding the four pick-up points for the narrow-aisle crane. For each aisle, 
two pickup and two drop­down stations are placed asymmetrically on each of the levels. Each of the aisles 
are divided into two sections, each with a narrow-aisle crane and individual unloading and loading stations. 
After unloading two pallets, the narrow­aisle crane has to move vertically to load the next pair of pallets 
for storage. Individual animated statistics are placed on the overall layout. These include histograms 
for the usage of each individual narrow-aisle crane, the number of pallets in the system in different 
sections, and the congestion level of different conveyor units and rail-guided vehicles. With Arena, 
all complex situations could be modeled easily. The results of the simulation study surprised the end 
user and the main contractor. Although the system design could handle the required throughput of pallets, 
bottlenecks at different times of the day occurred in unexpected areas. We simulated breakdowns on one 
of the four narrow­aisle cranes to find out what effect breakdowns would have on the complete conveyor 
system. We also studied breakdowns on elevators SF3 or SF4, because they transport all pallets either 
in the warehouse or from the warehouse. We did not simulate truck movements and allocation to the bays 
(see Figure 12); we only know the frequency and the number of pallets coming into the system delivered 
by train, truck, or production. There is no interface to the outside transportation network. More than 
500 simulation runs were carried out with these results: . The narrow-aisle cranes were underutilized 
. The input and output pallets could be processed in the required time span; however, during breakdowns, 
pallets coming from the production, train, and truck areas should be handled alternately for maximum 
throughput . The buffer sections, with a few exceptions, have sufficient capacity . The rail-guided vehicle 
QVW2 will be a bottleneck unless a higher velocity can be obtained . The elevator SF3/4 will be a bottleneck 
during breakdowns of other units, and breakdown strategies need to be developed, see Figure 13. . One 
I-point (scanner) is sufficient, but strategies for building pallet pairs are necessary . Elevator SF1 
will be a bottleneck if only one pallet can be handled at a time. The results showed, that the system 
was very robust in being able to cope with the peaks and troughs of pallet inputs and outputs anticipated. 
(Figure 11)  The identified and unexpected bottlenecks were later confirmed by the designers of the 
system, and feasible modifications to the design were tested and incorporated into the final system. 
The simulation model was also used by the control­system designers, which resulted in reduced installation 
and commissioning time. The simulation project provided them a greater understanding of the system characteristics 
through the need to collect more detailed information, and analyzing the performance thus reduced the 
risk of unexpected problems in the design. After installation, a comparison of simulation results with 
real output was found to be 100 percent accurate. Customer´s comments: We reduced our risk using simulation, 
and we had more insight in the behavior of the system compared with analytical methods.   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I thank the company Eichhof Brewery in Luzern for permission to publish this paper and Systems Modeling 
for support during the last 12 years. The project was also supported by the staff of Salomon Automation 
in Graz, Austria. Arena is a registered trademark of Systems Modeling Corporation. AutoCAD is a registered 
trademark of Autodesk. REFERENCES Pegden, C.D., R. E. Shannon, and R.P. Sadowski, 1990. Introduction 
to Simulation Using SIMAN, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. Law, A. M. and W. D. Kelton, 1991. Simulation Modeling 
&#38; Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. Muller, D., 1989. AS/RS and Warehouse Modeling. In Proceedings 
of the 1989 Winter Simulation Conference. Kelton, W. D., R. Sadowski, and D. Sadowski. 1998. Simulation 
with Arena, WCB/McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY K. HEINZ WEIGL is currently a consultant 
in the field of manufacturing and logistic systems and lecturer at the Technical University Vienna and 
Dresden and the University of Economics in Vienna. He received his M.Sc (Dipl. Ing.) in Electrical Engineering 
in 1980 and his Ph.D (Dr. techn) in 1992 from the Technical University of Vienna. He was employed by 
Siemens AG for five years in the high-voltage motors division in Germany. In 1994 he founded the European 
Simulation and Logistic Academy (ESLA) in Austria. 
			