
 DR. JAMES A. CALLOWAY is an associate profes- sor of business at the College of Administration and Business, 
Louisiana TechUniversity. He re- ceived his B.S. in electrical engineering from the University of Oklahoma 
and an M.B.A. and Ph.D. in business administration from the University of Houston. He has held management 
positions in the electronics industry and teaching positions in the military and at the University of 
Houston. Dr. Calloway is co-author of several papers and mono- graphs on economic modeling of governmental 
and industrial processes and is currently involved in development of a policy evaluation model for the 
State of Louisiana. Dr. Calloway is a member of AIDS, TIMS, Phi Kappa Phi, and Beta Gamma Sigma. He received 
the American Institute of Decision Sciences Award for an outstanding doctoral dissertation. SIMULATION 
OF GOVERNMENT POLICY James A, Calloway ABSTRACT  Government policy, and sometimes the lack of it, can 
alter the basic structure of the U.S. economic system. This paper describes the devel- opment of a policy 
evaluation model and its use to simulate proposed energy and environmental pol- icy effect on the national 
economy. The model and its components are described together with the analytical and validation processes 
used. INTRODUCTION  Government policy has a dramatic influence on the state of the national economy 
whether it deals with the money system directly through Federal Reserve policy or indirectly through 
such avenues as environmental policy. Even the lack of positive government action has a definite bearing 
on the economic behavior of business and industry as evidenced by the recent inability of policy makers 
to enact a comprehensive national energy program. This paper deals with the analysis of resource-allocation-policy 
and the evolutionary development of an energy-policy evaluation simu- lation model. Shubik (6) defines 
simulation as "the oper- ation of a model--a representation of the system-- amenable to manipulations 
which would be impossi- ble, too expensive or impractical to perform on the entity it portrays." The 
impracticability certainly applies to our national economy, al- though this is exactly what we do when 
we enact legislation without knowledge of its probable economic impact. Our economic system is extremely 
flexible, and in many instances, capable of withstanding extreme abuses. On the other hand, it represents 
a delicate balance of attitudes, biases, and interrelational complexities that is virtually beyond comprehension. 
Since any energy policy must have far-reaching national effects, we are definitely dealing with the entire 
economic system. Most contend that this nation's actions relative to energy policy are likely to have 
international implications as well. Manipulation of such a sys- tem for purposes of experimentation and, 
espe- cially without a reasonable or at least partial understanding of the result, would lead to its 
ultimate destruction. A model or representation of the system is a must for policy analysis, since the 
model can be manipulated and studied without detriment to the actual system. Implication of the behavior 
of the actual system can be deter- mined from the model and policy makers can pro- ceed to develop legislation 
with an improved knowledge of the impact such legislation will have on the operating system. The analyses 
described here involve policy evaluation models funded by the National Science Foundation and used to: 
 evaluate the feasibility and national economic impact of President Ford's proposed policy of zero imports 
of foreign crude oil by 1985, coupled with the policies set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency 
lead- ing to zero discharge of pollutants to the air and waterways.  Economic impact was to be measured 
in terms of the price effect on raw materials and manu- factured goods associated with certain critical 
energy-lntensive industries. Thus, the model had to account specifically for prices and quantities related 
to energy supplies, (fuel, electricity, etc.), raw materials, and industry end-products, as well as the 
quantity, composition, and origin of all pollutants produced by the industries. The decision to build 
a policy model was an easy one; the decision as to what type of model to build was not. In fact, the 
decision process was evolutionary and a final determination took several months and several unsatisfactory 
turns. The nature of energy and energy-related pol- icies, such as environmental policy, is such that 
the future is not expected to be represented by the past and historical data are generally insuf- ficient 
to forecast the costs of imposing newly legislated environmental policy. Furthermore, the nation had 
never had energy legislation or environmental legislation as such before; thus, there was no historical 
data to collect. Future waste treatment, resource recovery, and recycle process configurations were likely 
to appear for which no historical operating data existed. (This speculation has indeed been born out 
in recent months.) In general, normative models were re- POLICY SIMULATION .... continued quired which 
possessed the ability to augment historical data with an appropriate synthesis of technical data into 
a comprehensive economic framework to evaluate how the basic structure of the industry or industries 
might change in re- sponse to proposed legislation. The models had to be able to adapt to changes in 
the operating scene which had never before been experienced. MODEL STRUCTURE A process model using 
linear programming was used to describe the critical energy production, conversion, and consumption industries. 
Consid- erations included alternative methods of produc- tion and waste treatment; input mixes of energy, 
water, capltal, and raw materials; and output mixes o£ end-products, by-products, and waste discharges. 
This model was comprised of the following industries identified by their Standard Industrial Code (SIC): 
electric power, petroleum refining, natural gas processing, and the basic chemicals industries such as 
organic and inorganic chemicals, fertilizers, plastics and polyesters, cyclics and intermediates, alkalies 
and chlorine, and synthetic rubber. Development of the model was based on a three tier structure: individual 
plant models, combi- nations of plant models into industry models, and combinations of industry models 
into an integrated industry model. Each production process was mod- eled specifically in terms of its 
resource re- quirements (fuel, raw materials, capital) and the resulting outputs (primary products, secondary 
products, pollutants) as illustrated in Figure i. Further, alternative production and waste treat- ment 
processes were provided to allow changes in productlon configuration affected by technologi- cal innovations, 
improved efficiencies, and capi- tal equipment investment and retirement decisions. Thus, the model 
was able to adapt to changes in the industrial operating environment perpetrated by proposed energy 
policy, environmental policy, technological progress, or any combination of the three. Upon specification 
of the supplies of natural resources, environmental policy, and final demand for the model's 48 produced 
outputs, the linear progra~maing model efficiently allocated the available resources to satisfy the 
specified pro- duction requirements. VALIDATION Since it was intended that the policy eval- uation 
model represent physical and economic structure likely to exist in the future, model validation presented 
an interesting problem. This problem was met through formulation of a panel of experts (industry, academic, 
and government) to provide critical analysis of model development, technological accuracy, and analytical 
results. The panel was formed at the outset and used in an advisory as well as analytical capacity. Member- 
ship was modified periodically aS the need for expertise changed. ANALYTICAL RESULTS Faulty Concluslons--The 
analysis compared total production costs for both policy conditions (no energy/envlronmental policy v__ss 
zero discharges and zero imports). Two subcategories were examin- ed as well, processing costs and fuel 
and material ENERGY CRUDE OIL NATURAL GAS COAL RAW MATERIALS CAPITAL SYSTEMS  PRODUCTION PROCESS 
ENERGY WATER USE AND WASTE TREATMENT AIR EMISSION CONTROL SOLID WASTE &#38; BRINE TREATMENT i DESIRED 
PRODUCTS ELECTRICITY PETROLEUM FUELS &#38; DERIVATIVES IMPORTANT CHEMICALS UNDESIRED PRODUCTS WATER 
POLLUTANTS ORGANIC INORGANIC HEAT AIR POLLUTANTS SULFUR OXIDES PARTICULATES SOLID WASTES ASH SULFUR DRY 
SOLIDS  FIGURE 1 FUNDAMENTAL COMPONENTS OF REPRESENTATIVE INDUSTRY MODELS costs. Results indicated 
that the objectives could be achieved at a nominal increase in total product cost of 14 percent. Processing 
costs in- creased by 40 percent while fuel costs increased by 5.7 percent (7). Attempts at validation 
of the modeled re- sults revealed a major discrepancy between the cost figures obtained from the model 
and those projected by industry. The evolutionary process of model development continued as we sought 
to determine what criteria had been omitted from the original model formulation. Investigation indicated 
there was a definite shift in the production process configuration of several industries resulting from 
imposition of proposed environmental restrictions; that is, the cleaner fuels and non-polluting production 
pro- cesses were in greater demand. Furthermore, since natural gas prices were government regulated, 
the model did not allow a corresponding price increase as demand for clean fuels increased. Thus, the 
projected cost increase relative to fuels and raw materials substantially underestimated that which could 
reasonably be expected, especially if the market were free to determine price and supply response. We 
determined that, contrary to exist- ing government policy, the price of scarce re- sources must be allowed 
to increase in conjunction with product demand. In other words, the market place must be allowed to perform 
its function without regulatory intervention. The decision to make the industry model price sensitive 
precipitated the need for end- product demand models possessing the inherent qualities necessary to reflect 
the action of the market place (5). Further, resource supply models were needed to reflect possible increased 
supplies of resources resulting from increased prices (2) (3). The final configuration of the model 
consis- ted of supply models for crude oil, natural gas, and coal, and demand models for critical energy 
end-products such as natural gas, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene, coal, and electricity. The demand models 
depicted national demand in three sectors: residential and commercial, transportation, and industrial 
(that part of industry not accounted for by the LP industry model). Basic estimates of economic demands 
were developed by the FEA (now Department of Energy) for the Project Independence Report (i). Direct 
and cross-price elasticities were computed for $4, $7, and $ii per barrel of crude oil. These direct 
and cross-price elasticities were used in the de- mand model to adjust the base energy requirements for 
different input prices. Using 1973 as the base year, a crude oil and natural gas supply model was developed 
(3) which estimated total production of new crude oll and natural gas from the lower 48 states accounting 
for both regional economic and physical factors for eight regions of the United States. The economic 
feasibility of exploration investment was determined through evaluation of the net cash flow resulting 
from exploration, development, and pro- INPUT PRICE: ¥ CRUDE OIL &#38; END -PRODUCT NATURAL GAS DEMAND 
MODEL SUPPLY MODEL Demand = Supply = f (Price) g(Price) i% INTEGRATED |~ RIGHT I INDUSTRY MODEL , 
HAND SIDES j Min cTx s,t. AX = b I [FY INt JT LA no DEMAND yes PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM ~ SOLUTION FIGURE 
2 ITERATION PROCEDURE  duction activities (4). This net present value calculation includes contributions 
from secondary and tertiary oil recovery as well. The final simulation model used to make energy policy 
evaluations, represents an inter- active interface of the supply, industry, and de- mand models as illustrated 
in Figure 2. The three models were operated with an iteratlve supply/de- mand equilibrating algorithm 
to estimate market- clearing prices and quantities of crude oil, nat- ural gas, coal, fuel oil, and electricity 
for the United States. The objective of the iterative procedure was to find an industry model solution 
for which: i. exeogenous final product demands were met; 2. endogenous intermediate product de- mands 
were met; and 3. supply and demand for crude oll and natural gas were balanced. Solutions were obtained 
for a set of 'base case' specifications (no controls) and for the scenario of interest (zero discharge/zero 
imports). Comparing the two partial equilibrium solutions indicated the impact of the modeled policy. 
 POLICY SIMULATION .... continued Revised Concluslons--Results from the sec- ond set of analyses indicated 
production cost in- creases of more than 50 percent. Process costs increased by 51 percent. Market clearing 
prices (partial equilibrium) for the major energy pro- ducts were $2.48/mmbtu for oil, $2.34/mmbtu for 
natural gas, and $.75/mmbtu for coal. The stated objectives were accomplished to the satisfaction of 
the panel of critics but not without relaxing some of the restrictions on the model. Specifi- cally, 
it was necessary to eliminate price regu- lation of natural gas and prohibit construction of new electric 
power plants using natural gas and oil-fired boilers. BIBLTOGRAPHY  I. Federal Emergy Administration. 
Proiect In~_dependence__Report: Project Independence. U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, 
D.C., 4118-00029 (Nov., 1974). 2. Hill, Robert R., Economic Supply Models for Crude Oil and Natural 
Gas in Texas. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Houston, May, 1975.  3. Kim, Y. Y., Economic 
Supply Models for Crude Oil and Nat_ur_~al Gas i__n the United States, Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of Houston, 1978.  4. Thompson, R. G. and Y. Y. Kim, Supplies of New Crude Oil and Natural 
Gas in the Lower 48 States: An Economic Model. Gulf Publishing Co~, Houston, Texas, 1978.  5. Lievano, 
Rodrigo J., Energy Use and the Environment, Unpublished doctorsl dissertation, University of Houston, 
1975.  6. Shubick, Martin, "Simulation of the Industry and the Firm"; American Economic Review, i, No. 
5, (Dec. 1960), p. 909.  7. Thompson, R. G., James A. Calloway, and Lillian A. Nawalanic, Th___~e Qost 
of Energy and a Clean Environment, Gulf Publishing Co., Houston, 1978.  
			