
 Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain SIMULATION OF THE ILLINOIS WATERWAY LOCKS SYSTEM D. Brent Bandy Department of Information 
Systems and Operations Management College of Business Administration University of Wisconsin Oshkosh 
Oshkosh, WI 54901, U.S.A. ABSTRACT A computer simulation model of the locks system on the Illinois Waterway 
is described. The model was developed using ProModel for Windows and includes boats and barge tows traveling 
through the leeks system and operation of the leeks. Entities with attributes are used to simulate the 
boats and barge tows that enter the system, travel either upstream or downstream through the locks, and 
then leave the system. Locations are used for the locks and for entry and exiting of the boats and barge 
tows. The operation of the locks is simulated through the use of variables, resources, and operation 
logic in the processing module. The handling of both boats and barge tows in the helm greatly complicates 
the simulation model, since their differences in size is signitlcrmt. For example, a loekage can easily 
handle tenor more boats, while a barge tow with f~n barges can require a double lockage (typically nine 
barges for the fwst loekage and six barges and the tow boat for the second Ieckage). At times both barge 
tows and boats are included in a single loekage. 1 INTRODUCTION The Illinois Waterway is pi$rt of the 
waterway system that links the Great Lakes with the Gulf of Mexico. It is the largest and most important 
water route in Illinois, extending tlom Lake Michigaa at the Chicago and Calumet Harbors to the mouth 
of the Illinois River where it empties into the Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois, about 50 miles 
north of St. Louis. The Illinois Waterway is composed of the Illinois Rivev the Chicago Sanitary and 
Ship Canal; the Calumet Sag Channet and parts of the Cahune4 Little Calume4 Chicago, and Des Plaines 
Rivers. There are nine locks on the Illinois Waterway. he total drop in water elevation from Lake Michigan 
to Grafton is about 160 feeL. ProModel is a -te event simulation software package developed primarily 
for manufacturing and service systems (ProModel Corporation 1992). The Windows version is very easy to 
use, and its capabilities allow for building simulation models quickly and efllciently. One of the primary 
features of ProModel for Windows is its animation cap~bllities. It uses the graphic capabilities of Windows 
to builld both the model and its animation representation interactively. Thus, animation is not an add-on 
feature. It is an integral part of the model building process. ProModel has lbeen used extensively in 
various application areas; however, using it to simulate a river leeks system is a challenging, unique 
application. 2 THE ILLINOIS WATERWAY LOCKS SYSTEM Eight of the leeks on the Illinois Waterway are U.S. 
Government leeks operated by the Army Corps of Engineers (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1974). They are 
at the following locations (relative to the mouth of the Illinois River at Gratlon): La Grange, Mile 
80.2; Peoria, Mile 157.7; Starved ROCIGMile 231.0; Marseilles, Mile 244.16; Dresden Island, Mile 271 
.5; Brandon Road, Mile 286.0; Lockport, Mile 291.1; and Thomas J. O Brien, Mile 326.5. The other leek 
is in Chicago Harbor and is operated by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago. The Thomas 
J. O Brien Leek is the largest of the locks on the Illinois Waterway, with usable dimensions of 110 feet 
in width by 1000 feet in length. The other seven U.S. Government locks all have usable dimensions of 
110 feet in width by 600 feet in length. The lock operated by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater 
Chicago has usable dimensions of 80 feet in width by 600 feet in lemgt.h. The northern part of the Illinois 
Waterway starts at Lake Michigan, which has an elevation of about 580 feet, and has two branches. The 
southern branch starts at the mouth of the Calumet River at Ctjlumet Harbor in Lake Michigan on the south 
side of Chicago, east of 91st Street. From there it consists of the Calumet River for eight miles to 
where it becomes the Little Calumet River near 141st Street and Torrence Avenue; the Little Calumet River 
for six miles to where it joins the Calumet Sag Channel at Blue Island; and the Calumet Sag Channel for 
16 miles to where it joins the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canrd near Lemont. 1483 The northern branch 
starts at the mouth of the Chicago River at Lake Michigan in downtown Chicago, essentially at the lock 
in Chicago Harbor. From there it consists of the Chicago River for two miles to where it branches near 
Lake Street and Franklin Street in downtown Chicago; the South Branch of the Chicago River for four miles 
to where it is connected to the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal near 31st Street and Ashland Avenu~ and 
the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal for 18 miles to where the Calumet Sag Channel joins it near Lemont. 
The Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal project was completed in 1900 and the canrd carries Chicago s treated 
sewage southwest, away fmm Lake Michigan. Before its completion, Chicago dumped its sewage in Lake Michigan. 
The lock in Chicago Harbor was built as part of the project which included reversing the flow of the 
Chicago River from east to west. It was the first river in the world to flow away from its mouth. The 
Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal is 30 miles long, 202 feet wide, and 24 feet deep. Its rate of flow is 
controlled by sluice gates at Chicago Harbor and at the Thomas J. O Brien Lock and Controlling Works. 
There are two locks on the northern part of the lllinois Waterway, the lock in Chicago Harbor at the 
beginning of the northern branch and the Thomas J. O Brien Lock and Controlling Works on the southern 
branch. The O Brien Lock is at about the midpoint of the 14-mile s~tch of the Calmnet and Little Calumet 
Rivers that connects Calumet Harbor to the Calumet Sag Channel. It is on the Calumet River seven miles 
from Cahunet Harbor. The entrance to the lock by car is on 130th Street, just west of Torrence Avenue 
on the south side of Chicago. The change in the water level at the Thomas J. O Brien Lock varies somewhat 
as it does at all of the locks, but is approximately four feet. The location near Lemont where the Cahunet 
Sag Channel joins the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal is 303.5 miles by water from the mouth of the Illinois 
River at Grafton. Of course, the actual distance is much less, since there are many bends in the Illinois 
and Des Plaines Rivers. From its junction with the Calumet Sag Channel, the Chicago Sanitary and Ship 
Canal extends 13.5 miles further, joining the Des Plaines River between Joliet and Lockport. There is 
one lock on this part of the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, the Lockport Lock and Dam, which is one 
mile east of the junction of the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal with the Des Plaines River. l%e change 
in elevation at the Lockport Lock and Dam is about 40 feet. The Des Plaines River is next to the Chicago 
Sanitary and Ship Canal for 24 miles, tiom their junction between Joliet and Lockport northeast to Summit. 
From its junction with the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, the Des Plaines River flows southwest for 
17 more miles until it joins with the Kankakee River near Dresden Heights in Will County to form the 
Illinois River. The Brandon Road Lock and Dam is on this part of the Des Plaines River, four miles southwest 
of its junction with the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal. Ihe Bandy entrance to this lock by car is 
at the intersection of Brandon Road and U.S. Highway 6 near Rockdale, which is just west ofJoliet. Ihe 
change in elevation at the Brandon Road Lock and Dam is about 35 feet. The Illinois River is 273 miles 
long and makes up the longest stretch of the Illinois Waterway. There are five locks on the Illinois 
River. Going downstream, the first one is Dresden Island Lock and Dam, which is near Kankakee Blti 1.5 
miles from the confluence of the Des Plaines and Kankakm Rivers. The change in elevation at Dresden Island 
is about 25 feet. The Marseilles Lock is 27 miles further downstream, while the Marseilles Dam is only 
25 miles downstream near downtown Marseilles. The Marseilles Canrd is two miles long next to the Illinois 
River, extending from the dam to the lock The change in elevation at Marseilles is about 20 feet. Proceeding 
downstrearnthe Starved Rock Lock and Dam is 13.5 miles fmm the Marseilles Lock, eight miles west of Ottawa 
and five miles east of LaSalle. It has a change in elevation of about 20 feet, and is the easiest of 
the Illinois River locks to view, since Starved Rock State Park, with its high bluffs, is adjacent to 
the dam on the south shore, The lock is next to the north shore and has a visitor center. The Peoria 
Lock and Dam is 73 miles downstream of the Starved Reck I.ock and Dam. It has a change in elevation of 
about ten feet, but varies greatly. It can be seen tiom Interstate 494, just south of Peoria, where it 
crosses the Illinois River. he La Grange Lock and Dam is 68 miles downstream of the Peoria Lock and Dam 
and 80 miles upstream of the mouth of the Illinois River at Grafton, about half way between Beardstown 
and Meredosia. By car it is on some back country roads, pretty much in the middle of nowhere. The change 
in elevation is about five feeg but varies greatly. The elevation of the Mississippi River at Grafton 
is approximately 420 feet. However, in floods the elevation increases signitlcantly. On the other hand, 
during droughts the elevation is lower. In recent floods both the Peoria and the La Grange Lock and Dams 
have been completely under water, with the water level reaching to the second floor of the buildings 
next to the locks.  3 USE OF THE LOCKS River locks provide a means for bypassing rapids, dams, and other 
locations on the river where there are signMcant changes in elevation. Sometimes canals am associated 
with locks system, connecting the locks to the river either upstream or downstream of the elevation change, 
as is the case with the Marseilles Canal. Canrds can also provide connections between rivers and other 
waterways, including both the Calumet Sag Channel and the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal. Of course, 
there can be locks and dams directly on canals, such as the Lo&#38;port Lock and Dam on the Chicago Sanitary 
and Ship Canal. Simulation of the Illinois Waterway Locks S,ystem Whether vessels are traveling upstream 
or downstream, the procedure for a lockage is essentially the same. Before vessels enter the lock, the 
elevation of the water inside the lock has to be the same as that where the vessels are located. The 
water elevation inside the locks is controlled by underwater valves at both the upstream and downstream 
gates.When the lock gates are opened, vessels can enter the lock. Of course, the lock gates and underwater 
valves must be closed at the other end of the lock to maintain the proper water level. &#38;number of 
vessels that will fit in the lock depends on the usable dimensions of the lock and the size and shape 
of the vessels. Safety considerations also play a role. As many as twenty or more small boats can easily 
tit into a large leek. On the other hand, barge tows are otlen too big to fit into a lock and must be 
moved through in two parts, which is referred to as a double lockage. Once the vessels are in the lock, 
the underwater valves and the leek gates are closed. Then the underwater valves at the other end of the 
lock are opened, which allows the water elevation in the lock to eventually equalize with that on the 
other side of the exit gates. The length of time required for this is determined by the size of the valve 
openings and the total change of elevation required for the water inside the lock Otlen the vatves are 
not used wide-open, due to safety considerations with respect to water turbulence, both inside the leek 
and on the other side of the lock gates when other vessels are waiting there to use the leek. Once the 
water elevation inside the lock is sufllciently close to that on the other side of the exit gates, the 
gates are opened. The vessels then exit the lock and proceed on their trip. Vessels traveling through 
locks systems are obviously self-propelled. However, often barge tows must be split into two parts to 
get them through a lock. When this happens, the part with the tow boat is still self-propelled; however, 
the part that has only barges must be moved by some other external force. This force is provided by electric 
wenches that are located on shore both upstream and downstream of the leek.  4 BOAT AND BARGE TRAFFIC 
Trafllc on the Illinois Waterway consists of both boats and barges, which must be moved by tow boats. 
A barge tow consists of a tow boat and from one to sixteen or more barges, depending on the size of the 
barges. The barges carry a variety of products, including grain, chemicals, coal, sand and gravel. Barge 
tows move up and down the waterway at approximately five miles per hour. For lockages there are essentially 
three types associated with barge tows: 1) a single lockage without having to recontlgure the barge tow; 
2) a single lockage with some reconilguration of the barge tow being require~ and 3) a double lockage. 
For the first type of loekage, the barge tows have overall dimensions that are less than the usable 
dimensions of the lock. It is possible that these could consist of nine or more barges and the tow boat 
especially at the Thomas J. O Brien bc~ which is the largest lock in the system. Typically they consist 
of one or two barges (or three small barges) in single tie, or of six barges, three abreast followed 
by the towboat. For lockages of the second type, the barge tows have an overall length that exceeds the 
usable length of the leek. hey could have as few as three barges, but often have four barges, in single 
file, followed by the towboat. Of course, it would be possible to conllgure the barge tow to fit into 
the lock (and thus into the fmt type of lockage); however, they are configured in single file for navigational 
purposes. These barge tows move through the leek in the following manne~ 1) The barge tow is moved into 
the lock and the front barges are tied to the side of the lock. 2) The barge tow is untied in such away 
that the two parts will fit into the lock lengthwise. 3) The back part of the barge tow backs away from 
the front part, moves to the side and enters the lock next to the front part. 4) The lockage is completed. 
5) The front part of the barge tow is pulled out of the lock using one of the electric wenches onshore. 
6) The back part of the barge tow moves into position behind the front part. 7) The barge tow is tied 
back together again. 8) The barge tow continues the trip. Double lockages are required for barge tows 
that are so big that they cannot fit into the leek for a single kdcage. Usually they consist of nine 
or more barges, three abreast, followed by the tow boat. These barge tows relquire two lockages and they 
move through the lock in the following mannec 1) The barge tow is moved into the leek and the front barges 
are tied to the side of the lock. 2) The Ibarge tow is untied in such a way that each of the two parts 
will fit into the lock. 3) The back part of the barge tow backs out of the lock. 4) The lockage for the 
front part is completed. 5) The front part of the barge tow is pulled out of the lock using an electric 
wench. 6) The water level in the lock is returned to the initial level (essentially an empty loekage, 
which does not count). 7) The back part of the barge tow moves into position into the lock. 8) The lockage 
is completed for the back part of the barge tow. 9) The back part of the Ibarge tow moves into position 
behind the front part. 10) The Ibarge tow is tied back together again. 11) The barge tow continues the 
trip. Commercial boats are typically much smaller than barge tows. In addition, the Illinois Waterway 
is used extensively for recreation, which results in numerous small boatz using the system. The recreational 
boating season is primarily during the summer months, especially on weekends and holidays. Several small 
boats can be moved through a leek on a single lockage. In addition, a few smrdl boats will often fit 
into the leek with a barge tow, or part of a barge tow. Ilk is often done, at the discretion of the dockmaster, 
subject to safety considerations. In cases where a double IIockage is required for the barge tow, boata 
can be included in the seeond lockage. 1486 Bandy 5 DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL The model, which was developed 
using ProModel for Windows, simulates the operation of the Illinois Waterway in terms of the boats and 
barge tows traveling through the locks system and operation of the leeks. Entities and locations were 
the starting points for developing the model. Entities in the model represent the boats and barge tows 
that enter the system, travel either upstream or downstream through the leeks, and then leave the system. 
Locations within the model include the leeks, locations where barge tows and boats enter and/or leave 
the system, and queues for barge tows and boats where they wait to use the locks. Operation of the locks 
is simulated through the use of variables, resources, and operation logic in the processing module. The 
northern branch of the northern part of the Illinois Waterway, which extends tiom the mouth of the Chicago 
River at Lake Michigan to the junction of the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal and the Crdumet Sag Channel 
near LemonL is not included in the model. In addhion, there are a great many barge tows and boats that 
use the Illinois Waterway without going through a leek. These barge tows and boata are not included in 
the simulation, since its primary focus is on the leeks. There are only two entities in the model, one 
for boats and one for barge tows. They have five attributes as follows: 1) direetion in which the boat 
or barge tow is traveling (1 = downstream, 2 = upstream); 2) speed of the boat or barge tow in miles 
per houq 3) size of the boat or barge tow for use in determiningg how many will fit into the lock for 
a lockagq 4) additional duration required for the loekage due to the size of the boat or barge tow; and 
5) final destination for the boat or barge tow (from 1 for the La Grange Leek at the southern part to 
8 for the Ilomas J. O Brien Lock in the northern part). There are 44 locations in the model, as shown 
in Figure 1. Of these 44 locations, 24 are direetly associated with the locks, eight locations for the 
eight locks and 16 locations for queues for the boats and barge tows that are waiting for the leeks. 
Two queues, which look like ladders in Figure 1, are needed for each lock to handle the vessels going 
upstream and the vessels going downstream. Six locations are used to identify the rivers and canals for 
the animation aspects of the models: Illinois River, Des Plaines River, Little Calumet --CalumM River 
Calumet Harbor -:Oma% ~ ~Briee LO* A, -little Calurn.tRiver ~h bland ­w Calumet Sag Channel -L.mont 
Jolict ~= chicago S..it.ry and Ship Canal --Lotkp.rt Lock Rockdalc -9 -%nden Read Lock re d % lFA.Plaiim.Riv.r 
Kankak.m Bluffs ­ -Kankakce River Maweifle. = -Dre.de. Island Lock LrI $nllc s Ottawa -# -Mameif!w Lock 
--= .# .st.rved Rock Lock Peoria ­ :$mri= ,O=k R ~ Beardstown M -La Grange Lock R E Mecedosia -Grafton 
 F@ure 1. Locations in tie ProModel Shrmlation Model of tie Illinois Waterway Locks System Simulation 
of the Illinois River, CahnnetRiver, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, and Cah,unet Sag Channel. The 
other 14 locations are also used fbr animation to identify locations that are part of or near the Illinois 
Waterway: Calumet Harbor, Blue Island, Lemont, JolieC Roekdrde, Dresden Heights, Kankakee Bluffs, Marseilles, 
Ottaw&#38; LaSalle, Pcori% Beardstown, Meredosia, and Grafton. Squares are shown in Figure 1 for all 
locations that are not queues. When the simulation model is run, the squares and ladders disappear, and 
the animation depicts the boats and barge tows moving up and down the Illinios Waterway, waiting for 
the locks, moving through the leeks, and proceeding to their final destination. It should be noted that 
Figure 1 is not to scale. For example, the distance from Grafton to the Peoria Lock is 158 miles, while 
the distance from the Starved Rock Lock to the Lockport Leek is only 60 miles. Of the twenty locations 
in the model that are used to identify locations for animation, nine are also used to handle arrivals 
of the entities that represent boats and barge tows. These include Calumet Harbor and Grafton, the two 
end points of the Illinois Waterway, as well as one location between each pair of adjacent locks. There 
are 18 sets of arrivals in the model, for each of the two entities arriving at each of the nine arrival 
locations. For each set of arrivals several aspects are included the time of the f~st arrivrd, the total 
number of arrivals in the model run, the interarrival ftequency, and logic for calculating values for 
all of the attributes for the entity. The exponentird probability distribution is used interarrival times. 
thus assuming a Poisson process for arrivals. Operation of the locks and routing of the barge tows and 
boats from location to location is one of the most involved aspects of the model. This part of the model 
is carried out through the use of resources, global variables, priorities, and operation logic in the 
processing section of ProModel. For each leek four resources are required, for boats and barge tows traveling 
upstream and traveling downstream. These resources are used to move the boats and barge tows from the 
corresponding location queue to the location for the leek. The operation logic for the boats and barge 
tows at the leek locations also uses these resources, in order to prevent them from moving any boats 
or barge tows into the lock location during a lockage that is already in progress. Seven global variables 
are used in this logic for each lock for the following aspeem 1) the total amount of time required for 
the lockage; 2) the number of boats involved in the loekage; 3) the direction the barge tow and/or boats 
are traveling for the lockage; 4) an indicator variable for whether or not a barge tow is involved in 
the lockag~ 5) an indicator variable for whether or not the lock is in use or is reserved for a loekage; 
6) a counter to keep track of the boats going upstream as they enter and leave the loclG and 7) a counter 
to keep track of the boats going downstream as they enter and leave the lock. Barge tows have priority 
over boats for loekages, so theii resources are freed fwst when a lockage ends. Thus, if Waterway Locks 
System 1487 any barge tows are waiting in the queues, one will enter the lock before any boats are allowed 
to enter. If them is room for boats in the loekage along with the barge tow, tlhey enter the leek following 
the barge tow. If no barge tow is involved in b lockage, all of the boats that are waiting and are going 
in the direction of the lockage will be included, up to the capacity of the loclL which is assumed to 
be 33 boats for the Thomas J. O Brien kk and 20 boats for the other locks. Resources are also freed in 
a manner that nesults in alternating between loekages going upstream and loekages going downstream, when 
boats going in both directions are present. However, barge tows still take priority over boats, even 
if consecutive barge tows are going in lhe same direction. REFERENCES ProModel Corporation. 1992. ProModel 
PC User Manual -Production Systems Planning and Anulysis. ProModel Corporation. Orem, Utah. U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers. 1974. Charts of the Illinois Waterway -from Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois 
to Lake Michigan at Chicago and Calumet Harbors. U.S. Army Engineer District, Chicago, Illinois. AUTHOR 
BIOGRAPHY D. BRENT BANDY is an assistant professor in the Information Systems and Operations Management 
Department at the University of Wisconsin Oshlcosh. Prior to coming to UW Oshkosh in 1984, he worked 
for sixteen years for Amoco as a systems analyst and operations research consultant. He received his 
B.S. in {Chemical Engineering from the University of Illinois, his M.S. and Ph. D. in Chemical Engineering 
from Northwestern University, and his M.B.A. from the University of Chicago. He is a member of SCS, INFORMS, 
and APICS. 
			