
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. SIMULATION AS A MISSION PLANNING AND REHEARSAL TOOL William M. Garrabrants VisiCom Laboratories, 
Incorporated 10052 Mesa Ridge Court San Diego, CA 92121, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT There has long been an understanding 
by all military services that simulation systems provide an effective means of training combat units 
and their command structure to prepare them for eventual combat situations. Simulation is well understood 
as a training tool witness the large investment in the development of the next generation joint staff 
training tool, the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). However, the role of simulation systems in the staff 
planning process has not been exploited as fully as possible. With simulation's capability to control 
clock speed, quickly run through multiple scenarios, and do "what-if" planning, simulation systems are 
a natural support tool for the military commander and his staff to facilitate their planning in all phases 
of the staff planning process. This paper proposes an expansion of simulation systems' role to support 
all levels of command and control functioning, especially staff planning after receipt of orders and 
mission rehearsal. Each of the steps in the staff planning process are discussed in terms of the role 
that simulation should play. INTRODUCTION The Marine Corps' modeling and simulation system, the Marine 
Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) Tactical Warfare Simulation (MTWS), has been used in a training setting 
since its fielding in 1995. MTWS is an advanced simulation system that models all aspects of combat (air, 
land, sea, and amphibious ship-to-shore activities). MTWS is comprised of the following functional components 
(for a detailed description of MTWS and its components, see Blais 1994): MTWS Application Network (MAN) 
 distributed workstations performing combat simulation (e.g., ground combat, fire support, air operations, 
combat service support, combat engineering, intelligence) MTWS System Control (MSC) provides archival 
exercise data storage and retrieval, report generation, restart, and exercise clock management (the game 
clock can be regulated from 1/4 to 10 times normal time)  MTWS Display System (MDS) user workstations 
enabling command entry, report request, report display, map display, tactical data display, parametric 
data editing, batch file creation and maintenance, and batch file entry  MTWS Aggregate Level Simulation 
Protocol (ALSP) Translator (MAT) performs communications between MTWS and diverse simulation systems, 
including other service models, using ALSP  MTWS Analysis and Review System (MARS) provides analytical 
tools for display, reporting, and charting time-tagged exercise data during and after exercise conduct. 
MARS provides graphical and tabular display of exercise data which can be viewed in user defined time 
segments (for more information on MARS, see Blais 98).  Since its fielding, MTWS has been the backbone 
of the Marine Corps' simulated combat training environment. Its flexibility in that setting has been 
aptly demonstrated, supporting exercises that range in scope from classroom support at the Marine Corps' 
schools (Staff Non-Commissioned Officer [NCO] Academy, Amphibious Warfare School, and the Command and 
Staff College) to joint level exercises involving a confederation of other service simulations joined 
via the ALSP. In these venues, MTWS has proven its ability to model forces at various levels of fidelity 
and to adapt to a wide variety of scenarios. There is, however, another practical and important use for 
simulation systems like MTWS: supporting staff planning and mission rehearsal activities. Figure 1: 
Commander's Decision-Making Process (FM 101-5) THE PLANNING PROCESS The Marine Corps Planning Process 
(MCPP) pamphlet describes the staff planning process as an overlapping, flexible, coherent method of 
solving problems from performing mission analysis to creating an approved plan. Field manual FM 101-5 
(Staff Organization and Operations) further details the planning process after receipt of an order. It 
identifies staff actions from mission receipt to mission accomplishment (Figure 1), detailing activities 
for each of the staff members. MTWS, as a planning tool, will effectively support most of those activities. 
Each activity is examined below, noting how MTWS can support that activity. In an operational setting, 
MTWS enables the MAGTF commander and his staff to accomplish: Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace 
(IPB)  Identification of Centers of Gravity (COG)  Intelligence Briefings to Staff Members  Course 
of Action (COA) Analysis and Selection  Commander's Wargaming  Mission Rehearsal  Post-Operational 
Analysis  Every phase of the staff planning process can be supported by MTWS to enhance the decision-making 
process. Modeling and simulation, by its very nature gives the staff and the commander insight into the 
terrain, weather, and hostile forces arrayed against them that is difficult to obtain by static briefing 
slides. The following paragraphs describe the role MTWS can play in each phase of the Commander's Decision-Making 
process. 2.1 Receipt of Mission/Mission Analysis During the "Mission Analysis" phase of the process, 
the assigned mission, specified, implied, and essential tasks and commander's intent are scrutinized. 
IPB is performed to gain an appreciation for all aspects of the battlespace, and assumptions and limitations 
are reviewed. MTWS is employed in the initial IPB efforts. MTWS assists both the Intelligence Officer 
and the Operations Officer in analyzing the effects of terrain and weather on operations. Movement of 
troops, equipment, supplies, and aircraft for both friendly and enemy forces are studied on the MTWS 
Display System (MDS). The effects of the area of operations' infrastructure and demographics on movement 
and fire support can also be examined. The results of this analysis are displayed on the MDS or MARS 
workstations and constitute detailed situational templates. Analysis of the templates is performed by 
the Intelligence Officer to determine the enemy's most likely and most dangerous courses of action. The 
commander and staff are then briefed on the enemy COAs. Wargames are then prepared for future COA analysis. 
Intelligence briefings to the staff are conducted directly on the MTWS or the MARS workstations to provide 
a "live" presentation with animated unit depictions as opposed to a static briefing performed on a map 
and overlay. In essence, MTWS batch files that define initial enemy positions and their doctrinal movement 
on the battlefield become the formal situational overlay product from IPB. Screen captures of selected 
points in the MARS reviews are placed into presentation software for other briefing requirements. Additionally, 
MARS data files are sent to subordinates, who may also have MARS, for their review along with the warning 
order. This would serve to inform the subordinate commanders and their staffs of the current analysis 
of the enemy situation. The process of analyzing enemy course of action on MTWS will highlight gaps in 
intelligence that will aid the commander in identifying and articulating the Commander's Critical Information 
Requirements (CCIR). In addition, analysis of these information gaps will assist the Intelligence Officer 
in creating his initial reconnaissance and surveillance plan. Using MTWS, the Intelligence Officer can 
experiment with his reconnaissance and surveillance resources to determine the most effective resource(s) 
to employ in each gap to satisfy the CCIRs. Another byproduct of visualizing the friendly and enemy situation 
as developed in MTWS is that it will aid the commander in identifying sources of the friendly and enemy 
strengths, power, and will (their centers of gravity (COGs). Identification of the COGs is acknowledged 
to be the single most important element of the commander's guidance to his staff.  2.2 Courses of Action 
Development During this phase of the decision-making process, relative combat powers, critical capabilities, 
and critical requirements are determined and linked to COGs. COA narratives and sketches are developed 
to balance capabilities against vulnerabilities. MTWS is utilized to conduct an analysis of the relative 
combat powers of friendly and enemy forces, determining various points of vulnerability of the enemy 
forces. As the COAs are developed, each is built as a scenario in MTWS. At least two enemy COAs should 
be scripted: the most likely enemy course of action, and the most dangerous enemy course of action. The 
depictions of these potential enemy options will be used to test the suitability and feasibility of the 
friendly COAs in the COA analysis phase. A scheme of maneuver for each of the friendly COAs is scripted 
into MTWS for future analysis. The development of this scheme of maneuver in MTWS involves establishment 
of initial positions, movement plans, and fire support timing. As stored in MTWS, the sequence of commands, 
with time stamps, represents a synchronization matrix that can be used later for rehearsals and for actual 
coordination of forces on the ground. 2.3 Course of Action Analysis COA Analysis seeks to evaluate the 
COA narratives and sketches for suitability, feasibility, flexibility, and acceptability. Wargaming is 
the principal source of analysis, with the final products of the phase being: Sequences (including branches) 
for each COA  Critical decision points  Event matrix and decision support templates for each COA  
Completed synchronization matrix  Each COA is run on MTWS with the Intelligence Officer functioning 
as the enemy commander. The activities of each unit and the combat results are captured in MARS for future 
evaluation and comparison while MTWS command entry files are time-stamped to build final synchronization 
matrixes for each COA. Using MTWS's inherent ability to accelerate time advance, scenarios can be run 
in a fraction of the time normally required to test a scenario. Time permitting, multiple runs of each 
COA are performed and results tabulated. After each COA is run through on MTWS, each staff officer analyzes 
the advantages and disadvantages of each COA from his perspective based on their experiences during the 
wargaming. Staff officers can review each COA's results in MARS to make their determination of suitability, 
feasibility, flexibility, and supportability since MARS will depict not just the scheme of maneuver, 
but attrition, supply consumption, and timing. Briefings to the rest of the staff depicting critical 
decision points are conducted using the time-frame viewing capabilities in MARS and become visual event 
matrixes and decision support plans.  2.4 Course of Action Comparison/Decision The process of COA Comparison 
is the most critical phase of the staff planning process. Here, each COA is compared against decision 
criteria to determine which best accomplishes the mission, minimizes friendly casualties, and positions 
the forces to retain the initiative for future operations. All results of the comparison are reviewed, 
and the commander decides on the COA to be used. The product of this phase is an approved COA with a 
concept of operations and a warning order. The comparison of the COAs is best accomplished using MARS 
to graphically depict the event-by-event status of each COA. The data collected during the wargaming 
of the COAs is used to brief the Commander during the Commander's Decision Briefing. This briefing can 
be presented to the Commander as a "live" presentation using MTWS and MARS to describe the scheme of 
maneuver, synchronization issues, potential enemy actions, and combat results. Based on his visualization 
of the COAs, and after listening to the analysis of his staff, the Commander selects a COA.  2.5 Orders 
Development During the "Orders Development" phase, supporting documentation for the approved plan is 
prepared and disseminated to subordinates for preparation for execution. MTWS products from the COA analysis 
provide a significant portion of the desired documentation. The situational template (in the form of 
MTWS batch files to establish and maneuver enemy forces) provides subordinates with an excellent understanding 
of the enemy disposition and inclination. Command entry sequences from the wargame provides the synchronization 
matrix. And finally, the MARS output of the COA analysis gives the subordinate commanders excellent understanding 
of the scheme of maneuver and the commander's intent. MISSION REHEARSAL The "Mission Rehearsal" phase 
of the process is supported by MTWS by providing a tool for the subordinate commanders to gain insight 
into the terrain and weather factors that will influence their actions in the objective area. It also 
provides a means of rehearsing the timing issues relevant to the execution of the scheme of maneuver. 
Figure 2, from FM 101-5 (Staff Organization and Operations), provides a graph indicating the increase 
in relative understanding of the personnel involved in a variety of rehearsal techniques. The closer 
to a full dress rehearsal of the scheme of maneuver, the greater the understanding by all involved personnel. 
Unfortunately, as rehearsal techniques become more complex, preparation time rises significantly. Time, 
the Commander's most precious asset (and normally in very short supply after receipt of orders) must 
be spent carefully. The use of MTWS in the COA analysis phase of the planning process significantly reduces 
preparation time for an effective high-reward rehearsal. The initial friendly and enemy situation is 
already built in by virtue of having performed the COA analysis. The simulation is simply reset to the 
desired starting time, the participants (staff members and subordinate commanders) are issued their orders, 
and the rehearsal begins. Subordinate commanders sit at an MDS, observe their units in the maneuver, 
and issue commands to the MDS operator to coordinate their unit's activities with the plan and with adjacent 
units. During the rehearsal, an opportunity to investigate branching of potential enemy reactions exists 
(time permitting). This would prepare subordinates for other eventualities during the course of the actual 
execution of the plan.  Figure 2 Rehearsal Techniques Relative to Time and Understanding (FM 101-5) 
852 The result is a highly informative, detailed rehearsal in which commanders at all levels receive 
area familiarization and are able to refine issues of synchronization of fire support, air, assault and 
ground movement before they have arrived in the objective area. Data captured by MARS can point out high 
priority targets where scheduled fires would be most beneficial and other matters relevant to ensuring 
the greatest opportunity for success. 4 POST-OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS Although still in developmental stages, 
MTWS has established connectivity to C4I systems that could potentially allow C4I systems to feed actual 
operational data back into the simulation. This "backward" feed from the C4I system into MTWS would allow 
MTWS to record actual events in their proper timing and location. Then, following the operation, post-operational 
analysis would be possible through replay on MTWS or MARS. 5 CURRENT INITIATIVES The Marine Corps Office 
of Science and Innovation (OSI), recognizing the potential that simulation systems offer in the mission 
planning role, is proposing a study to determine effective methods of using simulation to support analysis 
of courses of action (Bailey 1998). The OSI concept, similar to a concept under consideration at the 
Joint Training and Simulation Center (JTASC) in Suffolk, Virginia, is to utilize existing simulation 
centers with their expertise and staffing to provide a COA analysis service to deployed commanders. Under 
the OSI concept, COAs would be developed and passed to the simulation facility. The facility, in turn, 
would run the COAs through the simulation at greatly accelerated rates (25:1), and provide the results 
back to the deployed commander for evaluation. The results would be returned to the commander in a form 
that could be reviewed in detail on an analysis and review system similar to MARS. The advantage of this 
approach is clear: the capability of the simulation centers like those at Quantico Virginia, Camp Lejeune 
North Carolina, and Camp Pendleton California are utilized to their fullest and the necessity to deploy 
simulation experts is avoided. 6 SUMMARY As a result of its ability to represent terrain, weather, troops 
and equipment, to review scenarios, and to compress the representation of time, a simulation system like 
MTWS is a natural solution to the commander's need for a planning and rehearsal system to support his 
operational planning efforts. In a deployable configuration, simulation is an integral component of the 
commander's warfighting tool kit. Deployed commanders with access to a modeling and simulation system 
and its inherent ability to support planning for contingency operations or other assigned tasks will 
be more prepared to meet enemy forces and win in battle.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Thanks to Dr. Mike Bailey, 
Marine Corps Office of Science and Innovation, Quantico, Virginia for his ideas regarding current initiatives 
to exploit simulation tools. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and VisiCom Laboratories, 
Incorporated, and do not necessarily express the official position or policies of the United States Marine 
Corps or the United States Navy. REFERENCES Bailey, Mike. 1998. Course of action assessment support 
today (Draft). Office of Science and Innovation, Marine Corps Modeling and Simulation Office. Blais, 
C. L. 1994. Marine air ground task force (MAGTF) tactical warfare simulation (MTWS). In Proceedings of 
the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J.D. Tew, M. Manivannan, D.A. Sadowski, and A.F. Seila, 839-844. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. Blais, C. L. 1998. Prototyping 
advanced warfare gaming capabilities for the 21st century warfighter. In Proceedings of the 1998 Winter 
Simulation Conference, ed. D.J. Medeiros, E. F. Watson, M. Manivannan, and J. Carson. Institute of Electrical 
and Electronic Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. United Sates Army. 1990. Staff organization and operations 
(FM 101-5), United States Army Training and Doctrine Command, Virginia. United States Marine Corps. 1997. 
Marine Corps planning process (MCPP) pamphlet (Draft). Marine Corps Staff Training Program Center, Virginia. 
 AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY WILLIAM GARRABRANTS is Project Manager for the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) 
Tactical Warfare Simulation (MTWS) at VisiCom Laboratories, Incorporated in San Diego, California. He 
has 20 years of experience in command and staff operations in the United States Marine Corps and 5 years 
of experience in modeling and simulation as applied to military combat, command, control, and communications 
systems. Mr. Garrabrants received his M.S. in Computer Systems from the Naval Postgraduate School in 
1990 
			