
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D. Goldsman SIMULATING AN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT IS AS MUCH FIJN AS... Anthony Kirtland Jacqueline Lockwood 
Karen Poisker Linda Stamp Patricia Wolfe Peninsula Regional Medical Center 100 East Carroll Street Salisbury, 
MD 21801, U.S.A. ABSTRACT The purpose of this project is to improve the operation of Peninsula Regional 
Medical Center s (PRMC) Emergency Department (ED) and decrease patient dissatisfaction with length of 
stay. The goal is to reduce patient throughput times and determine the appropriate staffing levels. An 
additional goal is to aid in identifying other system changes to improve patient and department flows 
in the ED through the use of simulation. 1 INTRODUCTION The objectives of this project are to reduce 
the patient s length-of-stay in the ED, and to decide the appropriate staffing levels for registered 
nurses and technicians. The operating environment of the ED had experienced significant changes in the 
past two years, first was a 160/0reduction in patient visits, second were operational changes that required 
a revision of the productivity system that had not been updated in four years, and last was increased 
patient dissatisfaction with long waiting and treatment times in the ED. The project examined 11 different 
alternatives to improve patient flow and determined the appropriate staffing mix based on patient volume. 
The top three alternatives were: first using a fwt track system in minor care, second the staging of 
patients to the next available treatment room, and third using point-of-care testing. The impact of changes 
is a reduction in patient turnaround time by 38 minutes. 2 OVERVIEW Peninsula Regional Medical Center 
is a 400+ bed tertiary care medical center in eastern Maryland. The ED typically treats 40,000 patients 
per year. The ED is the only level H trauma center on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, it has minor care 
facilities, serves as the regional Emergency Medical Services (EMS) base station, and an acute psychiatric 
evaluation center. The ED was experiencing significant changes in its environment: (1) a reduction in 
the number of patient visits over the past two years from 48,000 to 40,000, (2) departmental productivity 
and comparative indicators were declining, (3) the department had recently completed an expansion and 
renovation, and (4) patient dissatisfaction with length-of-stay in the department was increasing. All 
these factors lead the staff and management to believe that a systematic approach was needed to determine 
the appropriate staffing and services levels, and identify other methods to improve patient flow. A project 
team composed of nursing and department management, ED nurses, ED physicians, ED technicians, and management 
consulting was formed to investigate methods to improve these department processes. The team chose simulation 
as a tool to examine the current system and to test any proposed changes. MedModelTM simulation software 
was selected because of easeof use and the graphical interface that allows the visualization of the simulated 
system. 3 CURRENT SYSTEM To build the simulation model the first task for the team, was to collect data 
about the operation of the ED. Data was collected from patient charts, emergency department logs, computer 
information systems, interviews, observations and data collection where information was not available. 
Information about arrival times by hour of day were taken from a three-month sample period. The arrival 
pattern that the department experienced was used to distribute the patient arrivals during the day. Once 
this data was captured, the next step was to flowchart the patient and staff activities. The team developed 
detailed flows for the following nine patient types; abdominal pain, lacerations, fractures, non red 
and yellow trauma (non life threatening), red and yellow trauma (life threatening), medical emergencies, 
cardiac emergencies/clnest pain, assault (sexual and physical), ar{d minor-care. Each of these patient 
care categories were subdivided into five levels of increasing patient acuity. Each flow was a compilation 
of detailed activities fbr 1039 1040 Kirtlancl et a]. each patient type, and acuity, the use of consulting 
physicians, The validation of the model against the historical the use of ancilkuy testing i.e., laborato~, 
radiology, etc., information gave the team proof that the simulated model the probabilities of complications, 
the use of discharge represented the operation of the ED at PRMC (see Figure 1). protocols, and other 
factors affecting the patient flow. The more accurate times are those with the highest number of Once 
the flows were completed, the ED team conducted occurrences. The patient categories are ordered by the 
a patient chart review. Four hundred charts were chosen at number of patients. random from the previous 
year for the review. The review captured information about each patient type the arrival time, 4 PROPOSED 
SYSTEM ANALYSIS the mode of arrival, the patient acuity, the patient type, the number and kind of ancillary 
tests petiorrned, the procedures With the simulation now validated the next task before the periiormed, 
the discharge disposition, the discharge times, and team was to test impact of the eleven alternatives 
to improve other pertinent data were collected. This background patient flow. These alternatives encompassed 
the following information was entered into the simulation software to areas: reduction of staff, introduction 
of point-of-care testing develop the model of the PRMCk ED. For each patient type in the ED, developing 
and using a specialized minor care area the simulation logic was evaluated for any discrepancies to in 
the departments, changing triage protocols, and changes to actual departmental operation. This involved 
taking the volume in the department. The results are summarized in the information from the 400 patient 
chart samples and Figure 2. determining the average patient transit time through the The three optimal 
alternatives are: department and the confidence intervals using UniFitIITM, a First is establishing a 
fast track care in the minor care statistical analysis package. This historical information is area. 
The impact of this change in the ED saves 15.5 minutes important since it is the original pattern to 
decide if the in the average patient turnaround time. simulation matches reality and it is also the baseline 
against Second is placing patients in the treatment area when which changes to the simulation are to 
be judged for beds are available instead of sending them back to the waiting improvements. room. This 
saves 14.1 minutes on the average patient The model was validated using the Trace Validation turnaround 
time. function ti om the MedModelTM program. The team examined The third alternative is the use of point-of-care 
lab the trace logic for each patient type looking for errors in the testing. This saves 8.4 minutes in 
the average patient time required to perform Iimctions, errors in patient turnaround time. For eligible 
patients this translates to a processing logic, errors in staff processing logic, and faulty savings 
of approximately eighty minutes. When these three processing loops. To validate the model a period of 
one week alternatives are combined the resulting time saving to the with a one day warmup was selected. 
The simulation was run average patient turnaround time is a reduction of38 minutes. a minimum of 20 replications 
to validate the model against the historical period._ No. Hist. Patients I IHistorical Average I Historical 
I Conf. InteNal alpha .05 I I Simulation Mean i%=l A&#38;zi_ll 320 161.2 151-173 165.5 4.3 Accept 248 
147.0 135-159 145.8 1.2 Accept Ihinor Care T&#38;R LOS 74 i 95.6 I 86-105 I 104.9 9.3 Accept Ikll Admitted 
LOS 72 ] 212.8 i 190-235 I 216.7 3.9 Accept l~ed Emer~ T&#38;R LOS 67 I 186.0 I 165-207 I 183.7 2.3 Accept 
Ikdmitted Med Emer~ LOS 41 [ 228.0 I 195-261 I 222.9 5.1 Accept Ihbdominrd Pain T&#38;R LOS 32 I 157.7 
I 127-188 I 161.2 3.5 Accept l~ractures T&#38;R LOS 26 I 136.7 I 101-173 I 167.3 30.6 Accept !kon RY 
T&#38;R LOS 21 I 188.0 I 146-230 I 184.1 3.9 Accept Ihdmitted Cardiac LOS 37.0 Accept 21.1 Accept 1.8 
Accept Figure 1: Alternative Evaluation Table for the 11 Different Scenarios. Simulating an Emergency 
Department This changes the historical patient turnaround time from 161.2 the changes that would have 
the greatest impact for the minutes to 123.2 or a reduction of 24°Y6. services in the department. There 
are three alternatives that do not show any As a part of the project the team also conducted a Plus significant 
savings of time, but are as benchmarked best and Delta analysis which is used to delineate improvements 
practices and will save time when the emergency room is and failures for other teams on the use of the 
tools and quite busy. The first is the use of the internal waiting room processes. On the plus side the 
team identified six key points: for patients, waiting for the results of ancillary tests + The project 
made the department staff examine what (Laboratory and X-ray). Rooms that are normally occupied happens 
to a patient when they are treated in the ED. by patients waiting for results can be used by patients 
who are + The staiTfocused on resources being used by the system. in the waiting room. There would be 
no time advantages in + The need to have a multi-disciplinary team work on the this practice when the 
ED is not busy. project and have experts provide information on how the The second practice is having 
the triage nurse order lab system works. tests and x-rays for patients based on protocols set up by + 
Having Nursing management support the project. physicians. This practice will cause two delays to run 
+ Simulation and project requirements taught the team how concurrently. One delay is the waiting time 
in the waiting successtldly deal with massive amounts of data. room, and the other delay is waiting for 
lab results. + Simulation gives the team the ability to experiment with The last practice is to initiate 
bed search for admitted Iiture what-if questions safely. patients when the ED physician decides a patient 
needs to be admitted. The delay for bed availability will run concurrently On the delta side the team 
identified three key points that with the wait for a staff physician to approve the admission. they would 
like to change: + The large time commitment required by the team 5 CONCLUSION members to do the simulation. 
 + The stat%ng of the department during team meetings. Using simulation as an analysis tool in this project 
allowed + The lack of knowledge about simulation as a tool. the team to quanti~ time and staff savings 
that have a significant impact on the operation of the ED. Simulation In retrospect taldng on a large 
simulation project like this movided a laboratory setting to test and evaluate is as much fun as a ... 
. but the information and results alternatives before implementing. This prevented the are well worth 
the effort. disruption of the department and helped to identifi  Alternative Summary LOS(min) Impact 
(rein) Base 165.5 1. Setup a Fast track system in minor care area. 150.0 saves 15.5 2. Use I-Stat machines 
for in ED testing of laboratory samples to reduced lab test 157.1 saves 8.4 turnaround times. 3. Reducing 
the number of technicians by 4.5 FTE s 176.1 adds 11.6 4. Reducing number of Registered Nurses by 6.7 
FTE s 167.0 no real change 5. Take the patient back to an open treatment rooms. Do not let patients 
wait in the 151.4 saves 14.1 waiting room until the staff is less busy. 6. Initiate admission room search 
for an inpatient as soon as ESA_MD determines the 164.0 no real change need to admit patient, rather 
than wait until the staff physician approves the admission order. 7. Use of an internal waiting room 
(when ED is busy) for patients waiting on the 163.6 no real change results of laboratory tests an other 
tests.  8. Setup triage protocols that direct the triage nurse to orders certain tests (such as 161.9 
saves 3.6 EKGs, lab tests and x-rays) and the patient waiting for results of tests before being taken 
back to room (if ED is busy).  2. Change intermediate care rooms 21,22 and 23 for use in place of 9, 
10 and 11. 163.8 no real change 10. Reduced RN staff (6.7) plus 5 ?4. additional volume 174.0 adds 8.5 
 11. Less 5% volume 162..9 saves 2.6  Figure 2: Results of Alternatives Tested in the Simulation 1042 
Kirtland et al. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES ANTHONY B. IURTLAND is Director of Management Engineering Services 
from The SunHealth Alliance, based at Peninsula Regional Medical Center in Salisbury, MD. He received 
a B.S. from St. Bonaventure University in 1974, and an M.B.A. in Health Systems from Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute in 1980. His responsibilities include working with senior executive and departmental management 
in utilizing productivity systems, designing and implementing departmental process improvements, and 
using simulation modeling to improve operations. JACQUELINE A. LOCKWOOD is the Nursing Director for Emergencies 
Services Department at Peninsula Regional Medical Center in Salisbury, MD. She received a B.S. in Nursing 
from Salisbury State University in 1984. Her responsibilities include the operation of a 24 hour 32 bed 
Emergencies Services Department, that is an area Wide Trauma Center, EMS Base Station, and an Acute Psychiatric 
Emergency center. KAREN C. POISKER is the Vice President for Patient Care Services at Peninsula Regional 
Medical Center in Salisbury, MD. She received her B.S. and M.S. fi om the University of Maryland School 
of Nursing in 1978 and 1981 respectively, and an M.B.A. tlom Wilmington College in 1992. Her responsibilities 
as a member of the senior executive team include strategic planning and policy setting for the institution 
and operational responsibility for 18 Inpatient Nursing Units, all Surgical Semites, the Emergency Department, 
Infection Control, Pefision Services and Social Services. LINDA W. STAMP is the Nursing Practice Coordinator 
for Emergencies Services Department at Peninsula Regional Medical Center in Salisbury, MD. She received 
an RN certificate from the Registered Nurse Program at Wor-Wic Tech Community College. Her responsibilities 
include the review, evaluation, and implementation of changes in nursing practice in the department. 
PATRICIA WOLFE is the Performance Improvement Coordinator for Emergencies Services Department at Peninsula 
Regional Medical Center in Salisbuxy, MD. She received an RN certificate from Baptist Hospital School 
of Nursing. Her responsibilities include developing Clinical Indicators for the Quality Assurance Improvement 
Program in the department. 
			