
 Proceedings of the 1993 Winter Simulation Conference G. W. Evans, M. Mollaghasemi, E.C. Russell, W.E. 
Biles (eds.) SIMULATION MODELING OF PREHOSPITAL TRAUMA CARE Robert L. Wears Division of Emergency Medicine 
Department of Surgery University of Florida Health Science Center Jacksonville, Florida 32209, U.S.A. 
ABSTRACT Prehospital emergency care systems are complex and do not respond predictably to changes in 
management. A combined discrete-continuous simulation model focusing on trauma care was designed and 
implemented in SIMSCRIPT 11.5 to allow prediction of the effect of policy changes on system performance 
and patient survival. 1 INTRODUCTION Prehospital care of the sick and injured has developed into a complex 
system in the last 30 years. Much of this development has been bottom-up, driven by technological factors 
and the availability principle (any available tool will eventually be used). This has led to considerable 
debate in the medical community over the appropriate role of various clinical protocols routinely employed 
in many localities. Furthermore, as resource constraints and other external factors have stressed the 
system, the need for a systematic overview has become apparent. This project developed a simulation model 
of a prehospital trauma care system to provide a method by which the effect of modifications to the system 
can be estimated. Simulation has been previously used as an aid in planning and organizing such systems. 
Most of these simulations have concentrated on static aspects of the system, such as the number and location 
of responders (Fitzsimmons et al 1982, Uyeno and Seeburg 1984), improvements in response or transport 
time, etc (Valenzuela et al 1990). This project focuses more on clinical issues that are frequently modified 
dynamically by changing clinical and administrative policies. 1216 Charles N. Winton Department of Computer 
and Information Sciences College of Computing Sciences and Engineering University of North Florida Jacksonville, 
Florida, 32224, U.S.A. 2 SPECIFICATION The system under consideration is that portion of the prehospital 
emergency medical care system (EMS) which deals with injury in the seven county service area of northeast 
Flori&#38; and southeast Georgia. The EMS system is obviously affected by non-traumatic illness as well, 
so the model must include some representation of their effects, but they will not be at the focus of 
the model. The specification describes the system s elements and their behavior, and the goals for the 
model. 2.1 System Elements The system can be decomposed into five fundamental elements: patients, vehicles, 
receiving facilities, injuring events, and a transportation network over which vehicles move patients 
from sites of injury to or between receiving facilities. Patients suffer injuries because of injuring 
events or accidents. The appearance of patients in the system is not independent, since an incident may 
produce several patients. In addition, injuries occur in the two broad, nonexclusive categories of blunt 
and penetrating. Within these categories, patterns of correlated injuries exist; for example, brain injury 
is typically isolated in penetrating trauma, but often associated with chest and abdominal injuries in 
blunt. Injuries differ in severity, and result in a physiological process that can be followed over time 
and used to determine survival. Vehicles in the system are helicopter and ground ambulances, and private 
conveyances. Helicopter ambulances are typically few and therefore subject to more stringent dispatching 
criteria than ground ambulances. Ground ambulances and private conveyance are constrained to use the 
transportation network; helicopter ambulances generally travel faster and by line of sight, but are constrained 
by weather conditions and the need for a safe landing zone. Ambulmce persomel may perform several therapeutic 
interventions before Simulation Modeling of Prehospital Trauma Care transporting the patient to a receiving 
facility, while private transportation provides no emergency care. In addition, ambulances can be directed 
to (and away from) different hospitals, and provide some advance notice of a patient s arrival, but private 
conveyances do neither. Receiving facilities in the system are hospitals and other acute care facilities 
such as clinics or physicians offices. Hospitals may be classified into Level 1, 2, or 3 trauma centers 
as defined by Florida statute. Or, they may choose not to participate in the trauma center system; their 
actual capabilities typically do not change by virtue of this decision. Receiving facilities will perform 
initial resuscitation and evaluation of incoming patients, and then transfer them out of the system to 
definitive care. Injury incidents are independently distributed over time and space. Each event may produce 
one or more patients, although it need not produce any. Injury events produce either blunt or penetrating 
injury in their patienta, and typically not both. The transportation network consists of existing major 
roads, highways and bridges. A patient s transport time by ground conveyance depends on the available 
path through the transportation network and the time of day. Geographic barriers such as the St. John 
s River and other waterways are reflected in the transportation network. Because ambulances are most 
commonly directly managed by county governments, political boundaries also may affect transportation 
decisions. For example, in patients with minor injuries, the target receiving facility may be chosen 
such that the path to it does not involve crossing a county or state line; these considerations are dropped 
in the face of severe injury.  2.2 System Behavior The system s behavior consists of a temporal sequence 
of discrete events in the system running concurrently and interacting with a continuous pattern of physiological 
changes in injured patients. The sequence begins with an injury-producing episode that generates one 
or more patients at a particular location and time with a given pattern and severity of injuries. The 
prehospital system is activated and an ambulance dispatched to the location, typically on a proximity 
basis. The time from injury to arrival on scene is termed activation time. Once on scene, EMS personnel 
may have to locate (Campbell 1992, Campbell 1993) and/or extricate patients, and may provide some therapeutic 
services such as intravenous fluid administration or endotracheal incubation. The time from arrival on 
scene until departure for a hospital is defined as the scene time. The patient is then transported to 
a receiving facility in transport time. The means of choosing a receiving facility (eg, nearest hospital, 
nearest hospital of a given level) is a source of recurring controversy and will be examined in the simulation. 
The rweiving facility will perform initial resuscitation and evaluation and will then deliver the patient 
to definitive care (eg, the operating room, hospital admission, etc) after resuscitation time and some 
additional waiting time, which may be zero. Deftitive care is considered outside the system. Occasionally, 
the receiving facility may transfer the patient to another facility, repeating the transport and resuscitation 
stages of the cycle. During this process, the patient s physiological state will change depending on 
the injuries and therapy received. Some patients will die before being delivered to definitive care; 
for those who do not, their probability of survival will be estimated from their injuries and their physiological 
state at the time of exit from the system (Wears and Winton 1990, Champion et al 1991). Injuries can 
be categorized into three large groups based on their major physiologic effects: those producing blood 
loss, those interfering with respiratory exchange, and those affecting the central nervous system. In 
each of these categories, the physiologic state deteriorates over time without intervention. Indirect 
evidence of the severity of injury in these categories is combined into a trauma score (Champion et al 
1984, Champion et al 1990, Champion et al 1991) which is used by EMS personnel to make therapeutic and 
transportation decisions. 2.3 Goals Any simulation model should be constructed to answer specific questions, 
rather than just show that a model can be constmcted. This model was designed to estimate the effects 
of changes in: a. Triage criteria that determine the center to which a patient should be routed; b. 
Criteria for helicopter transportation vs ground transportation. c. Divert policy (the circumstances 
and length of time during which a hospital may divert incoming cases to another facility). These effects 
will be measured from two  perspectives: from the point of view of the system (numbers of patients received, 
percent utilization, etc) and from the point of view of the patient (length of time until definitive 
care, change in survival probability). Secondary goals include the ability to examine additional questions 
about the system as they arise, and the ability to apply the model to new EMS systems in other areas 
without reprogramming or recompilation. Wears and Winton 3 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION General design issues 
for this project are those common to all simulation models: selection of a simulation environment and 
the appropriate level of detail, verification of the implementation, validation of model, and the design 
and analysis of appropriate experiments. The realization of the model in SIMSCRIPT will be provided on 
request. 3.1 Simulation Environment The model was implemented in SIMSCRIPT 11.5 (CACI Products, La Jolla, 
CA) for several reasons. SIMSCRIPT is available on many computer systems and has wide general acceptance 
as a simulation language, simplifying the potential portability of the model. The EMS model proper lends 
itself easily to discrete simulation, while the physiologic model is more naturally thought of as continuous; 
SIMSCRIPT provides support for simultaneous continuous and discrete simulation, thus helping to model 
the interaction between these two components. And finally, local expertise and experience with SIMSCRIPT 
was available. 3.2 Data Structures Two general principles were used in representing entities in the 
model. First, entities having a potential lifespan in the model greater than a typical run length were 
represented as SIMS CRIPT permanent entities, while entities that potentially might come and go during 
a run were represented as SIMSCRIPT temporary entities. Second, no entity should have greater knowledge 
about itself or about conditions in the system than would its real-world analog. Application of these 
principles to the model entities described in Section 2.1 produced the following set of data structures: 
nodes, paths (a series of arcs connecting two nodes), hospitals, and ambulances were represented by permanent 
entities; arcs, dispatch lists, ambulance runs, accidents, patients and external events were represented 
by temporary entities or processes. A programming construct called a monitor was used to handle interprocess 
communications. A natural monitor, the dispatcher, exists in the real-world system, so this approach 
meshed nicely with the target model. Interestingly, the monitor function was more easily provided as 
a procedure, rather than as a SIMSCRIPT entity. Thus, the dispatcher is the only major real world entity 
having only an implicit representation in the model. Although not specifically implemented as such, entities 
such as ambulances and patients can be viewed as finite state automata, with the dispatcher functioning 
to oversee state transitions.  3.3 Statistical Issues The common random numbers technique was used to 
reduce variance between policy alternatives. Special care was taken to ensure synchronization of the 
random number streams. Although the system under study does not possess welldefined starting and ending 
times, it does empty out from time to time. Therefore, no warm­ up period to eliminate the effect of 
start-up transients was used. Instead, the model was started empty and idle, and the regenerative method 
used to determine run lengths; ie, a run is ended when the system returns to the empty and idle state. 
The primary goal of the model is effect estimation, not hypothesis testing. Statistical testing of the 
differences between model outputs under differing policies is complicated by the use of the regenerative 
method, since it cannot be guaranteed that parallel runs will always be directly comparable, even though 
every random component for each patient is guaranteed to be comparable. For example, individual runs 
might not necessarily have the same numbers of patients; in general, parallel runs will diverge and reconverge 
at unpredictable points. Naive direct comparisons of alternatives as if they were independent will overestimate 
the variance of the difference in effect. To properly compare the alternatives, summary measures must 
be calculated at a point where the model has reconverged under each alternative. Data for the model were 
obtained directly from Fire/Rescue records whenever possible. The distributional form of the input random 
variables was chosen after consideration of both theoretical and practical issues. For example, for those 
distributions known to be bounded, beta distributions were chosen since they were also bounded, and were 
then scaled and fit using moment matching or maximum likelihood methods. Similarly, if a distribution 
was known to be skewed to the right, or nonnegative, cmdi&#38;te distributions were restricted to those 
having the appropriate general characteristics. For all distributions for which empirical data was available, 
the choice among candidate distributions was made by visually assessing probability and quantile plots 
(Law and Kelton, 1991), after matching the first two moments (mean and variance) to the empirical data. 
Twenty-six random variables were used in the model. Since SIMSCRIPT by default provides only ten random 
number streams, each 100,000 variates long, its standard random number generator was modified to support 
30 Simulation Modeling of random number streams, each 1,000,000 variates long. In addition, provision 
has been made to use other random number generators for any or all of the random variables in the model. 
 3.4 Patterns of Injury The spatial pattern of injury was assumed to be roughly proportional to population 
density. This has been shown to be the case in at least one major city (Pepe, Curka, Zachariah, et al, 
1992). Pepe et al also showed that the distribution of types of accidents (eg, assault, auto accident, 
gun-shot wound, etc) was independent of time and space; this assumption was incorporated into the model. 
[ Figure 1: Spatial distribution of trauma incidents in the study area The temporal pattern of injury 
was modeled by a non-stationary batch Poisson process (Qnlar 1975). Raw data kindly provided by Zachariah 
(personal communication) was used to estimate the diurnal pattern of injury occurrence. This was combined 
with weekly variation (Baker 1992) to produce the weekly cycle of injury incidence used in the model. 
The spatial distribution of incidents is illustrated in Figure 1, Figure 1, and roughly corresponds to 
population density in the target area. 3.5 Transportation Network The geographic area of interest was 
represented at a higher level than blocks or map coordinates by modeling the area as a digraph. Nodes 
in the graph represent certain critical areas, such as: neighborhoods or fire­ rescue service areas from 
which requests for care arise; choke points --areas such as bridges which transporters must traverse 
en route to their destination; and receivers, Prehospital Trauma Care 1219 typically hospitals categorized 
according to Florida s trauma statute. Arcs in the digraph represent logical routes between nodes, not 
necessarily physical roads. Arcs were assigned weights representing travel time across them, these weights 
may vary with time of day. While some information on average transport times is available from the Fire-Rescue 
system, information about the distribution of transport times is not. However, Campbell (Campbel192, 
Campbell 1993) has published detailed summary results of a variety of prehospital time intervals, and 
kindly agreed to provide his raw data for use in the project (personal communication). Therefore, distributions 
were fit to Campbell s data using quantile and probability plots, or occasionally using the method of 
momenta. Since there are extensive and highly functional mutual assistance agreements among the political 
jurisdictions in the study area, political boundaries have not been explicitly represented in this implementation. 
It would be possible, if desired, to represent political boundaries by placing an empirical penalty function 
on the pertinent arcs; such a penalty function would be greater for minor injuries and zero for major 
injuries. K@ ,f ML \\\ / -WFCX+ k ~------­ --.-.., p CAL,.*- R,, ----­... .. .,, my 9. -... * MCL*-------­ 
 ., M% ~!, ~ Figure 2: Transportation Network as a Digraph Only a finite area was simulated, but resources 
located near the boundary of the simulated area might be called to service events occurring beyond the 
boundary; similarly, injuries occurring within the boundary might be managed at hospitals outside the 
boundary. In the system under consideration, the boun&#38;ries tend to fall at watersheds where events 
are rare, and very little boundary crossing occurs. For example, it is common for ambulances in St. John 
s county to respond to calls in or transport patients into Duval county; it is uncommon that they do 
so with respect to Flagler county, because of population densities and pre-existing 1220 Wears and Winton 
referral patterns. Therefore, these edge effects were neglected save for judiciously choosing the boundaries 
of the simulated area to keep them to a minimum. A simplified version of the digraph modeling the geographic 
area is shown in Figure 2. Average node to node times within the transportation network routes were 
precomputed and stored prior to a simulation run. These times were used to generate ambulance call lists 
for each node, and hospital destination lists for each node, and the basis of shortest expected travel 
time. The call and dispatch lists were saved in a file that can be edited to reflect special circumstances. 
Helicopter ambulances are assumed to be callable to any locations, and to take turns in responding to 
calls. The choice of helicopter vs ground ambulance is based on Trauma Score and distance by current 
policy, and will be the subject of experimentation.  3.6 Physiologic Model Injuries occur in identifiable 
patterns that a model should represent to achieve face validity. Ideally this requires generation of 
categorical variables having a given correlation. While many simulation models have assumed independence 
of variables, apparently successfully, there are several instances (Law and Kelton 199 1) in which it 
has been shown that the failure to model correlation between variables substantially affected the results. 
Although Devroye (Devroye86) and Johnson (Johnson 1987) have offered several plausible approaches toward 
the general problem of generating correlated random variates, neither has specifically addressed this 
problem. Unfortunately, the covariance structure of within-patient injury patterns has yet to be described 
quantitatively. Therefore, it was necessarily assumed that blunt and penetrating injuries had the same 
distribution of injury severity. Injury severity was modeled by assigning a values drawn from a scaled 
beta distribution fit to data from MacKenzie (MacKenzie et al 1986) to patients representing their Injury 
Severity Score (1SS), (Baker et al 1974), and then partitioning the total 1SS among the three major categories 
of physiologic derangement as suggested by Baxt and MacKenzie (Baxt et al 1987, MacKenzie et al 1986.), 
and finally mapping those components to either direct physiologic variables (eg, blood pressure) or to 
components of the Revised Trauma Score (RTS: see below), (Champion et al 199 1). The RTS values thus 
computed were validated by comparing their distribution to the distribution of RTS reported previously 
(Champion et al 1984, Champion et al 1986, and Morris et al 1986) with good agreement. Each patient was 
represented as a distinct entity within the model, as were resources such as ambulances, helicopters, 
and hospitals. A limited set of physiologic variables was modeled for each patient, since detailed physiological 
modeling (Mazzoni 1988) is computationally intensive. l%e model of hemorrhage developed Lewis (Lewis 
1986) and modified by Wears and Winton (Wears and Winton 1990) was adapted for use in this project by 
extending it to accommodate respiratory exchange. Direct central nervous system injury seems to be a 
distinct problem (Baxt 1987) that is synergistic with both hemorrhage and respiratory injury. It was 
therefore modeled as a black box process, whose main effkct is to cause a downward adjustment in the 
probability of survival. The three components of the physiologic model were used to compute the Revised 
Trauma Score (RTS), (Champion et al 1984, Champion et al 1991), which, together with the 1SS has achieved 
general acceptance in predicting survival. The RTS assigns each component of the physiologic model a 
value on a O to 4 scale. These scores may then be simply summed to form a O to 12 scale, but a weighted 
sum (Champion et al 1991) with a maximum total of 7.804 is thought to provide better prediction. A mapping 
between the hemorrhage component and these scores has already been developed (Wears and Wintion 1990). 
 3.7 Output Measures Certain critical variables were used as the basis of comparison between policy 
alternatives. These included the dynamic proportion of utilization of trauma centers at each level. Since 
trauma centers typically must maintain excess capacity, an alternative measure of utilization, the proportion 
of time the center is not at or over capacity, (ie, the center could handle an additional patient) was 
also tracked. Other important outcome measures include the total time in the system, the mortality in 
each phase prior to definitive care, and the probability of survival following definitive care. 4 Verification 
and Validation Major components of the implementation were verified against predictable model elements 
wherever possible. This was done by independent testing of stub routines where practical, and by inspection 
of the simulation trace or outputs elsewhere. Separate verification runs checking aspects of the model 
s logic have been performed and compared to specific test cases derived from available Trauma Registry 
data. Many of these verification runs were initially performed at the module level so that the desired 
(true) behavior of the model can be more easily predicted. An activity trace is Simulation Modeling of 
Prehospital Trauma Care produced by the model to aid in verification and validation. The model was validated 
by checking its output against aggregate data on injury types, patterns of transportation and survival 
using published data and the trauma registry maintained by University Medical Center in Jacksonville. 
Unfortunately, detailed data on the overall operation of the prehospital care system is not maintained; 
a modified Turing test may help in further model validation. The current level of validation of the model 
is not considered sufficiently definitive for the model to be used in establishing policy. Further validation 
will require formalized collection of data from the system for comparison to model output. 4.1 Random 
Variate Generators Two new random number generators were coded and verified; the non-stationary Poisson 
distribution routine nsp.f, and mygamma.f, a replacement for SIMSCRIPT S gamma variate generator, which 
can be show-n to be erroneous for large values of the shape parameter. (The beta variate generator also 
had to be modified, because it uses gamma variates). ~inlar s method (@alar 1975) of generating the interamival 
times for a non-stationary Poisson arrival process was implemented in the function nsp.f. Goodness of 
fit testing on a variety of sample data sets showed no evidence of poor fit, giving grounds for acceptance 
of the nsp. f function. The gamma variate generator was implemented from two published algorithms (Bratley 
et al 1987). For shape parameter greater than one, Tadikamalla s method was used, and for order one or 
less, Ahrens method. Verification examples were produced over a wide range of arguments including those 
known to return invalid results for the SIMSCRIPT generator. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Analysis The realization 
of all random variables in the implementation was checked to confirm that they agreed with their specified 
parameters and distributions. For example, the distribution of observed 1SS scores in the model compared 
reasonably well to that described by Baker (Baker et al 1992), which it was designed to match. Similarly, 
the proportion of blunt to penetrating injury, the spatial distribution of injuries, the number of victims 
per accident, and other elements were confirmed to approximately match their real world counterparts. 
The dynamic behavior of the implementation was verified to be compatible with the model by careful inspection 
of the trace output and temporal outputs such as blood pressure. Special attention was paid to dispatching 
rules, such as alternating imsigmnents between helicopter ambulances, or between tsvo ambulances based 
in the same node. It was possible to confirm from the trace dispatched ambulances that were recalled 
had indeed not reached the scene. It was also confirmed that ambulances treated patients in order of 
severity as manifested by the current value of the RTS. And finally, the trace confirmed that no ambulance 
was dispatched to the wrong node or to the wrong hospital, and that no ambulance traveled tcj a hospital 
without carrying a patient. This method of verification can never absolutely confirm the reliability 
of the system, but it does serve to increase confidence that the implementation behaves according to 
the model s specifications. Table 1: Outcomes Estimated by the Model Compared with Observed and Literature 
item model observed other mean daily: amb runs 41.734 44.0 nla helo runs 5.07 5.0 nla probability of 
death: on scene 0.018 0.01 nla before definitive care 0.128 0.05 0.085 mean systolic blood pressure at 
definitive care 93.8 100.0 95.4 mean transport time (minutes) 22.1 20.0 nla Rigorous validation of a 
system such as this is extremely difficult, primarily because of the inadequacy of existing data sets 
useful for confirming model performance (McCoy et al 1992). However, it was possible to compare measures 
of the model s performance to locally available data elements, to establish at least order of magnitude 
validity. The following items had sufficient data available to allow such comparisons: number of ambulance 
runs, number of helicopter runs, proportion of deaths prior to definitive care, etc. The model s predictions 
for these variables are compared with convenience sample estimates from Jacksonville Fire Rescue and 
published data in Table 1. The distribution of transit times was compared with that derived from Campbell 
s data. Mean transit times were different, reflecting differing geography, but quantile plots of the 
hvo data sets revealed that they have approximately the same distribution, differing only by a scaling 
factor. Wears and Winton 5 Demonstrative Experirnenta The utility of the model was demonstrated by experiments 
testing the effects of changes in triage and helicopter dispatch policies. 5.1 Triage Policy Three sets 
of runs were performed using a different cutoff point to determine when a patient should be triaged directly 
to a Level 1 trauma center, bypassing other (possibly closer) hospitals. Current standard operating procedure 
calls for all patients with an RTS less than or equal 10-11 on the 0-12 RTS scale (corresponding to a 
score of approximately 90% of the weighted maximum of 7. 8408) to be transported directly to a Level 
1 center, even if lower level centers might be closer. This baseline case and tsvo alternate cases were 
simulated. The minimum run length was set to 24 hours, and a total of 28 runs (approximately one month) 
were performed. The following outputs were used as measures of system performance under each scenario: 
trauma center utilization, red time, and reserve; proportion of accidents pended (ie, no ambulance immediately 
available), mean waiting time until an ambulance is dispatched among pended accidents; helicopter utilization; 
mean probability of death prior to receiving definitive care; unmet need (patients who met helicopter 
dispatch criteria but for whom a helicopter was unavailable); and total waiting time until EMS arrival. 
The classical approach (Law and Kelton 1991) was used to calculate point and interval estimates from 
the results of the 28 regeneration cycles. The results for the baseline case and two alternatives (triage 
cutoffs of 80% and 95% of maximum) are summarized in Table 2. Compared to the baseline case, the main 
effects of liberalizing the triage cutoff are an increase in helicopter utilization, and a decrease in 
the length of time that a pended accident must wait to have an ambulance assigned to it. In addition, 
some variables such as unmet need and the probability that no ambulance is available when the an accident 
requests one were noted to behave unpredictably. The three alternatives at six points in the simulation; 
results at the two convergence points spanning at least a full week cycle are shown in Table 3. After 
adjusting for multiple comparisons, the results show that helicopter utilization is significantly different 
under the 80% and 95% triage cutoffs (P = .013, paired ttest); the 95% confidence interval on the difference 
in utilization between these two alternatives is .036 + .0014, or about a 33% increase. Although the 
mean difference in waiting time for pended accidents is large between the 80% and 95% policies (9.2 minutes), 
the difference is not statistically significant. This could be due to inadequate power since only two 
point estimates were obtained; further runs would be required to improve the precision of the estimate 
to see if a true effect on waiting time should be expected. Table 2: System Performance over 30.928 Days 
under Different Triage Criteria RTS cutoff (% of IIMX) 80 90 95 trauma center daily pts 21.9 22.6 23.0 
utilization .288 .301 .304 red .Ooo .000 .001 reserve .9998 .99996 .9997 probability no amb .042 .053 
.042 wait (rein) 31.4 24.8 22.0 helicopter utilization .112 .135 .148 unmet need .266 .340 .322 probability 
death* .120 .122 .123 activation time (rein) 21.4 21.6 21.1 *prior to deftitive care Table 3: Convergence 
Points Including at Least a Seven Day Cycle helo utilization waiting time RTS cutoff 80 90 95 80 90 95 
(% of max) convergence time (days) 13.919 .128 .139 .163 34.2 21.0 22.7 30.928 .100 .133 .136 28.0 28.3 
21.2  5.2 Helicopter Dispatch Policy Currently, helicopter ambulances are dispatched for patients needing 
a level 1 center whose transport time is over 19 minutes, and patients needing a level 2 center whose 
transport time is over 39 minutes. The effects of reducing these times by about 50% (to 10 and 20 minutes, 
respectively) are shown in Table 4; the triage Simulation Modeling of Prehospital Trauma Care cutoff 
was kept at 90% of maximum, so these results should be compared to the center column in Table 2. It appears 
that the effect of liberalizing time and distance transport criteria on helicopter use is much greater 
than that of liberalizing the triage cutpoint, yet the latter has received considerably more attention. 
Table 4: System Performance (Mean + 95% CI) under Alternate Helicopter Dispatch Criteria trauma center 
utilization 0.298 + 0.037 red O.000 reserve 0.9999 * O.0001 pr acc pended 0.042 * 0.019 wait (rein) 24.4 
* 8.86 helicopter utilization 0.160 t 0.021 unmet need 0.293 i-0.037 pr death* o.112 * 0.020 time til 
arrival 22.2 * 1.74 *prior to definitive care 6 Conclusions It is interesting to note that the trauma 
triage cutoff, which has been the subject of vehement debate at times, had little effect on the overall 
load on the system, while a factor that has received little attention, the retriaging of less severely 
injured patients to a higher level of care if such a center is reasonably close had a much greater impact. 
This leads to the conclusion that the common knowledge of domain experts may not always be helpful in 
predicting the response of a complex system to change, and that computer models of such systems may enhance 
the decision makers accuracy and reliability by adding insight into the possible responses of the system 
to variables that were not previously thought important. Concern for the validity of current disaster 
planning and a demonstration of the potential of this model has led to community-wide interest in using 
a more fully validated version of the model to assist in planning for several events of importance in 
northeast Florida. The particular areas of interest are: a. Modifying the current triage policy to take 
all patients to the nearest hospital, which would perform rapid stabilization and transfer to a Level 
1 center for critically injured patients. a. Loss of a hospital and subsequent evacuation of its patients 
to other facilities. b. Loss of a major choke point such as a bridge for hours to days. c. Widespread 
flooding of low areas eliminating multiple transportation routes and isolating some hospitals and nodes. 
 d. An area-wide disaster such as a hurricane, which might combine all of the preceding elements. e. 
Modification of the physiologic model to use a more detailed physiologic score such as ASCOT (Champion 
et al 1990), and to estimate the covariance structure of injuries from the American College of Surgeons 
National Trauma Registry Data (TRACS).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful for the assistance 
provided by Brian Zacariah and Jack Campbell, who generously provided data sets used in developing and 
verifying this model. REFERENCES Baker, S. P., B. O Neill Brian, W. Haddon Jr., et al. 1974. The injury 
severity score: a method for describing patients with multiple injuries and evaluating emergency care. 
 Journal of Trauma, 26: 187-196. Baker, S. P., B. O Neill Brian, M. J. Ginsburg, et al. 1992. 2he Injury 
Fact Book. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Baxt, W. G., and P. Moody. 1987. The differential survival 
of trauma patients. Journal of Trauma, 27: 602-606. Bratley, P., B. L. Fox , and L. E. Schrage. 1987. 
A Guide to Simulation. Springer-Verlag, New York. Campbell, J. P. 1992. Time-to-patient interval: the 
hidden component of response time [abstract]. Annals of Emergency Medicine 21:643. Campbell, J. P., Gratton 
M. C., Salomone III, J. A., and R. D. Powers. 1993. Ambulance arrival to patient contact: the hidden 
component of prehospital response time intervals. Annals of Emergency Medicine 22:1254-1258. Champion, 
H. R., W. J. Sacco, A. J. Camazzo, et al. 1984. Trauma score. Journal of Trauma 9:672­ 676. Champion, 
H. R., C. R. Frey, W. J. Sacco, et al. 1986. Major trauma outcome study in quality assurance. Presented 
at the 4th Annual Meeting, Committee on Trauma, American College of Surgeons, Ft Lauderdale, FL. 1224 
Wears and Winton Champion, H. R., W. W. Copes, W. J. Sacco, et al. 1990. A new characterization of injury 
severity. Journal of Trauma 30:539. Champion, H. R., W. J. Sacco, and W. S. Copes. 1991. Trauma Scoring, 
 in Moore, Ernest E., K. L. Mattox, D. V. Feliciano [editors], Trauma. Appleton &#38; Lange, Norwalk, 
Comecticut. @lar, E. 1975. Introduction to Stochastic Processes. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Devroye, Luc. 1986. Non-Unifotm Random Variate Generation. Springer-Verlag, New York. Fit~immons, J. 
A., and B. N. Srikar. 1982. Emergency ambulance location using the contiguous zone search routine. Journal 
of Operations Management 2:225-237. Johnson, M. E. 1987. Multivariate Statistical Simulation. John Wiley 
&#38; Sons, New York. Law, A. M., and W. D. Kelton. 1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis. McGraw-Hill, 
New York. Lewis, F. R. Jr. 1986. Prehospital intravenous fluid therapy: physiologic computer modelling. 
 Journal of Trauma 26:804-811. MacKenzie, E. J., S. Shapiro, M. Moody, J. H. Siegel, and R. T. Smith. 
1986. Predicting posttrauma functional disability for individuals without severe brain injury. Medical 
Care 24:377-387. Mazzoni, M. C., P. Borgstri5m, K. E. Arfors, and M. Intaglietta. 1988. Dynamic fluid 
redistribution in hyperosmotic resuscitation of hypovolemic hemorrhage. American Journal of Physiology 
255 (@ 2): H629-H637. McCoy, L. C., S. Ruby, G. W. Reynolds, et al. 1992. The hidden disaster in emergency 
management: The missing data base --so you think there are data bases in notebooks waiting to be input 
into a computer. Presented Simulation MultiConference, Orlando, FL Morris, J. A., P. S. Auerbach, G. 
A. Marshall, R. F. Bluth, L. G. Johnson, and D. D. Trunkey. The trauma score as a triage tool in the 
prehospital setting. 1986. Journal of the American Medical Association 256:1319-1325. Pepe P. E., P. 
A. Curka, B. S. Zachariah, et al. 1992. Urban trauma: diurnal variations in the incidence, severity and 
geographical distribution of various mechanisms of injury [abstract]. Annals of Emergency Medicine 21:618. 
Uyeno, D. H., and C. Seeburg. 1984. A practical methodology for ambulance location. Simulation 48:79-87. 
Valenzuela, T. D., J. Goldberg, K. T. Keeley, and E. A. Criss. 1990. Computer modeling of emergency medical 
system performance. Annals of Emergency Medicine 19:898-901. Wears, R. L., and C. N. Winton. 1990. 
Load and go vs. stay and play: analysis of prehospital intravenous fluid therapy by computer simulation. 
 Annals of Emergency Medicine 19:163-168. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES Robert L. Wears is Associate Professor in 
the Department of Surgery, Division of Emergency Medicine at the University of Florida Health Science 
Center in Jacksonville, and received an MS in Computer and Information Sciences from the University of 
North Florida in April, 1993. Dr. Wears is interested in the application of computer-based modeling and 
analysis techniques to clinical and health policy problems. His work includes statistical and connectionist 
approaches to computer modeling. This paper is an portion of his master s thesis in computer science. 
Charles N. Winton is Professor in the College of Computing Sciences and Engineering at the University 
of North Florida. He has recently served as Interim Dean of the College of Computer and Information Sciences, 
and as Vice Chairman of the Department of Mathematical Science at the University of North Florida. His 
research interests include mathematical computing, modem algebra, random variate generation, and computer 
simulation modeling.  
			