
 Proceedings of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. J. Swain, D. Goldsman, R. C. Crain, and 
J. R. Wilson SIMULATION OF A SMART CARD-BASED MANUFACTURING SYSTEM S. Manivannan Chen Zhou M. Burlington 
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA 30332, U.S.A. 
 ABSTRACT A simulation model of a manufacturing system in which the information associated with the movement 
of pallets and material handling systems is handled by smart cards or tags is presented. The simulation 
model depicts a novel method for integrating information with the physical products, processes and material 
handling systems. The smart cards capture data on the shop floor and combine the physical entities with 
their associated information. The smart card-based manufacturing system offers several benefits; automated, 
reusable and reliable information handling media and possible reduction in redundant processors, software 
and networking tools. Using the simulation model, the design requirements and the performance characteristics 
of the smart card-based manufacturing system are examined. The results from the simulation model along 
with several research issues are discussed. INTRODUCTION In this decade, one of the most essential requirements 
for successful operation of a manufacturing facility is to produce the right items in the right quantities 
and deliver to the right location at the right time. The information associated with the status of processing 
stations, in­process inventory, physical locations of material handling equipment, actual starting time 
and completion time of a product, and number of completed products are critical for the successful operation 
of a manufacturing facility. This information should be integrated with shop floor control and resource 
planning systems to reduce delays and long lead times (Hsu and Rattner 1990). Further, for efficient 
control of these operations in real time, the volume of information must be kept minimum. One way to 
decrease this information overload is to apply artificial intelligence in the real-time controller design 
(Papp et al. 1989). A conceptual framework for designing a decision support system in CIM to acknowledge 
human cognitive abilities and to reduce information overload is presented by (Sharit, Ebertz and Salvendy 
1988). A flexible representation scheme is key to handling complex data and knowledge associated with 
the material handling systems in manufacturing cells (l%jiwara et al. S. Narasirnhan School of Management 
Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA 30332, U.S.A. 1986). A strong relationship exists between 
information handling and material handling in CIM environments (Anon 1987). Also, the efficient operation 
of material handling systems requires reduction in data processing and information overload (Dewar 1988). 
In this sense, the drive towards paperless production may solve these issues in many manufacturing facilities 
(Diehl 1991). The evolution of novel methods for capturing, handling and processing information in real 
time has drawn considerable attention in industry. With total quality management (TQM) as a new goal, 
automatic identification and efficient information handling become essential. Emerging technologies such 
as RF tags, bar codes and smart cards are being used in material handling and component tracking (Kellock 
1989). A survey of such technologies is discussed in (Byfield 1990). In this paper, a novel approach 
to handling on-line information in a manufacturing cell is presented. One of the main features of this 
approach is the use of reusable smart cards for handling information associated with the in-process inventories, 
material movement and handling equipment. A simulation model using SIMAN language is developed for a 
smart card-based manufacturing system (SCBM). Several experiments are performed using the simulation 
model and the analysis of results are discussed. These results provide an insight into the characteristics 
and influence of various parameters in the SCBM system. 2 INFORMATION HANDLING PROBLEM One of the major 
difficulties of managing a large number of processing stations, products and material handlers is data 
proliferation. Expensive on-board and off-line computers, software, networking tools and information 
handling media are required. Most of the automated manufacturing systems utilize a hierarchical control 
structure (Acar and Ozguner 1990). This structure depends upon the size and complexity of the system 
and includes central, area and onboard controllers. In such cases, transmission and reception of data 
between physical entities and shop floor controllers are either on-line or off­line. Radio-frequency 
and inductive signals are being used in on-line cases for communication, whereas infra-red and radio-frequency 
signals are used in off-line cases. In on­line cases, the resources transmit and receive information 
969 Manivannan et al. from anywhere in a factory on a time sharing basis. However, in off-line cases, 
the production or material handling equipment transfer data with the central controller only at specific 
points of a factory. This leads to another difficulty in controlling automated production cells. Data 
communication becomes a bottleneck and signals are affected by noise created by accessories and attachments 
to production equipment such as motors, transformers and welding machines. Also, the information transfer 
rate to a physical resource is nearly three orders of magnitude slower than that of local area computer 
networks. In such cases, the number of physical equipment that can be controlled in real time is severely 
restricted. There is a need to examine other means of information handling and communication. SMART CARDS 
IN MANUFACTURING Recently, the smart cards are conceived as a medium of acquiring, storing and distributing 
information in many manufacturing applications. These are portable storage devices with intelligence 
and provisions for identity and security (Bright 1988). They often resemble credit or bank card in size 
and dimensions, however, embedded within each card is an EEPROM chip incorporating complex control and 
protection circuits. The card can commonly store up to 64 Kilobits of data that can be easily read and 
written. It combines the advantage of paper systems in terms of physical association with the material 
handler without related disadvantages. At present, smart cards are mostly used in financial services, 
travel industry, military applications and electronic diagnosis (Svigals 1987). The reasons for selecting 
smart cards are that they can store, process and handle a significant amount of data in a compact, light-weight, 
reusable, inexpensive and reliable medium (Stefanides, 1987). A complete survey of existing technology, 
current applications and future trends of smart cards is discussed in (Cordonnier 1991). An exploded 
view of the various components of a smart card-based manufacturing (SCBM) system is shown in Figure 1. 
In the SCBM design, the pallets carry products. The material handling vehicles are fitted with an on-board 
console consisting of a smart card read/write mechanism and an operator interface. Smart card posts (SCPS) 
are installed at various strategic locations to exchange information via smart cards. SCPS are analogous 
to zone controllers or bank teller machines to collect information from vehicles, update the operation 
and product information and assign tasks to vehicles. The SCPS primarily interface with smart cards, 
provide data and instructions to smart cards, act as intermediate data storage devices and transmit data 
to other SCPS via the local area network. The SCP includes a read/write device, a carousel and a slot 
to receive and eject smart cards during the information transfer. The SCPS have limited processing power 
and maintain a common database. Finally, SCPS monitor WIP levels at various pickup and drop-off stations 
and interact with non-vehicle equipment such as AS/RS, conveyors and process machines for control purposes. 
The SCPS receive information regarding the total load requirements, schedules and due dates from an SCBM 
computer. In addition to the vehicle control mechanism, each vehicle includes a read/write device to 
sense information on the smart cards and an operator interface to communicate with the SCPS. The SCPS 
determine the vehicle number and exchange the task information via smart cards carried by the vehicle 
operators. A task list for each vehicle is created and stored in a database maintained at SCBM computer. 
These task lists are generated using the standard optimization and/or heuristic procedures for assigning 
tasks to vehicles in a manufacturing cell. This paper primarily focuses on organizing and handling information 
via smart cards to manage the product flow with the manual material handling vehicles such as pallet 
trucks, platform trucks and forklift trucks. The modeling and simulation of SCBM is restricted to tracking 
products moving on pallets in a manufacturing cell and performing operation control of various types 
of manual material handling vehicles. Typical activities performed in an SCBM system are product identification 
tracking and control, task assignment, route specifications and vehicle dispatching. Also, the information 
regarding materials, products, processes, plans and state changes are acquired and transferred via smart 
cards among processing stations, vehicle operators and SCBM computers in the manufacturing facility. 
In this section, we describe the operation principles of an SCBM system shown in Figure 1. These principles 
are used to build a simulation model. S[ep (1): A pallet containing raw materials is moved to the kitting 
area located at the exit of raw materials (R/M) store and then conveyed to an SCP located inside the 
R/M store. (a) An operator keys in the necessary product information and pallet identification number 
using the read/write device connected to an SCBM computer. (b) This information is written to a smart 
card by the SCP and the card is ejected out of SCP through a slot. (c) The operator picks up the card 
from the SCP slot (pallet card) and inserts into the card holder of the pallet. (d) The pallet is then 
moved to the end of the conveyor  where it waits to be picked up by a material handler. Step (2); A 
material handling vehicle travels to the R/M store. The operator picks up a smart card (vehicle card) 
from the SCP that specifies the raw material pallets to be transferred to the production area. (a) Upon 
retrieval of pallets, the smart card on the pallet is scanned by the read/write device on the vehicle. 
 (b) The information on the pallet card is transferred to the vehicle card along with the pallet pickup 
time. (c) The material handler travels to the first workstation specified by the vehicle card.   ,= 
h I .Ca2d Transf Card \ Post \ ( I t?­ ~ [ W$w y  Em 1 \ Pickup &#38; Dropof# station rPatlet Conveyor 
.­ - Card Card Transfer/ Holder 7 ~ Smart / Csrd / Post  JI 1 L&#38;aiizi *) +xSmart ~w slot to deposit 
&#38; retrieve smart ~ Figure 1: Various Components of a Smart Card-Based Manufacturing System Srep 
(3): The material handler travels to a workstation to drop off pallets with parts that require further 
operation. (a) The pallet card is scanned using the read/write device on the vehicle before dropping 
off at a workstation. (b) The pallet information is then written to the vehicle card along with the 
pallet drop off time. (c) The pallet is transferred to the process queue at the workstation and located 
according to the operation sequence of that part. After drop off, the material handler continues to perform 
activities as per task list stored on the vehicle card.  Step (4): The material handler travels to a 
workstation to pick up a pallet consisting of parts. (a) Upon pickup, the pallet card is first scanned 
using the read/write device on the vehicle. (b) The information is written to the vehicle card along 
with the pickup time. (c) The material handler then continues to perform various activities as per task 
list stored on the vehicle card.  Step (5). Once all the tasks on the vehicle card are completed, the 
material handler goes to the nearest SCP to exchange information. (a) At the SCP, the material handler 
removes the current vehicle card and inserts it into the SCP card slot. (b) The SCP reads the vehicle 
card to obtain the data on vehicle identification number, tasks completed and pickup/drop-off times at 
various workstations. (c) The SCP updates the shop floor control and SCBM databases.  (d) Using the 
current tasks and data obtained from the vehicle card, the SCP assigns new tasks to a vehicle. (e) Once 
a new task list is generated by the SCP, the vehicle card is updated. This card is now ready to be picked 
up by the material handler. (f) The material handler picks up the card from the SCP slot and inserts 
it back into the read/write device on the vehicle. (g) The new task is displayed on the monitor and 
the material handler begins to perform the next task.  Step (6): If the pallets contain only the finished 
parts, then it is transported to the finished goods store. (a) The finished parts are dropped off at 
the beginning of a pallet conveyor at the entrance of the store and moved to an SCP located inside the 
store. (b) The operator removes the pallet card and inserts it into the SCP slot. The SCP reads the 
card and updates the SCBM databases and other SCPS. (c) The finished parts are kept in storage. After 
shipment, the empty pallets and the pallet cards are sent back to  the R/M store for reuse. 4 MODELING 
AND ANALYSIS OF An abstract representation of flow of pallets, handling vehicles, smart cards and information 
systems is shown in Figure 2. This abstraction utilized in designing a simulation model using system 
described in Section 3. SCBM material in SCBM has been the SCBM 972 Task Aasi ent ..,., ..,.>-.x ,-, 
LEGEND w/s = Workstation R/M = Raw Materials F G = Finished Goods ..,:>,.. ............. = Smart Card 
Post A Figure The simulation model is used to depict SCBM, to study the information flow Manivannan 
,-, .-.,-i _ -m -m_ vehicle J . ~ empty ~ vehicle -> eqxY - ~py ... , ,,, , ..> vehicle ~. empty 2 Abstract 
Representation et al. ,-.,-. * with a smart card and inproceas materials vehicle with a smart card with 
a smart card and pallet vehicle returning to SCP after finishing tasks vehicle with new smart card and 
new task with smart cwd snd finiied goods pallet and a smart card embedded in the pallet of an SCBM System 
the operations of between the SCPS and vehicles and the vehicles and pallets in the cell and to examine 
the impact of number of tasks per vehicle card (determines the memory size of smart cards), task arrival 
rates and number of vehicles on SCBM performance. 4.1 SCBM Simulation using SIMAN/Cinema A manufacturing 
cell consisting of eighteen workstations and three material handling vehicle types is considered. These 
vehicle types include pallet trucks, platform carts and forklift trucks. These are human operated vehicles 
and move products on pallets from one station to another. Tasks arrive continuously at the SCBM computer 
from the shop floor controller. Each task is associated with either a pickup or a deposit operation to 
be performed by a specific vehicle type. The task information is stored in the database (DB) which is 
accessed by the SCPS. Each vehicle carries exactly one smart card to exchange task information from one 
of the three SCPS located at strategic locations of the manufacturing cell. This smart card, in conjunction 
with a readlwrite device mounted on the vehicle, provides the operator with the list of tasks. Once all 
the tasks on the smart card are completed, the operator drives the vehicle to the nearest SCP to exchange 
information. Whenever the operator goes to an SCP, the smart card from the vehicle is inserted into the 
SCP slot. First, the information on the smart card is read by the SCP and then a new set of tasks are 
determined and written on the card. Currently, the simulation model considers (i) the issues of task 
arrivals, (ii) the SCP and vehicle interactions, (iii) the movement of vehicles and smart cards and (iv) 
the movement of pallets in the cell. The activities in the raw material store and finished goods store 
and the production been ignored. The SCBM system simulation language on animation using CINEMA process 
at the workstations have has been modeled using SIMAN a Sun SPARC workstation. An software is created 
to visualize the operations of the cell. A flow chart shown in Figure 3 describes the approach used in 
the simulation model. The model consists of four segments; Segment O models task arrivals and interactions 
between tasks, workstations and vehicles; Segments 1, 2 and 3 model smart cards and information exchanges 
at SCPS for three vehicle types. Model Segment O Model Segments 1,2, &#38;3 - m Wait in the SCBM Computer 
Database Receive a Signal at SCBM Computer Transport Vehicles with Smart Cards to an SCP Wait at SCP 
Send a Signal to SCBM Com uter Prevent No adlocke Ready for Task Task No Assignment? Available? A= 
  es~yes Select the Firat Arrived Vehicle of Type I (i = 1,23) Using Vehicle Selection Rule Base %====+ 
Traqmrt fo Workstations @/D) I I Transport to the Closest SCP Usirrg SCP Assignment Rulebaae II Figure 
3: SCBM Modeling Approach The SCBM simulation model is created to represent Table 1: Input Data For 
SCBM Simulation several complex issues. These issues are as follows Input Variables Value (a) task generation 
at SCBM computer and distribution of tasks to vehicles when requested at any SCP, Number of workstations 
in SCBM 18 Types of material handling vehicles 3 (b) interactions between SCBM computer and SCPS, Velocity 
of pallet trucks 5.2 ft/sec (c) transfer of task information to the smart card whenever Velocity of 
platform carts 3.8 ft/sec a vehicle requests for new tasks at an SCP, Velocity of forklift trucks 4.6 
ft/sec (d) interactions between smart cards and SCPS, Number of vehicles in each type Inter arrival times 
of tasks at SCBM-DB ;xp.(12) (e) vehicle movements between SCPS, Number of types of taska/vehicle card 
5 (f) interactions between vehicles and SCPS,  Pickup/deposit + smart card read/write (g) interactions 
between smart cards and vehicles and time near workstations in the cett 15 seconds (h) movement of pallets 
and vehicles between various Read/write time at SCPS whenever a workstations based on the task information 
provided vehicle requests for new tasks 25 seconds Distances Between SCPS and workstations by the smart 
card. are fixed and range from 103 to 100oft 4.2 Simulation Experiments Table 2 provides a summary of 
simulation outputs The simulation model has been utilized to study the generated during the experiments. 
The first four columns relationships between several parameters that affect the correspond to simulation 
runs in which the data from design of an SCBM system. In this section, we present Table 1 is uset however, 
the number of vehicles in each various simulation experiments, each conducted for 14400 type is changed 
to 9 (El), 12 (E2), 15 (E3) and 18 (E4) seconds, using the SIMAN model. The model creates five respectively. 
The next three columns correspond to classes of outputs for the SCBM system as follows: simulation runs 
that utilize Table 1; however, the inter­ (a) average waiting time of task data at SCBM-DB (before arrival 
times of tasks at the SCBM computer follow the information is picked up by a vehicle), exponential distribution 
with a mean of 10 (E5), 14 (E6) (b) average task completion time (flow time) for different and 16 (E7). 
The last three columns correspond to runs vehicle types,  that utilize data from Table 1; however, the 
number of (c) avetage number of busy pallet tracks, platform carts or tasks assigned to the vehicle card 
is changed to 3 (E8), 4 for~ift trucks that are dispatched by a specific SCP, (J39) ~d 6 (E1o) respectively. 
(d) average utilization of SCPS and (e) total number of times the vehicle visited SCPS and  4.3 Analysis 
of Simulation Results exchanged smart card information. The manufacturing cell in Section 4.1 and the 
input 4.3.1 Amount of Data on a Smart Card data provided in Table 1 have been utilized to perform the 
simulation experiments. In each experiment, one or more Letus consider the outputs shown in E8, E9, E3 
and EKI parameters are modified. The outputs are further analyzed columns of Table 2. Using these outputs, 
we first to study the characteristics of SCBM systems. studied the impact of the number of tasks per 
vehicle card Table 2: Simulation Results From the SCBM Model Description of Outputs Generatsd El Ii2 
E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8 E9 EIO Average time task information waits in SCBM-DB 3397 1.724 1052 17.2 2075 129 
11.4 25.8 134 1443 Average flow time for pallet trucks 3734 2!100 1464 474 2452 583 463 345 513 1866 
Average flow time for platform carts 3844 ;!225 1590 612 2572 710 586 433 614 2007 Average flow time 
for forklift trucks 3798 2!195 1542 506 2538 634 509 374 552 1954 Average number of busy pallet trucks 
utilizing SCP1 2.56 3.18 4.23 4.78 4.27 4.63 3.73 3.12 4.09 3.83 Average number of busy carts utilizing 
SCP1 2.07 3.43 4.02 4.28 4.23 3.46 3.42 3.13 3.55 4.29 Average number of busy forklift trucks utilizing 
SCP1 2.30 3.92 3.34 4.53 3.08 3.33 2.82 3.01 3.17 3.78 Average number of busy pallet trucks utilizing 
SCP2 2.53 3.00 4.04 3.64 3.54 3.60 3.07 3.11 3.68 4.13 Average number of busy carts utitizing SCP2 2.48 
3.51 4.33 3.86 4.36 4.52 4.20 3.38 3.97 4.18 Average number of busy forklift trucks utilizing SCP2 2.09 
1.97 3.42 3.76 3.97 3.62 3.09 2.69 3.26 3.58 Average number of busy pallet trucks utilizing SCP3 2.72 
4L14 4.63 5.22 5.06 4.54 4.36 4.06 4.52 5!01 Average number of busy carts utilizing SCP3 3.34 3.52 4.64 
5.85 4.35 4.82 3.73 4.24 4.79 4.57 Average number of busy forklift trucks utilizing SCP3 3.32 4.35 5.58 
4.92 5.22 5.16 4.77 3.90 4.98 5.11 Utilization of the smart card post -SCP1 0.37 CL55 0.61 0.71 0.60 
0.60 0.53 0.69 0.69 0.58 Utilization of the smart card post -SCP2 0.39 CL46 0.64 0.61 0.64 0.63 0.56 
0.74 0.74 0.60 Utilization of the smart card post -SCP3 0.43 CL56 0.69 0.75 0.68 0.67 0.61 0.78 0.78 
0.64 Number of smart card information exchanges at SCP1 212 3115 350 4C9 348 345 305 395 395 332 Number 
of smart card information exchanges at SCP2 227 2,65 372 352 370 365 322 427 425 346 Number of smart 
card information exchanges at SCP3 250 325 395 430 390 387 350 448 448 370 Ej corresWnds to a specific 
simulation run (runlength = 14,400 seconds); All time values are in seconds; Manivannan et al. on the 
average flow times for various types of vehicles in the SCBM system. The flow time refers to the waiting 
time for a task at SCPS before assigning to vehicles plus the task execution time at the various workstations. 
From Figure 4, it can be inferred that the average flow times for all three vehicle types increase as 
the number of tasks per vehicle card is increased. Pallet Tmcks platform Carts Forklift Tmcks / o~ 3 
4 5 6 Number of Tasks/Card Figure 4: Average Flow times Versus Number of Tasks Assigned to a Vehicle 
Card Similarly, using the data in E8, E9, E3 and EIo of Table 2, we studied the impact of the number 
of tasks per card on the average number of busy vehicles that received information from a specific SCP 
(See Figure 5). From Figure 5, it can be inferred that the average number of busy vehicles increases 
as the number of tasks per card is increased. The reason being, the vehicles visit more workstations 
(as there are more number of tasks on the card) before they retutn to SCP for information exchange. This 
reduces the work load on SCPS. 9 1 3 4 5 6 Number of Tasks/Card Figure 5: Average Number of Busy Vehicles 
at Various SCPS Vs the Number of Tasks per Vehicle Card Again, using the data in E8, E9, E3 and E1o 
of Table 2, we studied the effect of number of tasks per card on the average waiting time of tasks in 
the SCBM-DB. From Figure 6, it can be inferred that the average waiting time increases exponentially 
as the number of tasks per card increases. As the vehicles take longer time to return to an SCP to obtain 
new tasks and the tasks arrive at an exponential rate, we can infer this pattern. ~1 w0J / Figure 6 
Average Waiting Time of Tasks at SCBM Computer Versus Number of Tasks per Vehicle Card From Figures 4, 
5 and 6, the SCBM designer can visualize the impact of the number of tasks per card on several performance 
measures. Accordingly, the designer may choose the appropriate number of tasks per card based on the 
desired average flow time for each of the vehicle types, average task waiting time in the SCBM computer 
and the average number of busy vehicles. 4.3.2 Information Exchanges at SCPS Consider the results in 
E5, E3, E6 and E7 of Table 2. First, we plotted the effect of changes in the number of information exchanges 
at various SCPS due to the changes in task arrival rates at SCBM computer. It can be inferred from Figure 
7 that the number of information exchanges at SCPS by various vehicles (on an average) 420 4@3 380 360 
340 320 g3m! I I % 10 12 14 16 z Time Between Task Creation Figure 7: Effect of Task Arrival Rate at 
SCBM Computer on the Number of Information Exchanges at SCPS reduces as the time between task arrivals 
to the SCBM computer increases. This leads to a reduction in SCP utilization as shown in Figure 8. Hence, 
for a fixed number of tasks per card, as the SCBM system becomes less busy, the number of exchanges between 
the vehicles and SCPS tend to drop leading to less workload at SCPS. 50 ~ 10 1214 16 Time Between Task 
Creation Figure 8: Effect of Time Between Task Creation at SCBM Computer on SCP Utilization Likewise, 
using E5, E3, E6 and E7 of Table 2, we studied the impact of number of tasks per card on the number of 
information exchanges. From Figure 9, it can be seen that the number of information exchanges by vehicles 
at SCPS did not vary significantly for three and four tasks/card, however, it dropped sharply beyond 
four. This drop occurs because the vehicles return less frequently to SCPS for information exchange. 
%3~~ 456 E3 Number of Tasks/Card Figure 9: Effect of Number of Tasks per Card on the Number of Information 
Exchanges at SCPS  Finally. we studied the impact of number of vehicles in each type (using El, E2, 
E3 and ELI of Table 2) on the number of information exchanges. In Figure 10, a steep increase in total 
number of information exchanges by various vehicles at all SCPS is noticed as the number of Manufacturing 
System vehicles in each type is increased. This occurs because the additional vehicles cause heavy work 
loads at SCPS. d  g200:;1 /1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 Number of Vehiclesflype Figure 10: Effect of Number of 
Vehicles of Each Type on the Number of Information Exchanges at SCPS From the graphs shown in Figures 
7, 8, 9 and 10, the SCBM designer can visualize the impact of (i) change in the task arrival rates at 
the SCBM computer, (ii) the number of vehicles of each type and (iii) the number of tasks per card. From 
these experiments, we may conclude that as the number of vehicles increase, the number of information 
exchanges at SCPS increases. This requires the number of tasks per card to be kept higher so that the 
vehicles do not return frequently to SCPS. However, this leads to delays in updating the SCBM computer 
due to infrequent exchange of information by vehicles at SCPS. Hence, tradeoffs between (i), (ii) and 
(iii) are required. 4.3.3 Number of Busy Vehicles The purpose of this experiment is to obtain the total 
number of busy pallet trucks, platform carts and the forklift trucks at any point in time. The data provided 
in Table 1 is utilized to run this experiment. Figure 11 shows nine graphs plotted using the OUTPT processor 
of the SIMAN language. Each plot is associated with a particular type of vehicle that went through one 
of the three SCPS. The plot provides the total number of vehicles that are busy at any given time. The 
vertical line in the graph corresponds to a vehicle either returning to an SCP after completing all tasks 
or leaving an SCP with a new task list. The horizontal line indicates the length of busy periods before 
a state change has occurred. The plots are grouped such that it is easier to obtain the number of pallet 
trucks (or platform carts or forklift trucks) that are busy at any given time. For instance, if the total 
number of busy pallet trucks is of interest at time 2000 seconds, then select the plots for pallet trucks 
and draw a vertical line passing through 2000 seconds. The number of busy vehicles that received smart 
card information from SCP1 is four, SCP2 is one and SCP3 is eight. The total number of pallet trucks 
that are busy at time 2000 seconds is therefore thirteen. Manivannan et al. Number of Busy Pallet Trucks 
Number of Busy Forklift Trucks ~ Number of B usy Phtform Carts rr z. a., , , 8. 13 13. w ... ,* ,. 
 , s I. . , . .. !+. ,. ,,.. Se  ,s *S. . I ,.. 19 4 3. 5 ,  ., 9. .. ; ,0 .. ,. i.. *.. I *3 ,., 
s,. .. 3. 10. lime Time Time Figure 11: Total Number of Busy Vehicles of Each Type Vs Simulation Time 
(x1OOO Seconds) From the foregoing analyses, it can be concluded that (e) number of vehicle/pallet cards 
(=1 in our example), the selection of suitable values for the design parameters (~ maximum number of 
vehicles of each type and is critical for a successful implementation of an SCBM (g) number of smart 
card information exchanges. system. Using the simulation model, the SCBM designer can study the interrelationships 
between these parameters. Some of these parameters areas follows: 5 BENEFITS OF SCBM SYSTEMS (a) rate 
of task creation at the SCBM computer,  (b) number of SCPS and their locations in the cell, The SCBM 
system has several new design features that (c) number of tasks per vehicle card, can greatly enhance 
the state-of-the-art techniques in (d) type, speed and memory capacity of smart cards, integrating information 
with the physical entities in  manufacturing. The SCBM system and the simulation model offer several 
significant benefits (a) The new information handling media leads to a faster, more reliable and cost-effeetive 
communication means in industry. (b) The simulation model can be used for examining the impact of the 
number of smart cards and the smart card posts on the performance of the SCBM system. (c) By using visible 
smart cards (both contact and non­contact types) and the simulation model, the user can pinpoint information 
overload and backlog in the network and take remedial actions accordingly. (d) The simulation model 
provides a modeling vehicle to study the operating characteristics of SCBM systems. Also, it assists 
the designer in examining the various implementation problems associated with the SCBM system envisioned. 
 SUMMARY In this paper, the design requirements and the operating principles of a smart card-based 
manufacturing system are discussed. A simulation model is developed to examine the design parameters 
that are critical to the successful operation of SCBM systems. The simulation model is built using SIMAN/Cinema 
language and is currently running on a Sun/SPARC computer. Several experiments have been conducted to 
verify the simulation program as well as to study the impact of various design parameters on the performance 
characteristics of the SCBM system. The results from these simulation experiments along with the benefits 
are also discussed. REFERENCES Acar, L., and U. Ozguner 1990. Design of Knowledge-Rich Hierarchical Controllers 
for Large Functional Systems. IEEE Transactions of Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 20 (4). Anon 1987. 
Building a foundation for CIM. Machine Design, 59 (14). Bright, R. 1988. Smart Cards: Principles, Practice 
and Applications, John Wiley &#38; Sons, New York. Byfield, I. 1990. Automatic Identification in Quality 
and Process Improvement. Metals and Materials, 6 (10) 632-634. Cordonnier, V.M. 1991. Smart Cardw Present 
and Future Applications and Techniques. Electronics and Communications Engineering, 3 (5); 207-212. Dewar, 
R.E. 1988. In-vehicle Information and Driver Overload. International Journal of Vehicle Design, 9 (4-5). 
Diehl, M. 1991. Warehouse Efficiency With Paperless Order Picking. Materials Handling Engineering. Fujiwara, 
Y, Ohbo, N., and T. Nakayama. 1986. Databases and Knowledge Bases as Scientific Research Tools. CODATA 
Bulletin, 1 (64). Manufacturing System Hsu, C., and L. Rattner. 1990. Information Modeling for Computerized 
Manufacturing. IEEE Transactions of Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2CI(4). Kellock, B. 1989. Component 
Trading -A Dream Come True. Machinery and Production Engineering, 147 (3754), 48-52. Oszu, T., and P. 
Valduriez. 1991. Principles of Database Systems, Prentice Hall, New Jersey. Papp, Z., Dobrowiecki, T., 
Bago, B., Vadasz, E., and K. Tillie. 1989. Intelligent Real Time Process Monitoring. IFAC Proceedings 
Series, Pergamon Press, Inc., New York, 1 (4). Pegden, C.D., Shannon, R.E., and R.P. Sadowski. 1990. 
Introduction to Simulation using SI&#38;L4N, McGraw-Hill, New York. Sharit, J., Ebertz, R., and G. Salvendy. 
1988. Proposed Theoretical Framework for the Design of a Decision Support System in CIM. International 
Journal of Production Research, 26 (6). Stefanides, E.J. 1987. Mobile Memory System Reads and Writes 
to Moving RAM. Design News, 1 (1):88-89. Svigals, J. 1987. Smart Cards: The New Bank Cards, Macmillan 
Publishing Co. New York. Weber, D. M., and C.L. Moodie. 1988. An Intelligent Information System for an 
Automated, Integrated Manufacturing System. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 8 (2). AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
S. MANIVANNAN is an Assistant Professor in the School of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. His current research interests lie in the area of intelligent manufacturing 
with an emphasis on integrating knowledge bases, discrete­event simulation and novel data acquisition/handling 
techniques in automated manufacturing cells. He is an active member of IEEE, SME, SCS and ASEE. S. NARASIMHAN 
is an Assistant Professor in the School of Management at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research 
interests lie in the areas of information systems, computer networks and distributed database systems. 
He is currently a member of IEEE, ACM, ORSA and TIMS. CHEN ZHOU is an Assistant Professor in the School 
of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests 
include dimensional measurement, cell control and novel information handling methods to manage material 
flow in industry. He is a member of SME, IIE and ASME. M. BULLINGTON is a graduate student in the School 
of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Her research interests 
are in smart card-based material handling systems, knowledge systems and simulation. She is a member 
of IIE, SME, Alpha Pi Mu and Tau Beta Pi.  
			