
 SIX TRENDS IN THE FUTURE OF THE OFFICE Paul S. Licker Information Systems Department Virginia Commonwealth 
University "Office of the Future" is a buzz term, but like many such terms, it sets a frame of mind 
and seduces by its easy enunciation. Often felt to be synonymous with "office automation," by speaking 
the term we seem to be invoking the concept and we begin to see it, or its progenitors all about us. 
It's a common principle in public relations that uttering a slogan is tantamount to purchase of the product. 
In this paper, I'd like to examine six trends which I feel complicate the "Let There Be" attitude of 
market re- searchers, not from the supply side of the producers (there are ample reasons to believe 
that the supply &#38;#169; 1981 ACM 0-89791-044-3/81/0600/0163 $00.75 See Page ii for Copyright Statement 
163 of OOF-ing systems will at least not grow as drama- tically as heretofore predicted I) nor even from 
the demand side of potential users. Instead I wish to see whether or not existing, relatively long-term, 
trends in how offices are staffed and run might ren- der OOF plans moot by changing the office as we 
know it ("office a.w.k.") beyond recognition. The future may arrive without an office a.w.k, to lead 
the fan- fare. If so, if we strongly suspect that, then at- tempts to design, market, and proliferate 
automated office products as systems may have repercussions far beyond the technological, but in the 
area of em- ployment and training of systems people to develop and utilize them the results may be catastrophic, 
akin to attempts to produce mechanical horses in the 1800s. The six trends, not all well documented 
but all at least as long standing as computers, are unrelated to technology thrusts, per se, although 
aided and abetted by the existence of available technology. As the technology develops, so too will the 
tempta- tion grow to consider technological solutions to perceived problems seen as stemming from the 
trends. 164 The trends are the following: o Increasingly the office is thought to be a data-driven 
and data-based "process";  o The supply of entry-level, career-oriented persons for office work is no 
longer in- creasing but will probably decrease;  o Decision-making activity and responsibility is being 
diffused throughout the organiza- tion;  o Traditional office functions are being dis- persed among 
individuals unrelated to the office;  o There is an increasing desire for and cor- respondingly greater 
recognition of the lack of productivity measures for office work;  o Pressure to automate even traditionally 
non- automatable office functions is mounting.  Taken singly, of course, each trend may be seen as 
an unthreatening, natural function of well-under- stood phenomena such as birth rates and technological 
"creep." Seen as a tableau, the trends probably spell the FINIS to a modern chapter of organizational 
specialization. 165 Data in the Office One common conception of the office is that it is a data processor, 
running on "raw," numerical in- put and producing well-behaving processed information as output, this 
last of which is in turn the basis for business decisions (of various sorts) and organi- zational knowledge. 
A recent set of studies 2 uses the term "data" in all three ways (as "data," "infor- mation," and "knowledge). 
The implicit model is one of a self-correcting system: sensation is filtered to provide information upon 
which decisions are taken to effect actions to correct the sensation. Jackson 3 terms this a "homeostat"; 
the concept permeates most writing on office process. No distinction unrelated to "processing stage" 
is made between data and know~ ledge. As with most rhetoric, the blurring is motivated. It is far easier 
to sell DP to "knowledge" workers if they become convinced that what they do is compatible with the notion 
of data processing. Even the weakest hobby computer can be packaged to perform "office" work: word processing, 
on-line data capture, communi- cation, text editing, accounts receivable and billing. 166 Unfortunately, 
while this might be what office automation is all about, it has little to do with what offices themselves 
are supposed to do. Those functions which are exclusively DP (well-defined input; well-known, programmable 
processes; well- behaved output) are indeed DP functions only tangen- tially related to the true business 
of the business office, which is to generate ideas. The hard-fought intellectual distinction between 
data and knowledge (and between data and information) posits that offices uncover problems and provide 
solutions and these are not exclusively numerical in form. Ideas unlike data (numbers or text) are wholly 
mental entities. The DWIP (Data-Word-lnformation-Processing) concept can't capture this. While DWIP and 
DWIP rhetoric is attrac- tive, one must not lose sight of certain data-inexpres- sible office situations. 
Not all of the office is data based. Not all of office process is data driven. To the extent that this 
trend continues, the office is in danger of being defined out of existence. From Bedroom to Boardroom 
 Little need be said regarding birth rates. In 167 the 1980s we can expect fewer 18-year-olds year by 
year and correspondingly fewer non-college-trained individu- als to enter the entry-level cohort. By 
the mid 1980s, even the college-trained cohort will be lower. Office management will increasingly be 
drawn either from the depleting pool of existing resources or from outside, while the more technically 
competent will be increas- ingly drawn to officework cousins and look-alikes in other fields, such as 
programming. Whatever other trends change the topography of the office, the population will become increasingly 
older, less well trained, and more parochial in outlook. With this as a base, who will look to the office 
for a career when other fields promise better pay, more access to power and promotion and more interesting 
work? Diffusion of Decisions The growth of emphasis in "Decision Support Systems" (DSS) was perhaps 
foreseeable, since ultimate- ly all business systems "support" decisions in some form. The argument for 
DSS typically stresses the in- creased complexity facing middle- and upper-level management in the decision-making 
process and their 168 needs for support in bringing decisions out of data. As the data grow in proportion 
and complexity, so, too, must the support systems, i.e., the modeling tools and 4 display mechanisms. 
In another sense, however, DSS has grown not in response to increased complexity but in response to the 
failure of Management Information Systems (MIS) as a 5 movement. The computer is both a complexity reducer 
and, as well, a complexity producer. The large-scale growth of EDP equipment usage, the creation of a 
large cadre of programmers, systems analysts and vendors has fostered its own unique, complex social 
system with a vested interest. The corollary of GIGO is LILO (Little In, Lots Out). We may be faced with 
a commercial/voca- tional system which is more than self-perpetuating, but is in fact self-procreating. 
All this wouldn't mean much if DSS didn't also imply that the concept of decision itself were under attack. 
Just as the computer is a force for decentrali- 6 zation of process and centralization of control , we 
may expect to see DSS a similar force. Within a rea- sonably mature DSS we may expect the decision itself 
to play an increasingly smaller role and be increasingly 169 more difficult to locate within the system. 
Instead, a new model of decision-making more attuned to the re- quirements of automated ("assisted") 
decision-making is developing: a machine into which the raw materials of decision (i.e., data) are 
fed and out of which, at some times, come "trial" decisions in the form of scenarios based upon models. 
"What if" is the slogan of DSS, as though "what if" were the most important question in making a decision 
(it is not; consider "Is a decision necessary?", "Do I have enough informa- tion to begin a decision?", 
"Can I locate those who must be convinced?", and "Is the decision makable?"). DSS treats a decision 
as though it were an item of computerware of the same order as data and therefore we may expect decision-making 
to achieve the same dif- fusion of action and responsibility as DP and WP have achieved for their objects: 
business data and text. Yet manifestly decisions are not necessarily or even regularly data-based. Although 
computer-based DSS may work best in a data-based environment (actually such an environment is an integral 
part of a DSS as currently defined), such a DSS would work best of all in an en- vironment in which decisions 
were about the computer system itself. In such a system, act, action, and ac- 170 tivity become indistinguishably 
modeled upon the process model of EDP. Decisions become stretched-out models of data-processing activities 
rather than those of people. Deciding itself becomes a rather mechanical process -- as it always has 
been at the lowest operational levels. No act at any level becomes valid, therefore, without being vetted 
through the model, itself based on informa- tion created by the model. Responsibility for such watered-down 
electronic decisions become dissipated throughout the organization like a gel, a fine suspension of models 
and data. The office a.w.k, of course does not seem like this, even during times of indecision. The office 
is a typically non-technological solution to the problem of making individuals decide under pressure 
from their coworkers (at many levels) and carry through their decisions. While DSS may ultimately reduce 
the risk at the execu- tive levels, it may well quash even mild attempts at risk-taking (I hesitate to 
speak of the development of risk management techniques among entry-level individu- als, but one must 
at least mention that independence, responsibility, gumption and judgment are four import- ant qualities 
any aspiring entry-level clerk or experi- enced office manager expects to be rewarded for). 171 Since 
the office is itself a solution to the basic problem of an organization (group decision-making including 
all phases of the decision-making process in addition to J. R. snapping his fingers and making a pronouncement), 
the technological path is not neces= sarily the only or best path to follow. As the DWIP model permeates 
office "thought," I suspect it will prove the most attractive. To the extent that DSS is a poor replacement 
for traditional decision-making or an inhospitable machine-based "host" for interper- sonal decision-making, 
we may see the office disappear as the locus of decision-making in favor of the auto- mated variety. 
 Disintegration of Functions Only brief comments need be made on the trend towards functional disintegration, 
since computers are an explicitly introduced disintegrator of functions. (An argument may also be made, 
of course, that compu- ters re-integrate, i.e., reorganize, but the point is that computers greatly change 
the way people think a- bout their work) The concept of the office as an in- formation processor of channel, 
easily programmed in a placid manner, greatly aids the technological replace- 172 ment of the people-filled 
office. The terminal net- work and the centralized software give the appearance of disintegration while 
maintaining a degree of central control. Aggregating DP, WP and IP through software provides each employee 
working with any form of the data-knowledge-information unified concept with a mini- aturized office 
capable of most of the functions tra- ditionally associated with office function. But there is more 
to it than that. Functional disintegration has usually been created by managerial fiat in the past as 
Taylor-inspired work analysis broke 6 up the whole job into parts. The new disintegrator possesses all 
the tools necessary to create constant disintegration (as seen from the worker's point of view) while 
maintaining the integration as a software model, as though Ford's assembly line were implemented in software. 
This itself is neither good nor bad, but it indeed will change the office landscape considerably. 7 As 
an example, consider Kraft's arguments con- cerning the de-skilling of programmers. Whatever the empirical 
truth of the de-skilling battle at the moment, Kraft bases his rationale upon cultural values. As specialized 
functions become more expensive, they be- come, perforce, more well documented and more easily 173 
passed on to the less-well-skilled, unless protected by legislation (i.e., registration) or organization 
 (guilds, unions). In turn, new specialties arise. Since our culture values productivity (in general), 
despecialization is seen as an increase in efficiency. Typically despecialization is accomplished through 
tool-making--this is why robotics is a potential threat to the labor force. The tools enable those who 
had hitherto been incapable become more capable through the performance of simplified task components. 
Kraft cites the movement towards CPT and Structured Program- ming as deskilling, enabling employers to 
substitute cheaper, less-well-skilled labor for specialists. While one may argue with Kraft's position 
(one should), it is easy to see the computer as a tool in the creation of de-skilling tools. Computers 
easily take over many supervision functions of programmers and analysts, too, although thus far one cannot 
point to a major replacement of skilled programmers but more likely an increase in the scope of the profession 
to include more piece-work and routine program develop- ment as those processes to be programmed become 
more well understood. But one thing is clear: given suf- ficient economic incentive, office functions 
can be 174 moved out of the office into the computer. Typical of these functions moved out so far 
are report-generation, money management, decision-making, personnel, and business planning through tools 
such as WP, portfolio management, DSS, automated human resource planning, and a myriad of models. Regular, 
computer-- ized performance appraisal reviews are now common; a career becomes data in a fifteen-minute 
annual interview. Other techniques, stemming from the human-relations school of Management Science are 
semi-mechanical auto- mations of group processes, budgeting, and long-range planning. What is PERT if 
not a computer program? Most, if not all, of these tools are far better than their prior techniques. 
What I argue here is that they are all data based, and, as such, prime candidates for computer-based 
de-specialization and diffusion. Space does not permit an argument here that data-based tools are neither 
necessary, nor if they are necessary are they implicative of technological (i.e., computer) implementations. 
Let's leave that for argument. The less arguable assertion is that such necessities have been perceived 
and responded to, with a resulting dif- fusion, which seems also to be necessary. Even if the 175 office 
survives disenfranchisement (from idea genera- tion), depopulation, diffusion and disintegration, it 
might become impossible to find. Decontrol As white-collar labor becomes the norm in busi- ness, an 
increased pressure will arise for measurement and control of white-collar productivity, the subject of 
the most intense search since the Lindburgh kidnap- ping. In the rhetoric, what is not measurable is 
un- controllable; what is ~ncontrollable is bad business. The result of this mind-set is to rush toward 
products which promise productivity measurement, if not outright control. This has always been the most 
attractive element of DP: its enormous increase in productivity is glaringly measurable. Again, office-work's 
cousin programming is a good example of where OOF may take us. Hitherto we measured programmer productivity 
in lines-of-tested- code-per-day. Since programming was a sort of black art, one could increase productivity 
by introducing redundant coding or, more typically, not increase productivity but simply increase delivery 
time, be- cause who cared anyway? Since testing was at best a 176 stochastic process, tested code was 
little guarantee against program malfunction anyway. With structured programming we can measure (and 
control) productivity by comparison of output with measurable ekternal objectives outside the computer, 
such as computing functions demonstrated. As the art of structured design matures, programming productivity 
can only rise. May we expect the same in structured office work? Perhaps. We still, however, see typists 
and WPers measured in lines per day. Clerks are still judged by their speed in emptying out baskets or 
filling in baskets. This notwithstanding, the trend toward increased need for control over office workers 
will only make computer-based "officering" more attractive. o GIGO will be inverted; data flow becomes 
a measure of effectiveness;  o Typists will be timed, clocked, and sequenced through intelligent WP 
systems;  o Clerk-coders will be judged in terms of num- ber of documents "filed" per instant;  o Computer-based 
telecommunications will not only provide linkage, but measure it, too.  177 The absurdity of this 
is the same as that of measuring a chauffeur's productivity in terms of the number of "Haw"s and "Gee"s 
successfully transmitted to the horseless carriage. Because the essential mo- del of DWIP is that of 
the ever reliable, accurate and available clerk, it is natural that the office find the DWIP model turned 
around on it and applied whole cloth. But it was never the case that the com- puter is really a clerk, 
so that the misplaced meta- phor cannot be repaired by imperfectly applying it back. Clerks are not programmers 
and retrieval mecha- nisms, officers are not ALUs, typists are not merely terminals all operating solely 
upon data. Upper manage- ment is more than a switch contolling allocation of resources or an operating 
system. But under the se- duction of improved (or at least measurable) produc- tivity, the model may 
be too attractive to ignore. "DP" Means "Displaced Person" Total replacement, not mere diffusion and 
dis- integration, of the office is, of course, the ultimate trend. It is, in fact, the cornerstone of 
the com- puter industry, which, from its earliest inception 178 applied the "mind" metaphor to its products 
("Elec- tronic Brain, .... Thinking Machine," and "Intelligent Terminal" come quickly to my protoplasmic 
processor). Now that we are convinced that EDP is essential to 8 our (business) society a.w.k. (See 
Weizenbaum for a partial refutation of this), we have turned the metaphor around (I have read about "human 
computers," "input-output clerks," and was once part of a group which began its corporate name with "Computer 
People"). Ignoring the insults for a moment, consider that we are beginning to fall for our own rhetoric 
when we conceive of a machine operator as an input-output clerk. This latter shifts the focus from an 
operative who solves chunks of management's problems to the fa- cilities, negating the worker's contributions. 
A ma- chine operator may take pride in operation or owner- ship of a device, but an input-output clerk 
has no tangible focus of work. Data is not material, but an electronic aspect of a machine, neither its 
product, its essential being, or its action. The results of seduction by the metaphor are logically the 
replace- ment of the office by its programmable processes. There are several arguments for why the DWIP 
 179 off±ce automation route is neither necessary nor pro- fitable, but in the interest of time I'll 
only interate my previous argument that the true challenge of the office is emphatically not to express 
office function in terms of DP-compatible units but to express the na- ture of the office in interactional 
terms: who deals with whom about what in which time frame and context. Typically the what is an idea. 
The basic EDP-engendered confusion between interaction and transmission, between communication and information, 
leads us into the Never- neverland of DWIP and its rhetoric. In history, any function entering Neverneverland 
does not return. When a set of poorly-understood functions stands on the brink, coated with Pixie dust, 
one sees a phalanx of Judge Craters about to be "disappeared." The Implications The six trends touched 
upon here are voiced to add controversy to a seventh trend which seems to be proceed- ing posthaste: 
office automation9). And while I neither foresee a halt to the trend nor desire much different alternatives 
considering the delivered promise of DWIP already in other, related areas, critical questions should 
be asked about the logical, as opposed to eco- 180 nomic,necessity of our particular way of "futuring" 
 the office. Computers do spell the end of some old ways and the introduction of newer, better ones. 
For those of us who train computer-oriented students for computer-based positions, a moral question continues 
to nag, however. What are we training them for? Since computers became useful to the general pub- lic, 
a number of professions have arisen directly from the computer ranks (programmer, computer systems ana- 
lyst, computer designer, marketeer, salesperson, etc.) and others have developed through applications. 
For the most part, the applications-based computer jobs are integral with their business contexts; remove 
the computer and there is still the business application. I'd like to get the critical discussion going 
about computer-based office jobs. If we remove the computer will there still be an office? Does there 
have to be? Should there be? So what? If we change the evolution of O0F by substituting a different, 
perhaps still computer-related model for DWIP, What kihds of jobs would result? What kinds of special 
training are needed? Can we supply them? And here's a question for academics: Are they studiable? Until 
we break through the rhetoric, there is nothing to argue or study. 181 Notes i. Mayfield, Anne A. 
"A Slowdown Ahead in Office Auto- mation," Computerworld, May 19, 1980, pp. ID22,25-8. 2. Rockart, John 
F. "Chief Executives Define Their Own Data Needs," Harvard Business Review, March-April, 1979, pp. 81-92. 
 3. Jackson, D. D. "The Question of Family Homeos-asis," The Psychiatric Quarterly Supplement, 31, Part 
i, 1957, pp. 79-80.  4. Keen, P. and Scott Morton, M. S. Decision Support Systems: An Organizational 
Perspective, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978.  5. Sprague, Ralph, Jr. "A Framework for the Development 
of Decision Support Systems," M. I. S. Quarterly, 4(4), December, 1980, pp. 1-26.  6. Dearden, John: 
"Myth of Real-Time Management Infor- mation," Harvard Business Review, May-June, 1966.  7. Inbar, Michael. 
Routine Decision-Making: The Future of Bureaucracy, Beverly Hills, California: Sage, 1979.  8. Toffler, 
A. The Third Wave, New York: Bantam, p. 47, 1981. This is not the only source of information on the topic, 
but Toffler's contribution in this book is insight into the separation of consumer from pro- ducer which 
he feels computer-based systems will re- institute.  182 9. Kraft, Philip. Programmers and Managers: 
The Rou- tinization of Computer Programming in the United States, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977.  
10. Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reasoning, San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1976.  ii. 
Lodahl, Thomas and N. Dean Meyer. "Six Pathways to Office Automation," Administrative Management, 41(3), 
1979, pp. 32-3, 74, 78, 80, 90. Biographical Sketch Paul S. Licker has worked in and around computers 
since 1964. He holds an M.S.E in Computer and Information Science from the University of Pennsylvania 
and a Ph.D in Communications from the Annenberg School at U. of P. For over ten years, his interest has 
been in telecommu- nication system design and application. He has consulted for several large corporate 
clients and participated in market research and design evaluation for several Tele- communication products 
through them. Currently, he is Assistant Professor of Information Systems in the School of Business of 
Virginia Commonwealth University where he teaches telecommunications applications. He is working on a 
book with focus on the management of programmers and is the author of several articles on office automation. 
 183 
			