
   tomated manner. It is dif.cult, however, to obtain such de­scriptions from complex real-world audio 
signals of music, and we cannot use existing techniques for this purpose. We therefore propose a method, 
called RefraiD (RefrainDe­tecting Method), that automatically detects the beginning and end points of 
chorus sections and repeated sections in a song with a focus on popular music. Although other chorus-detection 
methods have been reported [1, 2, 19], they only extract a single segment from several chorus sections 
by detecting a repeated section of a designated length as the most represen­tative of a song. None of 
these previous methods addressed the problem of detecting all the chorus sections in a song and identifying 
both ends of those chorus sections. Furthermore, while chorus sections are sometimes modulated (the key 
is changed) during their repetition in a song, the previous meth­ods were not able to deal with modulated 
repetition. The Re­fraiD, on the other hand, makes it possible to detect all re­peated chorus sections 
in a song and to estimate their begin­ning and end points by examining the mutual relationships among 
various repeated sections. This method also incor­porates a new similarity measure that enables detection 
of a repeated chorus section even after modulation. Although the results of automatic detection here 
may include some errors and are therefore not 100% accurate, they still provide the listener with a valuable 
aid to .nding a desired playback position and make a listening station much more convenient than in the 
past. If, however, there are times when an accurate description is required, results of automatic de­tection 
may be manually corrected. For this reason, we de­veloped an editor enabling manual labeling and correction 
of chorus sections and of the song structure on the whole. Man­ual labeling is a useful tool for songs 
not suitable for auto­matic detection or outside the category of popular music. 4.1 Problems in chorus-section 
detection To enable the handling of a large number of songs in popu­lar music, this research aims for 
a general and robust chorus­section detection method using no prior information on acous­tic features 
unique to choruses. To this end, we focus on the fact that chorus sections are usually the most repeated 
sec­tions of a song and adopt the following basic strategy: .nd sections that repeat and output those 
that appear most often. It must be pointed out, however, that it is dif.cult for a com­puter to judge 
repetition because it is rare for repeated sec­tions to be exactly the same. The following summarizes 
the main problems that must be addressed in this regard. Problem 1: Acoustic features and similarity 
Whether a section is a repetition of another must be judged on the basis of similarity between the acoustic 
features obtained from each section. In this process, similarity must be high between acoustic features 
even if the ac­companiment or melody line changes somewhat in the repeated section. This condition is 
dif.cult to satisfy if acoustic features are taken to be simple power spectrums Figure 3: Overview of 
chorus-section detecting method RefraiD. or mel-frequency cepstral coef.cients (MFCC) as used in audio/speech 
signal processing. Problem 2: Repetition judgment criterion The criterion establishing just how high 
similarity must be for repetition to occur depends on the song. It could be easily set for a small number 
of speci.c songs by manual means. For a large song set, however, this criterion would have to be automatically 
modi.ed based on the song being processed. Problem 3: Estimating both ends (beginning and end points) 
of repeated sections The beginning and end points of repeated sections must be estimated by examining 
the mutual relationships among the various repeated sections. For example, given the song having the 
structure (A BCBC C), the long repeti­tion corresponding to (B C) would be obtained by a simple repetition 
search. The both ends of the C section in (B C) could be inferred, however, from the information obtained 
on the .nal repetition of C in this structure. Problem 4: Detecting modulated repetition Because the 
acoustic features of a section generally un­dergo a signi.cant change after modulation (key change), 
similarity with the section before modulation is low, mak­ing it dif.cult to judge repetition. The detection 
of modu­lated repetition is important since modulation sometimes occurs in chorus repetitions in the 
latter half of a song.  4.2 Overview of the chorus-section detecting method: RefraiD Figure 3 shows 
the process .ow of RefraiD, a chorus-section detecting method that solves the problems described above. 
1. Extract 12-dimensional chroma vectors and calculate sim­ilarity STFT power spectrum 8 kHz Summation 
over    six octaves Chroma vector  Figure 4: Overview of calculating 12-dimensional chroma vector. 
The method .rst extracts a 12-dimensional feature vector called a chroma vector, which is robust to small 
changes of accompaniments, from each frame of an input audio signal and calculates the similarity between 
these vec­tors (solution to Problem 1). Figure 4 shows an overview of calculating the chroma vector. 
The 12-dimensional chroma vector vv(t) is extracted from the power spectrum, .p(f, t) at the log-scale 
frequency f at time t, calcu­lated by using the short-time Fourier transform (STFT). Each element of 
vv(t) corresponds to a pitch class c (c = 1, 2, . . . 12) in the equal temperament and is represented 
as vc(t): OctH 8 vc(t)= BPFc,h(f) .p(f, t) df. (1) -8 h=OctL The BPFc,h(f) is a bandpass .lter that passes 
the signal at the log-scale frequency Fc,h (in cents5) of pitch class c in octave position h6 Fc,h = 
1200h + 100(c - 1) (2) and is de.ned using a Hanning window as follows: BPFc,h(f)= 1 2 1 - cos 2p(f - 
(Fc,h - 100)) 200 . (3) This .lter is applied to octaves from OctL to OctH. In the current implementation, 
the input signal is digitized at 16-bits/16-kHz, and then the STFT with a 4096-sample Hanning window 
is calculated by using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Since the FFT frame is shifted by 1280 samples, 
the discrete time step (1 frame shift) is 80 ms. The OctL and OctH, the octave range for the summation 
of Equation (1), are respectively 3 and 8. This covers six octaves (130 Hz to 8 kHz). 5Frequency fHz 
in hertz is converted to frequency fcent in cents so that there are 100 cents to a tempered semitone 
and 1200 to an octave: fcent = 3 1200 log2(fHz / (440 × 2 12 -5)). 6In the Shepard s helix representation 
of pitch perception [23], c and h respectively correspond to chroma and height.  t(time) Rall(t,l)0 
ABCC ABCCCC Figure 5: A plot of line segments, the similarity r(t, l), and the possibility Rall(t, l) 
of containing line seg­ments. The similarity r(t, l) is de.ned in the right­angled isosceles triangle 
in the lower right-hand cor­ner. The actual r(t, l) is noisy and ambiguous and usu­ally contains many 
line segments irrelevant to chorus sections. The similarity r(t, l) between the chroma vectors vv(t) 
and vv(t - l) is de.ned as vv(t) vv(t-l) - maxc vc(t) maxc vc(t-l) r(t, l)=1 -v , (4) 12 where l (0 
= l = t) is the lag. Since the denomi­ v nator 12 is the length of the diagonal line of the 12­dimensional 
hypercube with edge length 1, r(t, l) satis.es 0 = r(t, l) = 1. 2. List repeated sections The method 
then lists pairs of repeated sections by using an adaptive repetition-judgment criterion that is con.g­ured 
by an automatic threshold selection method based on a discriminant criterion [20] (solution to Problem 
2). Pairs of repeated sections are obtained from r(t, l). Considering that r(t, l) is drawn within the 
right-angled isosceles tri­angle in the two-dimensional time-lag space as shown in Figure 5, the method 
.nds line segments that are parallel to the horizontal time axis and that indicate consecutive regions 
with high r(t, l). When the section between the time T 1 and T 2 is denoted [T 1,T 2], each line segment 
between the points (T 1,L1) and (T 2,L1) is represented as (t =[T 1,T 2],l = L1), which means that the 
section [T 1,T 2] is similar to (i.e., is the repetition of) the sec­tion [T 1 - L1,T 2 - L1]. In other 
words, a line segment indicates a repeated-section pair. To .nd (t =[T 1,T 2],l = L1) in r(t, l), the 
possibility of containing line segments at the lag l, Rall(t, l), is evalu­ated at the current time t 
(e.g., at the end of the song) as follows (Figure 5): t r(t, l) Rall(t, l)=dt. (5) t - l l Before this 
calculation, r(t, l) is normalized by subtract­ing the mean of r(t, l) in the adjacent area. = . . ··· 
··· ··· . . = . . . ··· ··· . ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· = = .. .. = = =  
			