
 SAN FRANCISCO JULY 22-26 Volume 19, Number 3, 1985 Solid Texturing of Complex Surfaces Darwym R. Peachey 
Department of Computational Science University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon, Canada ABSTRACT Texturing 
is an effective method of simulating surface detail at relatively low cost. Traditionally, texture functions 
have been defined on the two-dimensional surface coordinate systems of individual surface patches. This 
paper introduces the notion of "solid texturing". Solid texturing uses texture functions defined throughout 
a region of three-dimensional space. Many nonhomogeneous materials, including wood and stone, may be 
more realistically rendered using solid texture functions. In addition, solid texturing can easily be 
applied to complex surfaces which are difficult to texture using two-dimensional texture functions. The 
paper gives examples of solid texture functions based on Fourier synthesis, stochastic texture models, 
projections of two-dimensional textures, end combinations of other solid textures. CR Categories and 
Subject Descriptors: 1.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational Geometry and Object Modeling; 1.3.7 [Computer 
Graphi~]: Three- Dimensional Graphics and Realism. Additional Key Words and Phrases: anti-aliasing, image 
synthesis, shading, texturing. I. Introduction The most realistic and attractive computer generated images 
are usually those that contain a large amount of visual complexity and detail. Unfortunately, the amount 
of complexity which can be directly represented using geometric models is limited by computational considerations. 
Surface Permission to copy without fee all or part ol this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and]or specific permission. 
&#38;#169; 1985 ACM 0-89791-166-0/85/007/0279 $00.75 texturing (introduced by Catmuli [4]) is an effective 
method of simulating surface detail at relatively low cost. In computer graphics, objects are commonly 
modeled using surface representations. The surfaces of most objects are complex aurfaces consisting of 
a collection of individual surface patches, which may abut or intersect. Each patch is a simple mathematical 
entity, for example, a planar polygon, a quadric surface, or a parametric patch. Texturing consists of 
computing the value of some shading parameter p for specified points or areas on the patch. Traditionally, 
texturing has been done by means of functions defined on a two-dimensional texture space, usually the 
unit square.  p = p(u,v) A two-dimensional surface'coordinate system is defined for each surface patch, 
along with a "natural" mapping N from any point (X,¥,Z) on the patch to a corresponding point (u,v) in 
the unit square. (.,v) = ~'(x,r,z) , = p(Jv(x,r,z)) Originally, the shading parameter p was used to determine 
the reflectance or color of a surface patch at various points. Blinn later used texture functions to 
control environmeatal reflections [I], shininess and roughness [2], and surface nor_real direction [3]. 
The latter technique is particularly significant because it permits the simulation of bumps and wrinkles 
on geometrically smooth surfaces. Gardner [8] used texture functions to control transparency. Cook [5] 
introduced the use of generalized shading expressions which allowed a different shading model for each 
object or surface. In Cook's system, the (u,~) arguments to a texture function may be computed by arbitrary 
expressions, and the value produced by the texture function may be used in arbitrary expressions. Many 
methods of defining texture functions have been used. Most common is the use of a stored table of texture 
values. The summed-area table, proposed by Crow [7], is a means of representing tab, lar texture data 
for easier anti-aliasing calculations. The data in a texture table may come from a digitized photograph, 
or may be generated by any of several texture synthesis techniques. Synthetic textures can also be represented 
procedurally, by a function that directly computes a value when called, rather than obtaining the value 
from a table. In this paper, we introduce a different approach to texturing called solid texturln$. Solid 
texturing is shown to have advantages for rendering objects whose surface texture arises from their internal 
structure. Solid texturing also provides a way of easily texturing complex surfaces. (The SIGGRAPH reviewers 
have indicated that the concept of solid texturing has been independently proposed and implemented by 
Ken Perlin of MAGI.) 2. Solid Texturing 2.1 Solid Texture Functions A solid texture function for a shading 
parameter p is simply a texture function defined at the points on a surface in terms of their 3-space 
coordinates rather than their surface coordinates: p = p(X,r,z) In fact, it is usually more convenient 
to define a solid texture function throughout a given volume of space, not just at the points on a surface. 
This generalization makes it unnecessary to be concerned about the shape of the surface being textured, 
as long as it lies within the volume where the solid texture function is defined. As with two-dimensional 
texture functions, it is quite easy to make a solid texture function periodic so that it is defined at 
all points in 3-space, though care may be required to avoid discontinuities in the function at the boundary 
between one period and the next. The simplest way of applying a solid texture function is to use the 
three-dimensional scene coordinates of the point being rendered as the argument of the texture function. 
It is often more convenient to use the local coordinate system of some object, rather than the scene 
coordinate system, to determine the coordinates for solid texturing. Applying a three-dimensional coordinate 
transformation (matrix multiplication) to the coordinates before passing them to the texture function 
allows more flexibility. For special applications, a solid texture function may be evaluated based on 
another three-dimensional argument such as the surface normal vector, the direction of the observer, 
the direction of a light SOurCe, etc.  2.2 Advantages of Solid Texturing Objects which are made by carving 
or machining a ch-nk of a nonhomogeneous material exhibit a surface texture due to variations in the 
internal composition of the material. MAny natural materials are nonhomogeneons and have complex internal 
structures which result from growth, accretion, cracking, or mixing while in a liquid state. Natural 
materials such as plant and animal derivatives and veined or patterned minerals can be more reafisticaliy 
modeled using appropriate solid texture functions. For example, objects machined from solid wood exhibit 
different grain textures depending on the orientation of the surface with respect to the longitudinal 
growth axis of the original tree. Traditional graphics techniques of applying wood grain textures typically 
result in a veneer or "plastic wood" effect. Figure 1 was produced by applying a simple two-dimensional 
simulated woodgrain texture to the surfaces of a block and a sphere. Although each surface of the block 
resembles wood, the relationship between the textures on the adjacent surfaces destroys the illusion. 
The distortion of the woodgrain texture when applied to the surface of the sphere results in unrealistic 
spiral curves and discontinuities. Some improvement might be produced by scaling, rotating, or pro-stretching 
the textures [7], but it would be difficult to give a convincing impression of solid wood without adding 
more textural information. A more realistic solid wood effect may be produced by using a solid texture 
function that can determine which type of wood (light or dark) exists at a given point in space (Figure 
2). The function used here is simply a collection of coaxial cylinders alternating between light and 
dark wood. The central axis of the cylinders is oriented approximately from right to left in the figure, 
with a slight tilt upward and away from the camera. Although this cylindrical function is an excessively 
reg~llnr model of the structure of wood, it results in a surprisingly realistic woodgrain texture. Comparing 
Figures I and 2, a number of advantages of solid texturing are evident. The grain texture seen on the 
right end of the block in Figure 1 is realistic and is completely different from the grain on the sides 
of the block. The relationship between the textures on the various surfaces of the block is correct for 
solid wood. This is particularly clear from the way in which the textures match up at the edges between 
surfaces. The sphere in the lower part of Figure 2 also shows a convincing solid wood texture, without 
the unreasonable spirals and discontinuities seen in the sphere in Figure 1. All of these improvements 
were achieved without manipulating the texture function by scaling, rotating, or pro-stretching to suit 
the geometric models. the patches, so that textural discontinuities do not appear at the boundaries 
between adjacent patches. Methods have been devised to do this partitioning for groups of patches that 
form a sufficiently regular mesh. For example, Crow's rendering system [6] includes a program which assigns 
texture space coordinates to the vertices of quadrilateral patches that approximate a surface of revolution. 
Each quadrilateral is mapped to a rectang~dstr cell of a regular grid that covers the texture space. 
The program assigns adjacent quadrilaterals to adjacent cells of the grid. Within a single quadrilateral, 
bilinear interpolation is used to compute the texture coordinates of an arbitrary point from the texture 
coordinates of the four vertices. Use of surface texturing becomes more awkward and ad hoc as the number 
of patches grows and as their arrangement becomes less regular. When we consider the case of patches 
which do not neatly meet at the edges, but which may intersect one another, the problem of mapping a 
texture onto the complex surface is even more difficult. In order to properly assign areas of the texture 
space to patches, it is nccessary to determine the cxact curve along which two or more patches intersect, 
a task which may be mathematically or computationally intractable. Since adjacent patches may be of different 
types, different shapes, and different sizes, the surface coordinate systems on opposite sides of the 
boundary between two patches can be radically different. For example, a sharply curved patch may twist 
and distort a texture pattern which is undistorted on an adjacent fiat patch. Even two adjacent flat 
patches may have greatly different scales, so that the size of textural details is much larger on one 
patch than on the other. Because of these surface coordinate system effects, it is very difficult to 
ensure apparent continuity of two- dimensional textures applied to complex surfaces. Solid texturing 
can be directly applied to arbitrarily complex surfaces, without encountering the problems discussed 
in the preceding paragraphs. All of these problems result from the geometric relationships between patches 
or from the surface coordinate systems of the patches. Solid texture functions are independent of the 
surface geometry and the surface coordinate systems. Since every point on a complex surface has a unique 
position in three- dimensional space, a solid texture function can be directly evaluated at the point 
without any additional information. Figure 3 shows three instances of a spindle-shaped object that might 
form part of a piece of furniture. The center spindle is painted in several different colors to distinguish 
its various surface patches. The other two spindles are rendered with solid textures that approximate 
granite and wood, to demonstrate the straightforward applicability of solid texturing to complex surfaces. 
4. Generating Solid Textures In principle, solid texture functions can be defined and evaluated in most 
of the ways which are popular for two-dimensional texture functions. Texture functions may be divided 
into digitized textures and synthetic textures. The advantage of digitized textures is their potential 
for realism. Digitized textures are quite popular in two-dimensional texturing, because it is relatively 
easy to digitize a photograph. Digitizing solid textures is far less convenient, since it involves the 
two-dimensional digitization of a large number of cross-sectional slices through some material. It is 
often preferable to use a synthetic solid texture to avoid this awkward digitization process. Synthetic 
textures are more flexible than digitized textures, in that synthetic textures can be designed to'have 
certain desirable properties or to meet certain constraints; for example, a synthetic texture can often 
be made smoothly periodic, so that it can be used to fill an infinite texture space without visible discontinuities 
at the boundary between one period and the next. While a digitized texture must be stored in a tabular 
form and evaluated by table lookup, a synthetic texture may be evaluated directly in procedural form, 
or may be pre-evaluated and stored in tabular form. Tabular storage of synthetic texture functions is 
a way of improving execution speed and code simplicity at the expense of storage space. Three-dimensional 
texture tables pose greater problems than two-dimensional tables in this regard. High-resolution texture 
tables for a three-dimensional texture contain very large amounts of data (for example, 512×512×512 resolution 
requires 134 million bytes, assuming one byte per texel). Thus, synthetic texture functions that can 
be evaluated procedurally are often preferable to three-dimensional texture tables. 4.1 Solid Texture 
Models Synthetic textures are generated from a mathematical texture model which may be designed to approximate 
some natural texture. A great variety of texture models have been successfully used in two- dimensional 
texturing, and it is possible to construct three-dimensional versions of many of these models. Bombing 
[II] is a stochastic texture model which has proven useful in two-dimensional texturing. Bombing consists 
of randomly dropping bombs of various shapes, sizes, and orientations onto the texture space. An analogous 
procedure may be performed in a three-dimensional texture space. Figure 4 shows a synthetic "bubble" 
texture which might result naturally from bubbles or droplets of one substance being captured within 
another substance during solidification from a molten or liquid state. The texture was generated by placing 
28'2 sum of sinusoids. The phases of all of these functions are determined randomly for each vein. The 
vein growth process is used to generate a three- dimensional texture table with a resolution of 128 x128 
x128 and one bit per texture element. During rendering, the table is used to determine the values of 
the texture function at the eight vertices of a cube enclosing the point being rendered. Then trilinear 
interpolation is applied to calculate the value of the function at the point. Undoubtedly many other 
solid texture models will be developed in future to generate solid texture functions. The most fruitful 
sources of inspiration for these models are the well-established literature concerning synthetic two-dimensional 
textures, along with an understanding of the structure and causes of natural textures. 4.2 Projection 
Functions Projection functions are a class of solid texture functions based on two-dimensional textures 
which are projected through three-dimensional space. For example, a two-dimensional texture pCu,v) can 
be applied to a complex surface by means of the orthogonal projection function R: R(X,r,Z) = p(JCJ) for 
X and 1, E [0,1) R(x,1,,z) = 0, otherwise. R simply projects the texture p along the z axis. Each texture 
element of p generates a rectangnlar parallelepiped that extends infinitely in both directions parallel 
to the z axis. Of course, R can be rotated, translated, and scaled with respect to the object being textured, 
so the projection direction need not ultimately coincide with the z axis. Figure 6 shows an example of 
the orthogonal projection of a digitized image, shown at the lower right, onto a complex surface consisting 
of polygonal and cylindrical patches, shown at the upper left. The resulting textured object is shown 
at the upper right of Figure 6. Note that there are no discontinuities in the mapping of the digitized 
image onto the complex surface, even along the intersection curves between the various surface patches. 
The solid texture function used to approximate wood grain in Figures 2 and 3 is actnnlly an orthogonal 
projection of a set of concentric circles. In this case the concentric circles are generated procedurally. 
By using a two-dimensional texture table it would be quite easy to improve the realism of the solid texture 
by varying the thickness and spacing of the circles and allowing them to deviate from a strictly circ~!~r 
shape. However, a truly convincing wood texture would require a fully three-dimensional texture table 
to represent knots and other features that cut across the longitudinal growth axis of the tree. The synthetic 
textures used by Gardner [8] are also examples of orthogonal projection functions; they are defined on 
a three-dimensional scene coordinate system, but their values are determined entirely by the x and 1' 
coordinates. This amounts to a projection of the texture along the z axis. (The reviewers have noted 
that Alan Barr presented a texture projection scheme called "decals" at the SIGGRAPH '83 State-of-the-Art 
in Image Synthesis Course.) Orthogonal projection functions certainly are not the only types of projection 
functions that may prove useful. Cylindrical projections, where the two-dimensional texture table is 
indexed by, for example, the 1, coordinate and the angle of rotation around the 1, axis in the x-z plane, 
form another interesting class of projection functions. Other projection functions can be designed to 
preserve particular properties of the two-dimensional texture. Cartographers have long used the properties 
of conformality, equivalence, and equidistance [9] to classify projection functions for the restricted 
case of mapping from a spherical surface to a planar one. 4.3 Combination Functions Interesting solid 
textures can be produced by combining other solid textures in various ways. A combination function C(X,1,,Z) 
may be defined by c = ~(A.,,~, ... ,A.) where Aj(X,r,Z) are solid texture functions and o is an m-ary 
operation used to combine the values of the A~ functions. The "granite" texture shown in Figure 7 is 
a combination of three solid texture functions. Each of the three functions is an orthogonal projection 
of a two-dimensional texture. The texture shown in the upper part of Figure 8 is the basis of two of 
the projections, while the texture shown in the lower part of Figure 8 is used for the third projection. 
The three projections are combined by eight bit unsigned addition with wraparound. Even though reach 
of the three projections is limited to two dimensions of textural richness, the combination function 
is a true three-dimensional texture. (The granite texture is also used in Figures 3 and 5.) 5. Texluring 
Costa Although solid texturing may intuitively seem like a costly technique, it can be quite inexpensive 
relative to other parts of the rendering process. The SAN FRANCISCO JULY 22-26 coordinates used as arguments 
to the solid texture functions are usually easily avnllable as a by-product of other calculations (although 
 matrix multiplication may be required to transform the coordinates to the texture space). The cost of 
solid texturing depends primarily on the cost of evaluating the solid texture functions themselves. This 
cost varies widely with the nature of the function. Figures I through 7 were produced by a ray-tracing 
system called PORTRAY [I0]. Figur&#38;#169; 1, which uses a single two-dimensional texture table, took 
18% less CPU time to generate than Figure 2, which uses a procedural solid texturc function representing 
concentric cylinders. If the time needed to synthesize the texture table for Figure I is included, the 
difference drops to 12%. The solid texture function makes heavy use of a square root library function, 
and could probably be made much faster. Figure 6, which uses a projection function to map digitized 
image onto complex surface, was produced in less than 50% of the CPU time used by either of Figures 
I and 2, suggesting that other aspects of the rendering process have more impact on total cost than does 
the texturing method. Little can be said in general based on these cost comparisons, except that solid 
texturing need not be prohibitively expensive. If solid texturing is likely to bc much more costly than 
two-dimensional texturing in a given case, it is possible to use the solid texture itself to produce 
two-dimensional texture tables. Patch texture functions can be generated for each patch of a given object 
by evaluating the solid texture function at selected points on the patch and storing them in two-dimensional 
table (possibly a summed area table [7]). The solid texture must be sampled at an adequate frequency; 
it may be necessary to sample at a high resolution and filter the samples with weighted averaging technique 
to obtain a lower resolution anti-aliased texture. Note that the generation of the patch texture function 
must be done separately for each patch, and requires that the position and orientation of the patch with 
respect to the entire object (and with respect to the solid tcxturc function) bc known. It is not sufficient 
to perform this process once to produce a two-dimensional texture for use on several patches or objects. 
The texture is inherently three.dimensional; the patch texture function is merely a computational shorthand 
used for greater efficiency in rendering a partio,lar patch of particular obkct. Generating patch texture 
functions from the solid texture may be desirable and cost effective if the same object model is to be 
reused for many images (e.g., sequence of frames for animation). It may not be cost effective if only 
 single image is produced, because the solid texture function will probably bc evaluated at points that 
are not visible in the image. Patch texture functions may be generated for convenience rather than efficiency, 
because the Volume 19, Number 3,1985 patch functions can be used with existing graphics systems without 
modifications to support solid texturing directly. 6. Conclusions Solid texturing extends the notion 
of texturing from a surface coordinate basis to a solid coordinate basis. Solid textures are particularly 
suited to realistic texturing of objects which have been machined or carved from natural materials. Solid 
textures are also convenient for texturing complex surfaces without producing unpleasant discontinuities 
at the boundaries between surface patches. Mapping a two-dimensional texture onto an arbitarily complex 
surface by normal means is very difficult and requ~es ~eat deal of geometric information and geometric 
computation. Solid texturing of complex surfaces uses no geometric information directly, and leaves all 
geometric computations to other parts of the rendering system. This makes the solid texturing approach 
a simple, flexible, and powerful means of texturing complex surfaces. Solid textures can be generated 
by three-dimensional functions of various types, many of which have two-dimensional analogs. Solid textures 
also can be generated from two-dimensional textures as a means of applying such textures to complex surfaces. 
If desired, two-dimensional texture functions for individual patches may be automatically produced from 
a solid texture function, and applied to surface patches in the traditional way. Clearly the notion of 
solid texturing can be explored further. We have only begun the investigation of interesting three-dimensional 
functions and ways in which they may bc used to achieve particular effects. Solid texturing is not intended 
to replace traditional surface texturing, but rather to provide an additional technique in the image 
synthesis toolkit. It can achieve effects which are difficult or impractical to achieve directly using 
two-dimensional texture functions. However, solid texturing may be used to generate two-dimensional texture 
functions which achieve such effects. Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Natural Sciences 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada through infra-structure grant no. A2527. Larry Custead provided 
assistance in photographing images, while Judy Pcaehey and Derek Andrew offered valuable encouragement 
during the writing of the paper. The work could not have been done without the support and facilities 
of the Department of Computational Science and the University of Saskatchewan. ¢,. References [1] BLINN, 
J. F. and NEWELL, M. E. Texture and reflection in computer generated images. Commun. ACId 19,10(Oct. 
1976), 542-547. [2] B~, J. F. Models of light reflection for computer synthesized pictures. Comput. Gr. 
11,2 (Summer 1977), 192-198. [3] BLINN, J. F. Simulation of wrinkled surfaces. Comput. Gr. 12,3(Aug. 
1978), 286-292. [4] CATMULL, E. A Subdivision Algorithm for Computer Display of Curved Surface. Ph.D. 
dissertation, Univerdty of Utah, 1974. [5] COOK, R. L. Shade trees. Comput. Gr. 18, 3 (July 1984), 223-231. 
[6] CROW, F. C. A more flexible image generation environment. Comput. Gr. 16, 3 (July 1982), 9-18. [7] 
CROW, F. C. Summed-area tables for texture mapping. Comput. Gr. 18,3(July1984), 207- 212. [8] GARDNER, 
G. Y. Simulation of natural ~:.enes using textured quadric surfaces. Comput. Gr. /8,3(July 1984), 11-20. 
 [9] LORD, E. A. and WILSON, C. B. The Mathematical Description of Shape and Form. Ellis Horwood Limited, 
1984. [10] PEACHEY, D. R. Portray - An Image Synthesis 3ystem for Realistic Computer Graphlca. Research 
Report 84-18, Dept. of Comp. Science, Univ. of Saskatchewan, 1984. [11] SCHACHTER, B. J. and AHUJA, N. 
Random pattern generation processes. Comput. Gr. Image Process. 10(1979), 95-114. [12] SCHACHTER, B. 
J. Long-crested wave models. Comput. Gr. Image ProceaL 12(1980), 187-201. 
			