
 -5- SOME THOUGHTS ON USERS' SERVICES by Dr. Stefan Shrier Users' Services Specialist Computer Center 
Brown University Providence, Rhode Island 02912 The tentative observations which follow were written 
from the perspective of a new employee at the Brown Computer Center in June 1976 and a relatively insulated 
user of APL/360 on the Brown timesharing facility d0ring the preceding year. A comprehensive discussion 
of the ideas raised in this paper as regards this complex service function and facility could be based 
on input from all concerned. We begin by characterizing the Computer Center as a service organization 
which provides goods and services to the user community. The Computer Center exists in the midst of a 
community of scholars. There are few commercial users among the user base and ADP occupies less than 
one-third of the work load. Among the academic users we note that there are a few users classed as heavy 
users and a large number of small users. The result of this is a variety of questions which arise in 
problems which need to be dealt with and in interests and needs which vary widely. The non-Brown academic 
user might include other academic users through cooperative programs and consortia. The Computer Center 
as an operation and facility within the university structure is a unique element in the economic history 
of the university. This extremely expensive, direct-cost billed element is primarily supported by instructional 
funds. It is as much a research tool and aspect of the learning experience to the "funded (i.e.grant 
supported) academic" as it is to the "non-funded academic". The funded user who is paying money from 
outside sources demands in return unwavering excellence and professionalism in the service purchased 
which is, of course, subject to the usual competition in the marketplace. He might even generate a heavier 
demand on service (his "share"). These vivid facts of life must be faced in this time of the micro, mini, 
midi-computers and telephone access to mega-processors through ARP~NET, TELENET, ETCNET. The non-funded 
user, on the other hand, might not contribute real money to help cover day-to-day operations and cost 
recovery of major hardware components, but he is valuable as a contributor and participator in this 
facet of University services. Moreover, he plays an important role politically insofar as the Computer 
Center might well be tolerated by the University at large only so long as representative and widespread 
support and demand exist. The Computer Center must be aware of the need for a "marketing effort" to retain 
budget support for nov and future years of expansion, The goal of computer literacy is essential to 
be attained for reasons which include the current popularity of "computing skills" tooled as weapons 
in the graduating students' assault on the employment market. To focus attention on the Computer Center 
itself, we see an umbrella for components which might conveniently be labelled "operations", "systems" 
and ,,users' services". If we explore this further we begin to see items which emerge for discussion 
and examination. The Computer Center is one orqanization with the primary goal of service to the academic 
community. The obvious and possibly unavoidable overlap in the function between personnel and between 
the three labeled components identified above might be viewed as parallel elements to reinforce each 
other to improve the service to the consumer. Indeed, the us__eer with a solution to a problem as his 
qoal should -6- not be burdened with the internal workings of hardware, systems or personnel. In what 
follows we list functions relevant to the facilitating of computing at Brown and thus by definition the 
role of users' services in the University. ~uestion-Answer Function Local Questions S_~ questions 
which relate to the "peculiar" implementation at this installation of computing procedures occur on a 
daily basis. The user wants to know how to accomplish something here; the answer might not be (and generally 
is not) the same at any other CP-67 installation let alone another mainframe system. The "it's in the 
manual" answer might leave the user with weeks of poring over materials to decipher, uncover and implement 
the appropriate technique. He wants his answer and he wants it no_~w. It might take a few minutes to 
generate the answer: users' services specialists might in fact have to refer to other specialists at 
the Center to find the answer. More elaborate questions might involve implementation of some code, a 
whole system, some background research and letter writing, .... That is, the question cannot be answered 
on the spot. Global questions Ouick-to-answer questions include those on FORTRAN, ~PL, PL/I, . . ., 
bugs and/or techniques. These are characterized in part by the facet of system independence (and hence, 
portability). They do not in general (and in theory) depend upon CP-67 at Brown in a particular, current 
version. This category includes searching through software packages: casual suggestions on casual questions. 
 More involved questions include consultation or program development in areas such as language concordance, 
EDP problems (e.g. large SORT/MERGE), OSIRIS, solving stiff differential equations, KWIC index preparation, 
realtime applications, hybrids and other hardware. We also call attention to consultation on algorithms 
and such problems as, for example, the development of an interface to make SPSS easier to use. In such 
a scenario, users' services might draft the specifications and then work with the systems group in a 
cooperative venture. Terminal Centers and Material Mana qement The hardware interface to the computer 
is accomplished via phone links, communications interfaces, terminals, card readers, etc. Users' services 
must coordinate with Operations the governance of the human interfaces to the user, viz. consultants. 
This might include scheduling, language training, etc. Training is required because of the diversity 
in the user base, diversity in the equipment, protocols, and the need to carefully and clearly define 
ethical guidelines. To summarize, this is the implementation of a consultants' bureau for the user and 
the subsequent supervision of operation logistics. For equipment and supplies we include coordination 
with operations on equipment ergonomics; acquisition and rental of volatile supplies, such as diskpacks 
and tapes: the reporting of MHX problems, RJE station punch card shortages: etc. Gettin~ the word out 
 The users' services is generally the first contact the user has with the Computer Center; for many users, 
this is the only contact they have. (We must add that in general, systems and operations personnel 
are not to be approached by members of the user base indiscriminantly lest service denigrate in quantity 
and quality.) There is a need for the planning, production and maintenance of public relations. We 
must also introduce again the real world aspect of marketing which presents to the potential user the 
WHO we are, WHY we are here and WHAT we are prepared to do. These themes are of course elaborated 
for the user with a service account and we investigate specifics in the following subsections. Educational 
assistance This includes the professional -7- (though usually non-credit in the University) courses 
on the effective use of the facilities, system protocols (JCL, CMS commands), high level languages and 
special purpose utilities such as FRESS-the text editor. We also include assistance to the University 
community on pedagogical questions with regard to hardware and software. Under the titles "What's 
available to whom and how to do it" we include the distribution (and often the production) of manuals, 
TM's, etc.: acquisition of applications software: coordination with systems on the implementation of 
new applications software; consultation on the planning of new software; etc. Representation of the 
Computer Center The computer revolution comes in several sizes. The new compacts might be the forerunners 
of the satellites to FET high density megamemory vector computers which will be readily available in 
several years. A coordinations effort with the "Independent Facilities" on campus will result in better 
computing facilities for the academic community: various groups on campus represent state of the art 
in development of computing applications. The users' services specialists might also make available their 
talents to University planning commissions on: the role of computing in the learning process, the future 
of computing at Brown, is computing dead?, .... In particular, we cite the need for the participation 
in planning: future configurations and systems, possible links to satellites on campus, the potential 
to establish, for example, a packet switched network with the Computer Center as "host" (and supplier 
of carriers) . Contact and information exchanges with agencies such as EDUCOM, NERComP, Computing Economists 
for Prosperity, ACM, ICPR and the like also contribute heavily to the responsibility of users' services 
function. proqramm!nq.,services "What to do" with what appear~ to many users to be a FREE service when 
in fact it requires real support dollars raises many questions. Some immediate questions to be asked 
are: HOW? WHY? W_HHO P_~AYS.~?, Billable time to users?. If we extend the concept of preparation for 
computing application to include non-portable setup for problem solution, even a well-defined problem 
might involve, for examples, an SPSS deck setup or a JCL sequence which draw on elaborate skills. An 
area to be explored is the crossover of use of a package in an interdisciplinary or interdepartmental 
application vs. an intradepartmental or a sole faculty member use package. Delicate questions arise 
which might touch on department autonomy, artificial barriers between people drawn by "discipline", 
pro fessional rivalries and competitions, etc. We cite the applications package IMPRESS, the Princeton 
Social Science Consulting Bureau and the Dartmouth visual information retrieval project as scme of the 
many examples of possibilities for better educational facilities, better research tools, enhanced grant 
proposals for other segments of the community to open the question WHY? asked above. Marketinq Services 
to Commercial Users We note in closing the need to consider Brown's role in and responsibility to the 
"town" community; this might also include the sales of service to "for-profit" ventures in the vicinity. 
The latter raises many delicate questions which will have to be carefully explored. 
			