
 Spectrally Optimal Sampling for Distribution Ray Tracing Don P. Mitchell AT&#38;T Bell Laboratories 
Murray Hitt, NJ 07974  Abstract Nonuniform sarnpting of images is a useful technique in computer graphics, 
because a properly designed pattern of samples can make alisaing take the form of high-frequency random 
noise. In this paper, the technique of nonuniform sampling is extended from two dimensions to include 
the ex~a parameter dimensions of distribu­tion ray tracing. A condition for optirnslity is suggested, 
and algo­rithms for approximating optimal sampling are developed. The technique is demonstrated at low 
sampling densities, so the charac­teristics of aliasing noise are clearly visible. At superaarnpling 
rates, this technique should move noise into frequencim above the paasband of the pixel-reconstruction 
filter. CR Categories and Subject Descriptions: 1.3.3 [ Computer Graphics ]: Picmre/Irnage Generation 
1.3.7 [ Computer Graphics ]: Three-Dimensinrtal Graphics and Realism General Terms: Algorithms Additional 
Keywords and Phrases: Antialiasing, Distribution Ray Tracing, Nonrmifomr Sampling, Noise Perception 1. 
Introduction In 1979, Whitted demonstrated that ray tracing could be used to simulate a number of realistic 
shading effects [Whitted80], Unfor­tunately, ray tracing has a special ditllcuky with aJiaaing, a problem 
sometimes encountered when sampling signals. To focus on this issue, Whitted s sdgorithm can be cast 
into the form of a two­dimensional sampling problem. At each point (x ,y) on the image plane, a bnghmess 
sample is defiied by calculating the radiance of a ray from the viewpoint through that point. Assuming 
the irnage­phme coordinates range between zero and one, the image brighmess is detlmed by the mapping: 
~: [0,1]2 + radiance (1) Any synthetic image might be deacnbed as (1), but the details of ray tracing 
have special implications: the vrdues of f can only be evaluated at a @nt, and it is virtually impossible 
to symbolically intergrate or low-pass filter the function. In other words, the signat can be sampled 
but generally cannot be prefiitered to avoid aliaaing. An interesting approach to this problem is nonuniform 
sampling which an yield aliaaing in the form of high-frequency random noise [Dipp485, Cook86, Mitchel187]. 
Permission to copy wi[hout fee alI or pm nf this material is granted provided thatthecopiesarenotmadeor 
distributedfor direct commercialadvwr!age. the ACM copyright notice irnd the title of the puhlicatitm 
md itsdateappear,andnotice ii given that cnpyirrg is by permission of Ihe Association f,w Computing Machinery. 
Tn copy otherwise, or 10 republish. requlrc~ a fcc and/or specific permission. An elegant extension of 
Whitted s algorithm is distribution ray tracing (previously distributed ray tracing ), introduced by 
Cook, Porter and Carpenter [Cook84]. Their algorithm simulat~ motion blur, shadow penumbras from ftite-area 
light sources, depth-of­field effects, and glossy reflections from partially polished surfaces. This 
is achieved by sarnptittg in an additional set of parameter dimensions. For example, an object in motion 
will have a position in the scene parametrized by the time t, and motion blurred pixels can be calculated 
by averaging over many different samples of r. Depth-of-field effects are associated with a finite aperture 
on the camera sod are simulated by &#38;flecting rays through different points on the lens, parametrized 
by two more variables a ,b. Glcmy reflection results from varying the direction of a surface normal, 
as if the surface were made up of randomly distributed microscopic facets parametenzed by an orientation 
e,$. WitA these extra parameters, distribution ray tracing defines a multidimensional brighmess function 
f (x, y; r, u, . ). A sample of this function is evaluated by ~rforming a Whitted-style ray tracing operation. 
However, first moving objects would be transformed to their hxation at time r, a point light source is 
defined by (u,v) representing a sample of the area light, the primary ray from the camera is deflected 
through a final point from a position (a,b) on the lens, ete. Grtee the scene is prepared for a given 
set of parametervalues, a ray-tracing cakutation can be done. Assuming -x,Y, ~d D -2 parameters range 
from zero to one, we have the brighmess mapping: f : [O,l]D + radiance (2) The two-dimensional image 
is an integrationover the parameters 11 ~(x,Y) = JJ j~ (x, y;r, u, . )dtdu. (3) 00 0 Addhionstl integration 
or convolution (with a filter) may be done in .x and y to define a bandlimited image function i(.r, y 
) suitable for atias-free digitization. The integration in (3) cannot be evahsated analytically, but 
the process of distribution ray &#38;acing estimates f(-x,Y) by averagingmanysamplesper pixel. This prmxss 
can be viewed as a Monte Carlo integration, or as a classical statistical sampling probiem of estimating 
the mesrrrvalue off in a region of the image plane, or it can be viewed as a sampling problem in the 
signal processing sense. These viewpoints are not independent, and all of them can &#38; found with varying 
degrees of emphasis in discussions of distribution ray tracing [Cook84, 1...ee85,Cook86, Kajiya86, Shirley90]. 
The question investigated in this paper is how to extend the tedrniques of normnifomr sampling, used 
in Wldtted-style ray fraeing, to the multiple dimensions of distribution ray tracing. This is not simply 
the problem of generating a Dimensional image from samples of ~ , which might be a obvious extension 
of the twodtmensional methods. We are still interested in the characteristics of noise in a two-dimensionat 
image, and we expect AcM-(1-89791-436-8191$00.75  /ot)70157 157  SIGGRAPH 91 Las Vegas, 28 Juiy-2 August 
1991 the parameter dimensions r, u, v, ., 0 to play a qualitatively different role than the image coordinates 
x, y. 2. fncompleta Block Sampling Designs An important problem in distribution ray tracing k how to 
choose samples effectively to produce the highest qur@ image with the fewest rays. We might simpl choose 
samples randomly with a uni- X form disbibution in [0,1] . In sequential sampling, random samples are 
made until we are statistically cotildent that the average value has a low variance px%5, Kajiya86]. 
This procedure is usually improved by stratified sampling, where the intem al [0, 1] is divided into 
N levels, dropping a random sample into each subirrtenal. This spreads the samples out more evenly and 
often results in a lower variance of the average. In the twodimensiorral antisliaaing problem of whined-style 
ray tracing, each pixel area [0,1]2 can be divided into N x N subsquares for stratitkd sampling, This 
is more or less the same as jittered sampling, a common approach to the antialiiing problem ~ippt%5, 
Cook86, Kajiya86, I%mter89]. However, this is not a practical approach to srunpliig the parameter space 
of distribution ray tracing because of the high number of dimensions. Stratifkation of all D dimensions 
wordd result in ND blocks to be sampled. This could easily be tens of thousands of samplw per pixel, 
many more than would be reasonable or necessary. In practice, stratilcation has been applied to distribution 
ray tracing, but with incomplete block sampling designs that donot tldly populate the ND blocks. Cook 
created incomplete bbxk deaigrts by subdividing the pixel area into an N x N mesh of subsquares. he time 
dirmmsion was divided into N2 levels, and pairs of area-like parameters like (u,v) and (a ,b) were subdividing 
into N x N m=hes. N2 samples are then made which projected onto each subsquarc of the pixel once, each 
level of time once, each subsquare of the (u ,v) dimension once, etc. Thus only N2 of the possible ND 
blocks are occupied by a sample. Little has been said about how these associations betweem blocks should 
be chosen, but it is clear that linear correlation between parameter values should be avoided [Cook86]. 
Linear correlation would mean a tendemcy for samples to fall on hyperplanes in [0,1] D which could cause 
aliasing. The visual consequences of parameter correlation are objectionable and conspicuous. Shirley 
describes another incomplete block design called N-rook sampling, where N out of ND blocks are populated 
[Shirley90]. Let rrI, nz,..rtD.l b~u~tiomoftiesqwne(o,l, . . . ,N -1). Then we choose one asmple in each 
aubmterval of each parameter dimension. The nh sample is placed in level n of the x dimension, in level 
n I(n) of they dimemsiott,level nz(n) of the r dimension, etc. Once again, little is known about what 
are good or bad choices for the permutations, except to avoid linear correlation. An example in two dimensions 
is shown below: Figure 1. An 8-Rook Sampling Design in Two Dmensiorts There seems to remain an important 
piece of mrfiished business. We do not really know very much about what constitutes a good sampling design 
versus a bad one. Avoiding linear correlation is known to be important. Explicit in the two incomplete 
blcck designs described above is the property that the sampling pattern is good when projected onto certain 
lower-dimensional planes or axes. For example, the N-rook patterns are futly ~putated strstitkd designs 
when projected onto arty coordinate axis. Linear correlation could be avoided by randomly choosing sampling 
designs of either Cook s style or Shirley s. Mc$eover, sequential sampling (i.e., sampling until statistical 
cordMettce is achieved) is probably capable of giving satisfactory image quality [LeeS51, whether the 
sarnpliig design is good or not. The danger is that many more samplea might be computed than are necessary. 
3. Nonuniform Sampling in Two Dmensions Before tackling the problem of sampling in D dimensions, it will 
be usefrd to review the two-dimensional problem of sampling in the (x,y) dimensions. This is the problem 
in whined-style ray txacing. Typically, the image is supersarnpled at a high rate (by casting rays), 
and then filtered and resampled to a lower rate to produce the pixels of a digittd image. The filter 
may be an average over the pixel area, or it may be a more sophisticated low-pass filter. The process 
of sampling is represented mathematically by multiplication of the image signal with delta-function pulses, 
as diagramed below 1~~ I supersample pixel-rate pulses pulses Figure 2. Convemion of Ray-Casting Samples 
into Pixels The reconstruction filter interpolates samples to recreate a continu­ous image. The low-pass 
filter makes sure that image is bandlim­ited so sliasing witl not resutt when it is reaampled at the 
pixel rate. These two falters are uaditiomdly combined into one, but when supersarnphng is nonuniform, 
it is often the case that reconstruction and low-pass filtering are dktinctly separate stages [Mitchel187, 
Painter89]. If the supersamplmg pattern is nonuniform, and its spectrum has certain characteristics, 
the sampling error (or alksing) will take the form of random noise at high frequencies. llda is desirable 
for two reasons. If noise is concett@ated in the high frequencies, more of it will be attenuated by the 
low-pass filter pictured in Figure 2. Secondly, randomness and high frequency both help to make the noise 
less perceptible to a human observer. This can be understood by looking at the sampling process in the 
frequestcy domain. Let ~(x,y) represent the continuous image, S(X,y) represents the sarrtplig pattern 
(delta functions), and let r(x ,y) be the combined reconstruction/low-pass fflter. F, S, and R will represent 
the corresponding spectsa. In the spatiat domain, the sampling and filtering process is expressed by 
i(x,y) = r(x,y)*[f(x,y) .S(x,y)] (4) And in the frequency domain: I(roX,toY) = R(@,,rDY)-[~(rO., WY) 
*Mroz.@Y)l (5) where. and * represent multiplication and convolution respectively. The reconstruction 
fdtcr is described above as a linear low-pass filter, which is ideal for uniform samples but cart give 
a distotted reconstmction of nonuniform samples. Nonuniform reconstruction for images is not perfectly 
understc@ but in practice, ttordinear or space-wuying falters (which are not representable by a convolution) 
give better results ~ipp&#38;S5, Mitchel187, Marvasti87]. The result is still some type of low-pass filter 
(i.e., a smooth surface interpolat­ing the sample spikes). When the reconstmcth and low-pass stages (in 
F@re 2) are implemented separately, the low-pass stage could be a linear filter rainter89]. If the superaampling 
rate is much higher than the pixel rate, the linear low-pass stage should dominate the behavior of the 
system. We will model the recottatntc­tion as a linear low-pass filter for the purposes of qualitative 
analysis. The spectrum of the sampling psttem S will be a delta-function spike at the origin (the DC 
compent) and some pattern of noise aurrormding it. The convolution F* S (shown in F@ure 3) of a image 
spectrum with the nommiform-aarnpling spectrum gives a copy of the true image spectrum (the symmetric 
shape at the center of the figure) and a halo of noise energy (represented by the scat­tered dots). The 
low-pass fiiter R (represented by the dotted box) attenuates energy outaide its bounds. @Y t - (irX 
Figure 3. Spectrum of Nonuniformly Sampled Image tf the spectrum of the sampling pattern has energy concentrated 
in high frequencies, then the halo of noise will be pushed farther out from the origin, and more of it 
will be outside of the paas band of the filter. The best krtown patterns having this high-frequency characteristic 
are the Poisson-Disk stochastic point processes. These patterns are random, but include a constraint 
that no two points can be closer than some miniitrm distance (as if each point was surrounded by a hard 
disk) [Ripley77], The spectral consequences of this sampling pattern were first investigated by Yellott, 
who found this arrangement in the photoreceptors of monkey retinas [Yellott83]. More commonly used are 
patterns based on jirter processes. These are formed by randomly perturbing the points in a perimiic 
uniform lattice. Jitter samptirrg contains more Iow-tlequency energy m its spectrum than Poiasondisk 
patterns, and images produced with it have a more grainy appearance at low sampling rates ~tchel187]. 
However, jitter sampling is easy to generate, and straightforward adaptive-sampling schemes exist for 
generating jitter samples at variable density [Dipp6t35,Ccak86, Kajiya86, Pairtter89]. Smne of these 
methods could atso be described as stratified sampling. 4. Sequential Poisson-D~k Sampting Poissondiak 
samples are typicatly generated by a dart-throwing atgorithm which is computationally expensive and which 
makes it diff cult to control the ful density of samples (one initially choaes the hard-disk diameter, 
not the desired sample density) ~ipp685, Mitchel187]. With the following new algorithm, it is possible 
to generate good high-frequency sampling patterns with sequentially increasing dett­sity. Begin by choosing 
the fwt sample at random in a region. To add the (n + 1)* sample, generate mn uniformly distributed ran­dom 
candidate points (where m is a constant parameter). For each of these random points, compute the distance 
to the closest of the n Computer Graphics, Volume 25, Number 4, July 1991 points already in the pattern. 
Tlten chose the candidate poim with the largest closest-point distance, and add it to the pattern. By 
scal­ ing up the number of random candidate pointa, m proportion to n, we maintain a constant ratio m 
of cattdidateato patternpoints in the process. llms we expect the statistics of the pattern (the autocorre­ 
lation, etc) to alao scale and resnairr similar as the sample density increases. The high-frequency quality 
of the pattesn increased with m. This is art O(n 2) algorithm, but it is an improvement over the poorly 
defined temtination of the dart-throwing algorithm (which runs until it cannot add new santplea). The 
spx.d was improved dramatically by using grid methods for the nearest-neighbor cakula­tion. This point 
process is not strictly harckdbk, because it is possi­ble (although unlikely) for samples to lie very 
close together. How­ever, the resulting patternsare excellent if m is not too small. TYte following figure 
shows some snapshots from this process, using m=10 .* * I.-**.*-*. .. **..*:* . , .** .. . .*** . ... 
..*1 . . .**.. .* * .. . .*.**** * . .. o . *.**** .. . ..*.* . * 1-lI-JU Figure 4. Sequential Generation 
of High-Frequency Samples It is sometimes useful to perform this algorithm with wrap-around boundary 
conditions, so the psttern can be replicated periodicatty over the plane (with much longer pericd than 
the pixel rate, of course). The algorithm can be extended to higher dimensions, and it could also be 
used to generate isotropic high-frequency sampting patterna on ttre surface of a sphere. That may be 
useful because area light sources and gtoasy reflections require sampling solid angles. The alternative 
of stratitkd sampling of latitu&#38; and longitude is not isotropic because strata near the pde are very 
different in ahape than equatorial strata. The concept of choosing the best samplea from random candklates 
will be used again in the algorithms applied to distribution ray tracing, By hard disk we usuatly mean 
a circutar region of avoidance around each sample. By using an ellipse or other shape, the s~m of ttM 
pattern can be made anisolropic in some fashion. The human visual sensitivity extenda higher into vertical 
and horizontal frequencies ttrarrit doea into diagonal frequencies, so a Poissorrdiamond pattern might 
be better than Poisson-disk. Bcutouch et af support this idea in Ureirexpximents with uniform qrdrrcrmx 
sampling [Bouatoucb91]. This is an issue that could be studied further. S. Motion Blur and Spatiotemporal 
Sampling If two-dimensional sampling can push noise into high frequencies, can the same effect be obtained 
while sampling the extra parameters of dkaribution ray tracing? Let us be@rt by considering motion blur 
effects, where a single extra parameterr is added. tltis is not an obvious three-dirrremsional genesaIixationof 
the problem of the pre­vious swtion. ~ (x,y; t) is sampled in three dimensions,but we are stitl concerned 
with the resulting sampling noise in the two­ dinrensiorralimage i(x,y). To derive the spectrum of i(x,y), 
let ~,(x,y,r) = ~ (x,y; r) .s(x,y,t) be the sampled mrdtiparameter image function, whese s(x,y,r) is 
a distribution of delta furrtiorts in spac@ittte. The sampled image function is low-pass filtered spatially 
with r(x, y), and integrated over an exposure-time itrtervat for motion blur I i(x,y) = r(x,y)* ~f. (x,Y, 
r) dt (6) o I59  SIGGRAPH 91 Las Vegas, 28 JuIY-2 August 1991 The spectrum is a littfe easier to derive 
if we replace the integration over a time itttetvat with the equivalent operations of convolution with 
a box function in r followed by sampling one slice through t. Then using the Convolution Theorem, we 
fmd the spectxum of i(x,y) to bet . I(fJx,rDy) = R(cox,@Y) ~ Sinc(w,/2x)F.(@x. mY,@,)d@, (7) - The important 
difference between the expression for the static­itnage spectrum (5) and the spectrum of the motion-blurred 
image (7) is the integration over 0,, This means tbe three-difnertaiorutI spectrum (at least, the portion 
passed by the R and Nnc filters) will be projectedonto the spatiaf (fox ,roY) ptane, Ideally, we woutd 
tike the noisy part of this spectrum to be pushed out of a cylirtdricat region around the ro, axis, so 
its projection wiU contain onty the highest possible spatial noise frequencies. Figure 5. Cylinders of 
Medium and Low Spatial Frequencies Ttds suggests that the best general santpfing pattern will be one 
with little power in the low-spatial-frequency region around the O, axis. Figure 5 depicts the spectrum 
of the sampling pattern with cylirrdri­cal regions around the rot axis enclosing spatial frequencies 
below some brmdtimit. The wide cytinder on the left contains frequencies up to some medium vafue, and 
the cytinder on the right represents a lower bandlimit. We would like these cylinders to be as vacant 
of power as possible. In fact, the practicat requirement is to have the power within each cylinder be 
concentrated at the ftigheat possible frequencies. It is fdso important to give the highest priority 
to removing the lowest spatial frequencies, so we require the power in the right-hand cylinder to be 
concentrated at higher temporal fre­quencies than in the left-hand cylinder. t / Y Figure 6. Margittaf 
Distributions of %rnples in Space and Time These conditions in the frequency domain imply some conditions 
on the arrangement of samplea in space and time. l he two grapha in F@ure 6 illustrate situations corresponding 
to the spectra in F@re 5. They show the projection of samples onto the spatiaf plane (dots) and onto 
the time axis (tick marks). We are not yet certain where t flrisactuatlycorrespondstotheintegraticmoftimefrom-X 
to%. A phase-shiftfwtorcoutdbeaddedtoreflectintegrationfrmrOto 1. sine(x) = sin(rrx)lrrx. Utese samples 
shoutd be in spacdtinte, but we will be able to give conditiom on their projections into apace and time. 
If there is no movement in a region of the image, then onty the apa­tiat projection of the pattern is 
importan~ so we could begin by con­straining it to form an optimal distribution, like Poissorxlisk. We 
are interested in the power contained within cylinders of spatial tkequextcies,in Figure 5, and in the 
temporal-frequency distribution of that power. Imagine that we have convolved the spectnutt with a cylinder 
and sampled the reardt on the 0)1axis (this is equivafenf to averaging ova apatiaf frequencies inside 
the cylinders). llmt opera­tion cormponds approximately to selecting the samples within a cylindrical 
region of space, and considering their dme distribution. The ttarmwer cylinder of frequerwies in Figure 
5 corresponds to a wider region of space in F@rre 6. The temporal distribution of samples, shown in FQure 
6, represent one-dimensional patterns of the highest possible ihquertcy (such as Poisson-rod distributions). 
Therefore, the desired propmty of space/time sampling patterns is that in any cylindrical region of space, 
the dhibution of samples in dme witt be a high-frequency pattern. Aft interesting consequence of this 
is that samples which are adjacent in space ahotdd differ greatty in time or other parameter coordinates. 
This is quite dif­ferent from the most obvious tbreedirnensional anatog of Poiason­disk sampling. A Poisson-sphere 
point distribution woufd not necessarily have this property of high-frequency time distribution.  6. 
A Scanning Sample-Generation Atgorithm A simple scanning algorithm is one possible way to generate satn­ 
pliig patterns which approximate the conditions described in the previous section. Begin by stratifying 
the x and y dimensions into a mesh of subsqrrares, assuming that one jittered sample is contained in 
each. The goal is to assign each sample a vatue of the parameter t. This is done in scatming order, from 
left to right, and top to bot­tom. Sssss SPPPS sP -EEEl F@ue 7. Neighborhood of the Next Unprocessed 
Subsquare Figure 7 itluatrates the situation at some point in the scanning pro­cess. We wish to choose 
a parameter vatue for the subsquare con­taining the dot. In the 5 x 5 region surrounding the dot, some 
subsquara above and behind (indicated by P or S ) have already been assigned t values. Catl these the 
P-cetfs and S-cells (meaning primary and =ortdary). We woutd like the newt vatue to tit into a high-frequency 
Poisson­rod distribution, as shown in F@rtre 6. In a manner reminiscent of the sequential Poissottdisk 
atgorithm of section 4, we generate a set of primary candidate t vaturM with uniform random distribution 
in [0, 1], For example, let us say we generate 100 primary candidates. The candidate are sorted by their 
maximum cloaeat distance to the t vrdues of the P-cells. Distance is dtimed with wrap-around borrn­dary 
cotrditions, so the pattern can used periodicatty from frame to frame.. From the sorted list, we might 
pick (for example) the 10 with largest max-mitr distance. Any one of these 10 values shoufd be a good 
choice to complete a coarse Poisson-rod diatibrttion as suggested on the left of Figure 6. The set of 
10 vafrres selected above are now considered as secondary candidates. For each secondary candidate, compute 
the maximum closest distance to the r values of the S-cells, and pick the one with the largest msx-min 
distance. This should be a good choice to com­plete the denser distribution as suggested on the right 
of Figure 6. We are trying to meet two constraints, picking 100 primary candi­dates and evaluating how 
weff they match the situation on the left of Figure 6, then selecting 10 secondary candidates to match 
the condi­tions on the right. 7. Experiments with Scan-Generated Sampling Patterns F@ues 8 and 9 demonstratethe 
use of ttds sampling patternon a ray-tracedscene containing spinning wheels. F@re 8 was made by choosing 
t vatues with a uniform random distribution. Figure 9 uses the spectrally optimized r values generated 
by the scanning algo­rithm. In fact, a 32 x 32 pattern of samples was generated and repli­cated periodically 
on the plane. Both image were generated with just one sample per pixel so the sampling noise cart be 
seen clearly. Essentially, we are looking at the raw superaamples~., which would be passed into the filter 
stages of F@ure 2 in order to make an antialiaaed digital image. Figures 10a and 10b ahow the correapondlng 
noise spectra (with lighter shades indicating higher power). These were obtained by subtracting F@rres 
8 and 9 from a reference image (generated with 100 rays per pixel), to create an error image. The discrete 
Fourier transform of the error images show a typical white noise spectrum in Figure 10a, corresponding 
to the random sampling. However, Figure 10b shows a considerable concentration of power in the higher 
frequencies. Even though the mean square error of F@res 8 and 9 are about the same, the frequency distribution 
of power has a large impact on subjective appearance. A series of rarsdornty-sampled images like Figure 
8 were generated using from 1 to 9 samples per pixel, and seversf expert observers were asked to select 
the best comparison with Figure 9. F@sre 9 was obviously better looking that 1 sample per pixel and obviously 
worse than 9. The consensus was that three or four random time samples psr pixel were required to match 
the subjective quality of Figure 9. Figures 11 and 12 show a similar comparison of the tedutique applied 
to depth-of-field effects. F@rsre 11 was generated with uniformly random vahsea of (a, b ), the parameters 
controlling the deflection of primary rays through the camera aperture. F@sre 12 used parameter values 
generated by the scanning algorithm. The only difference from scanning generation of t values is the 
use of a twodlmensional Euclidean distance for the max-mio distance selections. Once again, both figures 
were generated with one ray per pixel. Figure 11 shows the clumpy pattern of sampling error characteristic 
of white noise, and Figure 12 shows the timer structure of high-frequency .oise. A cnticrd observer may 
notice, from the point-spread, that the simulated camera has a square lens. There is no special problem 
in simulating a round lens, which should have been done if this were not a simple experimental ray tracer. 
Figures 13 and 14 demonstrate another two-parameter experiment, using parameter values to perturb the 
normal vector of a surface and simulate glossy reflection. F@e 13 uses random perturbations and Figure 
14 uses scan-generated parameters. These images provide evidence that the condition for optimal parameter 
sampling is correct. The acruming sample-generation iilgori thm should not be thought of as a defrrtitive 
way to generate optimal samples, however. It is an ad hoc way to genexate a pattern with approximates 
the conditions defined in section 5, but only in a s x s region, and probably not with perfect isotropy. 
There is a great deal of opportunity for experiment and improvement. 8. N-Parameter Sampfing Suppose 
an image of the spinning-wheels picture (seen in Figures 8 and 9) is generated with motion blur and afso 
an area light source, creating shadows with penumbras. Using assoptimized pattern of r parameters ensures 
that the spinning spokes of the wheels are wefl sampfed as in Figure 9. Using an optimized pattemrof 
(u, v) param­eters erwres that the penumbra around the rim of the wheels has good high-frequency sampling 
noise. However, in regions where both distribution ray-tracing effects are combined-in a moving penumbra-the 
sampling noise baa a coarser white-noise appear­ance. Figure 15. t3-RookSampling Patterns It is not stilcient 
to optimize the t and (u ,v) distributions of sam­ples alone. fhe joint distribution of (r,u ,v) matters. 
Figure 15 demonstrates this concept. Here, two patterns btb have the same projected ( marginal ) distributions 
in u and v (in this case, uniform periodic). However, the overall joint distributions of the two pat­terns 
we very different. Suppose a signal was sampled with the pat­tern on the right. If the sigrud contains 
only variations in Useu or onty in the v dnensions, it may be sampled well enough. But if the image contains 
variation along the dmgonal perpendicular to the row of samples, severe afiaaing might occur. In distribution 
ray tracing, a similar situation can occur, and aliasing caused by paor joint dk­tribution of the parameter 
samples can be projetted onto the image. It is also not sufficient to just optimize the joint dktribution 
of (t,u,v) withcut considering the marginal distributions of r and (u,v). The scanning algorithm was 
used to generate samples in (r,u,v) with Poisson-sphere joint diatibutions, and this resulted in relatively 
poor image quatity. The region of moving penumbra was much improved, however. The beat image quatity 
in the moving-penumbra teat was achieved by generadng sampling patterns in which both the joint distribution 
and the marginal distributions are spectrality optimized. F@ure 16 shows the spinning wheels image, using 
a sampfing pattern which combws a joiit diminution of (r ,U,v) which is Poisson-sphere, and a margitraf 
distribution of r which is Poisson-rod. This suggests that as the parameter space becomes higher in dimension, 
sampliig patterns must be found which meet the conditions of Figure 6 in a combination of marginal and 
joint distributions. This combination of conditions was met by extending the scanning algorithm to select 
a series of primary, secondary, and terdary candidate. 9. Adaptive Sampling No matter how optimal a supersamplkrg 
pattern may be, we camot ignore the computational eftlciency of adaptive sampling. It is often the case 
(except in the most complex scenes) that many portions of artimage cats be sampled at relatively low 
density. A simple sohr­tion might be to use a few discrete levels of sampling density. The two-level 
sampling rdgorithm described by the author in [Mitchel187] was very easily adapted to use a fivedimensional 
(x,y,r,u,v) periodic pattern of 1024 samples. In that scheme, an image is sampled at a low base rate. 
h is a good idea to make this base rate selectable by the user, and typically one or a few samples per 
pixel area are sufficient. The results of the .  SIGGRAPH 91 Las Vegas, 28 JuIY-2 Auwst 1991 E!E slG6mAfHll 
­ base-rate sampling are then used to estimate local bandwidth and identify regions that require sampling 
at a higher rate. Variable sampling rates can be achieved by simply scaling the stored pattero. If the 
pattern is optimal in the sense discussed above, it will only be necessary to scale the pattern in x, 
y. Aa the sampling rate per pixel area increases, the rate per parameter dimension should also increase 
and the distribution should remain spectrally optimal, as indicated in Figure 6. 10. Conclusions Gptirnalnonuniform 
sampling is a familiar approach to the aliasirrg problem in Wtdtted s ray-tracing algorithm. I?&#38; 
paper takes a fwt step ia extending this technique to the muhidirnensiomd atgorithnr of distribution 
ray traciog. This is nontrivial for two reasons. Fret, a simpte extension of the stratitM/jitter sarnpting 
techniques to higher dimensions requires a number of samples exponential in the dimension. Secondly, 
this is not simply the problem of generating a D-dimensional image, which would be an obvious extension 
of the twodlmensiorud theory. ArI analysis of the sampling problem in distribution ray @acingsug­gests 
a critesia for sampling patterns that can force aliasing noise into higher frequencies. Samples contained 
in any circular region in space (on the x,y image plane) should have parameter values which form a pattern 
of the highest possible frequency. It appears that in addition to requiriog the overall joint distribution 
of parameter vatues to be high-frequency (e.g., a Poisson-hypcrsphere distribu­tion), it is important 
to insure that certain marginal disnibutions are of the highest frequency (e.g., time values beiig Poisson-rod, 
(u ,v) parameters being Poisson-dhk etc.). This problem could be studied further. A scanning sample-generation 
algorithm is proposed, which givea sampling patterns which locally approximate the opdrnal. This was 
good enough to demonstrate the correcmeas of the optimrdity condi­tion iII a numtw.r of teat images. 
Further work could be done on better sample-generation rdgorithrna, perhaps using exhaustive Monte Carlo 
search. Much more diffbdt sampling problesns arise in the current mmst advamxd rendering algorithms. 
These probIetns are made explicit in several recent works [Kajiya86, Heckbert90, Shirley!)O].  11. Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank John Arnanatidea,Pat Hanmban, Pad Heck­ bert, Peter Shirley, and the SIGGRAPH reviewera 
for their helpfut comments on this work and discussions of sampling issues. 12. References [Bouatouch91] 
Bouatouch, K., Bouville, C., Teltkn, P. Low aam­plirtg densities using a psychovisual approach. Bawgraphics 
91, to appem. [Cook84] Cook, R. L., Porter, T., Carpenter, L. Distributed ray tracing. Compurer Graphics, 
18, 3 (July 1984), 137-145. [Cook86] Cook, R. L. Stochastic aarnptiig in computer gmphics. ACM Trans. 
Graphics, 5, 1 (January 1986), 51-72. ~Ipp.585] Dip@, M. A. Z. and Weld, E. H. Antialiasirrg through 
stochastic sampling. CornpurerGraphics, 19,3 (holy 1985), 69-78. @eckbert90] Heckbert, P. S, Adaptive 
radiosity texture for bidirectional ray tracing. Computer Graphics. 24, 4 (August 1990), 145-154. ~ajiya86] 
Kajiya, J. T. The rendering equation. Computer Graphics, 20,4 (July 1986), 143-150. [Lee85] Lee, M., 
Redner, R. A., Uselton, S. P. Statistically [Marvasti87] ~tchel187] plinter89] ~ipley77] [Shirley90] 
~tted80] [Yeltott83] optimized sampling for distributed ray traciug. CornPurer Graphics, 19,3 (July 
1985), 61-67. Marvasti, F. A. A Unified Approach to Zero- Crossings and Nonuniform Sampling, Nonuniform 
R(23S(1987). Mitchell, D. P. Generating sntialh.sed images at low sampling densities. Computer Graphics, 
21,4 (holy 1987), 65-72. Painter, J., and Sloan, K. AntiaMsed ray tracing by adaptive progressive refinement. 
Compurer Graphics, 23,3 (July 1989), 281-288. Ripley, B. D. Modeling spatial patterns. J. Roy. s&#38;rrist..$oc.lt, 
39, (1977), 172-212. Shirley, P. Physically based lighting calculations for computer graphics. PhD Thesis, 
University of Illinois, (1990). Whitted, T. An improved illumination model for Shrld~ disphly, Conun. 
ACM, 23, 6 (June 1980), 343-349. Yetlott, J. I. Jr. !lpectxal consequences of ph@ore­ceptor samp~mg 
in the rhesus retina. Science, 221, (1983), 382-385.  : SIGGRAPH 91 Las Vegas, 28 July-2 August 1991 
 
			