
 Specializing Shaders Brian Guenter, Todd B. Knoblock, Erik Ruf * Microsoft Research Abstract We have 
developed a system for interactive manipulation of shading parameters for three dimensional rendering. 
The system takes as input user-defined shaders, written in a subset of C, which are then specialized 
for interactive use. Since users typically experiment with different values of a single shader parameter 
while leaving the others constant, we can benefit by automatically generating a specialized shader that 
performs only those computations depending on the parameter being varied; all other values needed by 
the shader can be precomputed and cached. The specialized shaders are as much as 95 times faster than 
the original user defined shader. This dramatic improvement in speed makes it possible to interactively 
view parameter changes for relatively complex shading models, such as procedural solid texturing. 1. 
Introduction During the process of interactively producing a computer­rendered image, a user will typically 
experiment with various image parameters, such as the positions of objects and light sources, the optical 
characteristics of surfaces, and surface textures. We would like to display the results of such parameter 
changes as rapidly as possible. Some of these changes, such as moving an object, are likely to require 
significant recomputation, while others, such as changing the color of one object, should not. This paper 
describes a mechanism for rapidly reacting to changes to shading parameters that control the local shading 
of objects in the scene. The local shading of an object is dependent only on object surface properties, 
such as the surface normal and surface position, and the geometric relationship of those properties with 
the illumination sources and the viewpoint. Global illumination effects, such as specular and diffuse 
interreflectance among objects, and shadows, are not part of the local shading model. Consider the simple 
Phong-like shader in Figure 1. If the user changes control parameter ks, only the multiplication ks*specular.component 
and the enclosing addition and vector multiplication operations need be reperformed; all other computations 
are guaranteed to return the same values as before. If, on the other hand, the parameter specular is 
changed, we may either have to recompute specular.component(and all expressions referring to it), or 
nothing at all, depending on the value of n.dot.h for that particular pixel. In either case, *Authors 
address: Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052. Email: {briangu, toddk, erikruf}@microsoft.com. 
Paper to appear in Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 95 (Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series, 
1995). Permission to make digital/hard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, 
the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 1 &#38;#169;1995 ACM-0-89791-701-4/95/008 
$3.50 changing a parameter value invalidates only a small portion of the work already performed. We take 
advantage of this observation as follows. Given an arbitrary user shading routine written in a subset 
of C and an indication of which parameter is to be altered, we perform an analysis to determine which 
of the shader s computations are invariant across changing values of the distinguished parameter. We 
then automatically generate 1 . code to perform the non-varying computations and save an appropriate 
subset of the results into a per-pixel cache area, and 2 . code to efficiently perform shading given 
the new parameter value and the cached information.  After executing (1) once, we need only execute 
the more efficient code in (2) each time the user alters the parameter. When the user selects a different 
parameter, we simply install new versions of (1) and (2). Figures 2 and 3 show the code resulting from 
the specialization of Phongon the parameter specular. The remainder of this paper is divided into five 
sections. Section 2 outlines the general architecture of our system, while Section 3 describes the specialization 
process in more detail. In Section 4, we analyze the costs and benefits of our approach on several shaders. 
We conclude, in Sections 5 and 6, with descriptions of related and future work.  2. System Architecture 
Our system consists of three main components: the geometric renderer, the specializer, and the user interface 
driver loop. 2.1 Geometric Renderer We render geometric image information offline before the interactive 
manipulation stage. Each pixel of the geometric image contains an object identifier associated with the 
object visible at that pixel, and the depth and surface normal of the point on the object surface which 
is at the center of the pixel. Our prototype uses a modified version of the Vivid ray tracer [17] to 
compute this information. During the interactive stage, the user loads a precomputed geometric image 
and then adjusts shading parameters on objects in the scene. Because the geometric image is rendered 
prior to the interactive stage, some image properties cannot be varied interactively. For example, the 
eyepoint is fixed, as are the position and orientation of all the objects in the scene. However, many 
scene characteristics, such as the position of lights, and the color and reflectance characteristics 
of objects, can be varied interactively. void Phong(int i, int j, Vec eye.position, Vec surface.normal, 
Flt depth, Matrix view.inverse, Matrix model.inverse, Matrix shade.inverse, PImageStruct dib, /* the 
following are the control parameters for this shader */ double red, double green, double blue, double 
specular, double ks, double kd, double ambient, double lx, double ly, double lz) { Vec light = {lx, ly, 
lz}; Vec world.position, light.vector, h.vector, eye.vector; double specular.component, diffuse.component, 
n.dot.h; Vec rgb = {red, green, blue};  world.position = trans.vector(view.inverse, vec(i, j, depth)); 
eye.vector = VecNormalize(VecSub(eye.position, world.position)); light.vector = VecNormalize(VecSub(light, 
world.position)); h.vector = VecNormalize(VecAdd(light.vector, eye.vector)); n.dot.h = VecDot(surface.normal, 
h.vector); if (n.dot.h > 0) specular.component = pow(n.dot.h, specular); else specular.component = 0; 
 diffuse.component = VecDot(surface.normal, light.vector); if (diffuse.component < 0) diffuse.component 
= 0;  rgb = VecScalarMul(rgb, (kd*diffuse.component + ambient) + ks*specular.component); SetPixelColor(j, 
i, rgb, dib); }  Figure 1: Source for a simple Phong shader. The parts of the shader that are dependent 
upon the parameter specular are underlined. 2.2 Specializer The specializer takes a user shader function 
and a designation of the control parameter to be varied and produces shading code specialized for that 
parameter. The user writes the shaders in a subset of C augmented with a library of useful graphics and 
mathematical functions. The framework is similar to that provided for writing shaders in RenderMan [7, 
16]. The restricted subset of C excludes the following C features: struct, union, pointer, and array 
types other than limited support for primitive data types such as vectors and points,  continue, break, 
and goto statements, and  recursion in the shader functions (although subroutines may employ recursion). 
 In some cases (e.g., struct types and structured loop exits), these restrictions simplify the implementation; 
in other cases (e.g., pointers, goto), they serve to make the necessary analyses tractable. The shader 
is responsible for calculating rgb values for each pixel based on image model information common to all 
shaders, and on shader-specific control parameters. Consider the sample shader, Phong, from Figure 1. 
The first 9 parameters of Phong, up through dib, are standard; they provide rendering data about each 
point and an output context. The remainder are the control parameters, and are associated with sliders 
in the user interface. Given a shader and a designated parameter, the specializer produces C++ code for 
two new procedures: a cache loader that precomputes and caches intermediate values that are independent 
of the designated parameter, and a cache reader that performs shading using the cached information. Figures 
2 and 3 show the generated loader and reader functions, respectively. We rely upon the compiler s optimizer 
to further improve the code by, e.g., eliminating dead code and hoisting loop-invariant computations. 
We install a new shader into the system by calling the specializer on the shader and each of the shader 
s control parameters, generating a loader/reader pair for each parameter. These procedures are then compiled 
and dynamically linked into the system.  2.3 Driver Loop The user interface driver loop allows the user 
to perform housekeeping tasks such as loading images, selecting shaders, and designating particular objects 
within the image for shading. It also allows the user to interactively modify the current shader s control 
parameters, and performs shading and image redisplay after each modification. Pseudocode for this portion 
of the driver is shown in Figure 4. After the user has selected a parameter to modify, the driver executes 
the corresponding cache loader to precompute the shader typedef struct { int c0; double c1; double c2; 
 } Cache;  world.position = trans.vector(view.inverse, vec(i, j, depth)); eye.vector = VecNormalize(VecSub(eye.position, 
world.position)); light.vector = VecNormalize(VecSub(light, world.position)); h.vector = VecNormalize(VecAdd(light.vector, 
eye.vector)); n.dot.h = VecDot(surface.normal, h.vector); if (pcache->c0 = n.dot.h>0) pcache->c1 = n.dot.h; 
else specular.component = 0; diffuse.component = VecDot(surface.normal, light.vector); if (diffuse.component<0) 
diffuse.component = 0; pcache->c2 = kd*diffuse.component+ambient; Figure 2: Body of the cache loader 
for the specialization with respect to specular. if (pcache->c0)  specular.component = pow(pcache->c1, 
specular); else specular.component = 0; rgb = VecScalarMul(rgb, pcache->c2+ks*specular.component); SetPixelColor(j, 
i, rgb, dib); Figure 3: Body of the cache reader for the specialization with respect to specular. repeat 
until new image/object/shader user selects a parameter P for each pixel in current object invoke loader[P] 
 repeat until new parameter P (*) user supplies a value V for P for each pixel in current object invoke 
reader[P](V) redisplay all pixels in object Figure 4: User interface driver loop. values that will be 
needed by the cache reader. Then, each time the user supplies a value for the chosen parameter, the cache 
reader is executed to perform the actual shading and the image is redisplayed. This runs more quickly 
because we have hoisted the parameter-independent computations out of the inner repeat loop (marked with 
*) in Figure 4.  3. Specialization The specializer begins by parsing and typechecking the shader function. 
The result is an abstract syntax tree (AST) annotated with type information. The core of the specialization 
process then proceeds in three steps. First, the dependence analysis determines which parts of the shader 
function are independent of the value of the designated control parameter.  Second, the caching analysis 
determines which of the independent computations should be cached.  Third, the splitting transformation 
separates the original shader function into cache loader and cache reader functions. Space limitations 
prevent us from presenting the specializer in detail. The next three sections present a simplified description 
of the three specialization steps. 3.1 Dependence Analysis Dependence analysis determines which parts 
of the computation are dependent or independent of the designated control parameter. The basic rule for 
dependence is that an expression is dependent on the designated parameter if one or more of its operands 
is. Although this basic rule would handle pure functional programs, the imperative assignment of variables 
in C requires a slightly more complicated analysis. A reference to a variable is dependent (on the designated 
control parameter) if the value assigned to the variable is dependent. It is also dependent if the choice 
of which (independent) value to assign is dependent. For example, if an assignment statement is guarded 
by an ifstatement whose predicate is dependent, then a downstream reference to the variable is dependent. 
In Figure 1, the parts of the function that are dependent upon the parameter specular are underlined. 
In this function, the first assignment to specular.component is dependent because it is assigned a value 
computed from the designated parameter, specular. This in turn forces the part of the calculation of 
rgb involving specular_component to be dependent. Finally, the call to SetPixelColor is dependent because 
it contains a reference to rgb,which is dependent because of the previous assignment. Our solution to 
dependence analysis is a straightforward application of standard dataflow analysis/abstract interpretation 
techniques. It works by flowing a model of the dependence of every variable though the shader function 
along the control paths. The final result of the dependence analysis is an annotation on every node of 
the AST as to whether or not its value may be dependent upon the designated control parameter. These 
annotations are necessarily conservative; assuming that a computation is dependent upon the control parameter 
when in fact it is not may make the specializer miss an optimization opportunity, but will not make it 
produce the wrong result.  3.2 Caching Analysis The caching analysis determines which of the independent 
values in the shader should be cached and which parts of the shader only need to occur in the cache reader. 
The results of the dependence analysis help to provide an upper bound on what might be cached. A priori, 
any independent computation is a candidate to be cached. However, independence is not sufficient to determine 
what should be cached. Consider the cache for the specialization of Phong on specular, represented in 
Figures 2 and 3. Since the value for kd*diffuse.component+ambientis cached, caching the either subexpression 
kd*diffuse.component, or the individual values of kd, diffuse.component, or ambient, would be inefficient. 
The caching analysis classifies each shader expression as either static, cache, or dynamic. Static expressions 
are those that need only be evaluated at load time. For example, in the assignment h_vector = VecNormalize(VecAdd(lightVector, 
eye_vector)); even though the right hand side is independent of the designated parameter, it does not 
need to be cached because the only reference to h_vectoris itself cached. Cache expressions are also 
evaluated at load time, but are consumed by dependent computations, so their results must be stored into 
the cache for later use by the cache reader. Dynamic expressions need to be computed during cache reading. 
This classification is performed using simple heuristics. An expression is marked as cache if it is independent, 
is the maximal such expression, is governed only by independent control predicates, and is not within 
a dependent while statement. Independent, non-cached expressions that do not directly contribute to dependent 
computations are marked as static. The remaining expressions are marked as dynamic. In the Phongshader, 
three expressions are selected for caching:1 n.dot.h>0,  n.dot.h, and  kd*diffuse.component+ambient. 
 All of the assignment statements other than the assignments to specular.component and rgb are marked 
as static. The 1The reason that n_dot_h>0 and n_dot_h are both cached is that there are distinct (dependent) 
consumers of these values in the cache reader. One could choose to cache just n_dot_h and recalculate 
n_dot_h>0in the cache reader. AST MakeLoader(AST e) { switch on mark(e) case Static: return e case Cache: 
allocate a cache slot s for e return MakeAssignment(s,e) case Dynamic: switch on form of e case e is 
an expression e0.e1: return MakeExp(., MakeLoader(e0), MakeLoader(e1)) case e is if (e0) e1 else e2: 
if (e0 is independent) return MakeIf(MakeLoader(e0), MakeLoader(e1), MakeLoader(e2)) else return MakeLoader(e0) 
 case e is while(e0) e1: if (e0 and e1 are independent) return MakeWhile(MakeLoader(e0), MakeLoader(e1)) 
else return Ø case ... } Figure 5: The cache loader transformation. AST MakeReader(AST e) { switch mark(e) 
case Static: return Ø case Cache: find cache slot s allocated for e return s case Dynamic: switch on 
form of e case e is an expression e0.e1: return MakeExp(., MakeReader(e0), MakeReader(e1)) case e is 
if (e0) e1 else e2: return MakeIf(MakeReader(e0), MakeReader(e1), MakeReader(e2)) case e is while(e0) 
e1: return MakeWhile(MakeReader(e0), MakeReader(e1)) case ... } Figure 6: The cache reader transformation. 
 first ifstatement is dynamic because its then-part is dependent, but the second ifis static.  3.3 Splitting 
Transformation In its third and final phase, the specializer derives cache loader and cache reader functions 
from the AST, which has been annotated with the results of the dependence and cache analyses. Figures 
5 and 6 present partial pseudo-code for the transformations that produce the cache loader and cache reader. 
The transformations are based solely upon the annotations and a case analysis on the form of the AST 
node e: If the node eis marked as static, then by definition it only needs to be included in the cache 
loader.  If the node eis marked as cache, then the loader allocates a cache slot for it and generates 
an assignment statement in the cache loader function that assigns the slot the value of the expression. 
The corresponding piece of the reader simply reads the cache slot.  If the node eis a dynamic ifstatement 
and it has a test that is independent of the designated parameters, then the loader may load cache values 
in the branches of the if. Such loading cannot be performed if the test is dependent, since the cached 
expressions will no longer be guarded by the test, possibly inducing a run-time exception that would 
not have occurred in the original program.  If the node e is a dynamic while statement, we conservatively 
choose not to cache anything within it. This implementation misses some cases where an independent value 
could be cached: where (1) the independent value is loop invariant or (2) where the only dependent consumers 
are outside the loop.  Figures 2 and 3 contain the results of running the splitting transformation on 
the specialization of Phongfor specular. The first five assignments of the shader are static, and are 
reproduced only in the loader. The first ifstatement is dynamic with an independent test; thus a version 
of the ifappears in both the loader and the reader. Both the predicate and the reference to n.dot.h are 
cached, and are thus assigned in the loader and refernced in the cache reader. The assignment to identifier 
specular.component is actually dead in the loader--we would expect the compiler optimizer to remove it. 
The second if is static, and so is included only in the loader. The third and final cache element represents 
the maximally independent expression kd*diffuse.component+ambient. 3.4 Pragmatics Cache space is a valuable 
resource. The pseudo-code in figure 5 implies that new space is allocated for each value that is cached, 
which would be correct but inefficient. For example, there are situations where two cached values may 
be correctly allocated to overlapping space in the cache, e.g., when only one of the values will be live 
on any given invocation of the cache loader. Our specializer employs some simple rules to more efficiently 
allocate cache slots. Cache space is also a finite resource, as performance will suffer if the total 
space allocated for the cache exceeds the available physical memory. For the moderate-complexity shaders 
we have specialized thus far, cache size has not been an issue. In the specialization of more complex 
shaders, it will be necessary to explicitly limit the amount of cache space that is allocated. To do 
this effectively, we plan to introduce a cost metric that approximates the cost of each computation that 
is a candidate for caching. This would then be used to guide what should be cached and what should be 
recomputed in the cache reader by caching only the top-scoring candidates. We can simultaneously improve 
cache size and reader efficiency by rewriting computations in the shader. One such opportunity is the 
associative rearrangement of arithmetic expressions.2 For example, the expression (x+y)+z contains two 
computations that are independent of x, namely y and z. But if we reassociate it as x+(y+z), this contains 
just one independent computation, y+z. The transformed code requires one less cache slot, and eliminates 
one + operation in the cache reader (Hanrahan and Lawson [7] describe a similar optimization). Thus far, 
we have described specializing shaders on a single control parameter. The specializer, in fact, supports 
specializations on multiple parameters. So, for example, one could produce a specialization that would 
allow the fast manipulation of any of the red, green, or blueparameters without having to call the loader 
again. For combinations of control parameters, there are too many possible specializations for them all 
to be generated in advance. We plan to extend the system to dynamically call the specializer at run-time 
when a subset of the parameters is designated by the user.  4. Results The specialization algorithm 
described above has been implemented in a prototype system consisting of approximately 20K lines of C++, 
Flex, and Bison code. The user interface driver loop is implemented in a small amount of Visual Basic. 
This section presents timing results for specialized shaders. 4.1 Timings We show results of the specializations 
of two shaders: the Phong shader of Figure 1, which has 10 control parameters, and a procedural solid 
texture shader, Texture, having 18 control parameters. These shaders were tested on the 320 by 243 pixel 
image shown in Plate 1. This image consists of five objects, including the background plane. We chose 
to time our shaders on the background plane because it is the largest object in the image. The timings 
were performed on a Gateway 2000 P5-90 Pentium processor with 64 megabytes of physical memory. The performance 
of the specializer is not an issue; specialization is performed offline and typically requires less than 
one second per specialization generated. Thus, we present timings only for the shaders themselves. Four 
statistics are of interest: 1 . the time to execute the original shader, 2 . the time to precompute 
the cached values,  2While floating point arithmetic does not obey the mathematical associativity laws, 
as long as the rewritten expression does not overflow, the effects are unlikely to be observable in a 
shading function. lz ly lx ambient kd ks specular blue green red 02468 Figure 7: Relative speedup due 
to specialization for Phong for each control parameter. scale_z scale_y scale_x r2 r1 ambient kd ks specular 
blur amplitude flt_terms blue1 blue0 green1 green0 red1 red0  Figure 8: Relative speedup due to specialization 
for Texture for each control parameter 3 . the time to perform shading given the cached and the control 
parameter values, and 4 . the ratio of (1) and (3). Figures 7 and 8 show the speedup ratio (4) for both 
shaders. These ratios vary from 1.4 through 7.4 for Phong, and 1.0 through 97.0 for Texture. Table 1 
gives the absolute data for Texture; the table of absolute data for Phong is omitted to save space. 
 4.2 Discussion The overhead of our two-phase shading approach is the time taken to run the cache loader. 
In our test cases, the sum of the loader and reader times is approximately equal to the time taken for 
a single invocation of the unspecialized shader. The cost of the additional memory operations to load 
the cache is balanced by the removal of statements that do not contribute to the cached values. When 
the user first selects a new control parameter, the system must execute both the cache loader and reader; 
thus, the first shading may be slower than the original, unspecialized shader. Subsequent parameter changes 
only execute the cache reader; thus, our interactive speedup is the ratio of the original and reader 
times. The user will experience this speedup most of the time when interacting with the system. The speedup 
ratio is highly dependent upon the particular control parameter chosen because we may only cache the 
results of computations that are independent of this parameter. In some cases, virtually all of the computations 
depend upon the chosen parameter, e.g., lx in Phong and flt.terms in Texture. Speedups for such cases 
are low, approaching 1, but never less than 1. In the majority of cases, however, the cache reader is 
much faster than the unspecialized shader, meaning that we achieve a net gain in processing speed when 
the user changes a parameter twice or more successively. Figures 7 and 8 demonstrate that the majority 
of parameters are computed significantly faster in specialized form. For example, 7 of the 10 parameters 
in Phongwere at least 3 times faster, and 6 parameters were at least 7 times faster, in specialized form. 
The speedup ratios are even more dramatic for the procedural solid texture shader. Of 18 parameters, 
14 were at least 25 times faster and 9 were at least 90 times faster. The Texture shader contains several 
expensive computations that depend on only a few control parameters, allowing significant speedups in 
specializations on other parameters. Parameter User Shader Cache Loader Cache Reader Ratio scale_z 31.14 
2.24 30.54 1.02 scale_y 31.15 2.43 30.46 1.02 scale_x 31.14 2.24 30.22 1.03 r2 31.27 32.25 0.70 44.95 
r1 30.95 32.11 0.72 42.82 ambient 31.15 31.33 0.33 93.03 kd 31.15 31.22 0.34 92.69 ks 31.15 31.02 0.33 
93.26 specular 31.11 30.70 0.80 38.80 blur 31.15 31.32 0.48 65.45 amplitude 31.15 32.43 1.50 20.83 flt_terms 
44.81 2.23 43.08 1.04 blue1 31.15 31.25 0.32 95.87 blue0 31.15 31.47 0.33 95.17 green1 31.15 31.06 0.32 
96.94 green0 31.15 31.03 0.33 95.64 red1 31.15 31.07 0.33 95.20 red0 31.15 31.24 0.32 97.05 Table 1: 
Execution time in seconds for the user shader, cache loader, and cache reader, and ratio of user shader 
time to reader time. Color Plates 1 and 2 show a typical incremental control parameter change. In Plate 
1, the amplitude parameter of the procedural texture shader for the tiled floor object is set to 12. 
In plate 2, it has been changed to 6. The time to reshade the image following this change was approximately 
12 seconds for the original (unspecialized) shader and 0.5 seconds for the specialized shader.  5. 
Related Work Relevant work includes the specialization of programs on partial input and the automatic 
construction of incremental versions of programs. 5.1 Partial Evaluation The specialization of programs 
on partial input specifications is known as partial evaluation [9,13]. A partial evaluator takes a program 
and values for some of its inputs, and produces a new, specialized, program parameterized by the remaining 
inputs, while a partial evaluator generator takes a program and produces a transformer which, given some 
input values, generates the appropriate specialized program, eliminating the need to analyze the original 
program each time a specialization is needed. General-purpose partial evaluators for imperative languages 
include Andersen s C-Mix [1] and the system of Baier et al. [3], which process programs written in subsets 
of C and Fortran, respectively. Osgood [11] addresses the full C language, but the large time and space 
costs of his algorithm limit its applicability. Our system can be viewed as a partial evaluator generator 
because it processes the original program only with respect to particular argument positions, generating 
a program (the cache loader) that later makes use of particular argument values. However, our approach 
differs from traditional partial evaluation strategies in that we are not limited to constructing specialized 
program text; we also construct specialized data values (such strategies are referred to as mixed computation 
in the literature). Applying a partial evaluator to our driver loop would yield a specialized shading 
procedure for each pixel in the image, whereas we limit ourselves to constructing specialized intermediate 
data values for each pixel, which are then processed by a single specialized shading procedure common 
to all pixels. The traditional approach might achieve better performance because of per-pixel code customization 
but is impractical due to the huge amount of specialized code that would be generated. Several researchers 
have applied partial evaluation to ray-tracing by using a general-purpose partial evaluator to specialize 
a general intersection routine with respect to a scene, producing a specialized ray-tracer parameterized 
only by the viewpoint. Mogensen [10] partially evaluated a simple ray-tracer coded in Lisp and got a 
two-fold speedup; when shading was added to the ray-tracer, the speedup increased to 8 times. Andersen 
[2] performed a similar experiment in C, and achieved speedups of 1.8 with a code size blowup of 15-90 
times. Other researchers used somewhat more application-specific specialization techniques. Hanrahan 
s surface compiler [6] symbolically simplifies input equations defining a general algebraic surface, 
then outputs a C program that uses numerical methods to find roots of the resulting polynomial. He reported 
a speedup of 1.3. Goad [5] proposed specializing a hidden surface elimination routine with respect to 
a fixed scene and variable viewpoint. In the area of mixed computation, Sequin [14] used ray tree caching 
to significantly speed up shading computations for a ray traced image. 5.2 Incremental program execution 
We know of two main approaches to efficiently handling incremental changes. One strategy encodes the 
program as a set of constraints, and explicitly reestablishes the constraints after each input change. 
Attribute grammars [4] are one example of a constraint system with an efficient incremental solver. Constraint 
systems are common in graphics; however, they are primarily used for their convenience and generality 
rather than as a foundation for efficient incremental execution. Most other approaches are similar to 
ours in that they cache intermediate results of an existing batch program. Recent research on memoization 
for functional programs includes improved caching strategies [12] and methods for memoizing specialized 
functions instead of data values [15]. There is also research on adding dependence information to existing 
imperative code [8]. Incremental execution techniques are general, but suffer in performance due to the 
need to dynamically process arbitrary input changes. Our restricted application domain, in which the 
user performs a series of repeated modifications to individual scalar inputs, makes it practical for 
us to perform the dependence analysis and caching transformations statically, and to rebuild the intermediate 
value cache using batch rather than incremental methods.  6. Conclusion We have described an automatic 
method for improving the performance of user-written shading routines by specializing them with respect 
to individual control parameters. By precomputing, caching, and reusing intermediate results that will 
remain constant as the user experiments with a single control parameter, the specialized shaders achieve 
up to a factor of 95 improvement in performance, allowing even complex shaders to be used in an interactive 
environment. We plan to extend this work in several ways. The analyses and transformations will be extended 
to handle a larger subset of the C language, and to perform additional optimizations such as associative 
rearrangement of expressions and cost-based allocation of cache storage. Specializing the mathematical 
library routines (as opposed to only their user-level clients) may also achieve a significant gain in 
performance.  7. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Stephen Coy for the use of his ray 
tracer and Greg Kusnick, Daniel Ling, Ellen Spertus, and the reviewers for helpful comments on previous 
drafts of this paper.  Plate 1: Test image.  Bibliography [1] Andersen, Lars Ole. Self-applicable 
C Program Specialization. Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Partial Evaluation and Semantics-Based 
Program Manipulation (San Francisco, California, June 12­20, 1992). Yale University technical report 
YALEU/DCS/RR-909, 1992, 54-61. [2] Andersen, Peter Holst. Partial Evaluation Applied to Ray Tracing. 
Unpublished manuscript, October 1994. [3] Baier, Romana, Robert Glück, and Robert Zöchling. Partial Evaluation 
of Numerical Programs in Fortran. Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Partial Evaluation and Semantics-Based 
Program Manipulation (Orlando, Florida, June 25, 1994). University of Melbourne technical report 94/9, 
1994, 119-132 [4] Demers, Alan J., Thomas Reps, and Tim Teitelbaum. Incremental Evaluation for Attribute 
Grammars with Application to Syntax-directed Editors. Proceedings of the Eighth Annual ACM Symposium 
on Principles of Programming Languages (Williamsburg, Virginia, January 1981), 105-116. [5] Goad, Chris. 
Special Purpose Automatic Programming for Hidden Surface Elimination. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 82 (Boston, 
Massachusetts, July 26-30, 1982). In Computer Graphics 16, 3 (July 1982), 167-178. [6] Hanrahan, Pat. 
Ray Tracing Algebraic Surfaces. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 83 (Detroit, Michigan, July 25­29, 1983). In 
Computer Graphics 17, 3 (July 1983), 83-90. [7] Hanrahan, Pat and Jim Lawson. A Language for Shading 
and Lighting Calculations. Computer Graphics 24, 4 (August 1990), 289-298. [8] Hoover, Roger. Alphonse: 
Incremental Computation as a Programming Abstraction. Proceedings of the SIGPLAN 92 Conference on Programming 
Language Design and Implementation (San Francisco, California, June 1992), 261-272. Plate 2: Image obtained 
by reshading image of Plate 1. This took 12 seconds unspecialized, 0.5 seconds specialized. [9] Jones, 
Neil D., Carsten K. Gomard, and Peter Sestoft. Partial Evaluation and Automatic Program Generation. Prentice-Hall, 
1993. [10] Mogensen, Torben. The Application of Partial Evaluation to Ray-Tracing. Master's thesis, DIKU, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 1986. [11] Osgood, Nathaniel David. PARTICLE: an Automatic Program 
Specialization System for Imperative and Low­level Languages. Master's thesis, MIT, September 1993. [12] 
Pugh, William and Tim Teitelbaum. Incremental Computation Via Function Caching. Proceedings of the Sixteenth 
Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Austin, Texas, January 1989), 315-328. [13] 
Ruf, Erik. Topics in Online Partial Evaluation. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, April 1993. Published 
as Stanford Computer Systems Laboratory technical report CSL-TR-93-563, March 1993. [14] Sequin, Carlo 
H. and Eliot K. Smyrl. Parameterized Ray Tracing. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 89 (Boston, Massachusetts, 
July 31-August 4, 1989). In Computer Graphics 23, 3 (July 1989), 307-314. [15] Sundaresh, R.S. and Paul 
Hudak. A Theory of Incremental Computation and Its Application. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual 
ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Orlando, Florida, January 1991), 1-13. [16] Upstill, 
Steve. The RenderMan Companion. Addison-Wesley, 1989. [17] Watkins, Christopher D., Stephen B. Coy, and 
Mark Finlay. Photorealism and Ray Tracing in C. M&#38;T Books, 1992 [18] Watt, Alan and Mark Watt. Advanced 
Animation and Rendering Techniques. ACM Press, 1992.  
			