
 STAFF INTERNSHIPS OR TEACHING OLD DOGS NEW TRICKS Jayne Ashworth Electronic Communications Support 
Coordinator Information Technology and Communication University of Virginia 530 McCormick Road Charlottesville, 
VA 22903 ashworth@Virginia.edu Tel: (804) 924-6168 Fax: (804) 9824715 ABSTRACT The University of Virginia 
s Department of Information Technology (ITC) has taken a pro-active approach to preventing staff burnout 
that helps staff members to develop new skills, provides opportunities for staff to try new career paths 
and allows ITC to spread support for existing projects among more people. The Staff Internship program 
provides a mechanism for staff members to talk with managers about what opportunities may be available 
in their own or other areas and then to write a formal proposal for an internship that will last six 
months. This paperpresents the origins of this project, how it has been received and implemented, reactions 
of participants and managers, andfuture directions it may take. INTRODUCTION The scenario is familiar 
not only in college and university computing support environments, but across the computing industry 
in general: we have an opening to hire someone for a new project, we find someone with the requisite 
skills, we hire the person, we train them, they work on the new project and help support some older projects 
as well. The new project completes. The person finds herself supporting the project, seemingly for eternity. 
She feels that she is stagnating and begins to look for new opportunities, sometimes outside our organizations. 
She receives an offer and leaves. We must find support for her project from existing staff and often 
wonder how we might have kept her skills and interests working for us. Like others, the University of 
Virginia s (U.Va. s) Department of Information Technology (DC) has been in this situation more than once 
in recent years. With Year 2000 issues looming, many of our most experienced staff have been lured to 
new and different projects outside our organization. Others have taken their web development skills and 
foIlowed the calI of more and faster equipment and new projects to pursue interests in private industry. 
Managers in ITC have been trying to find ways to introduce new skills to loyal workers whose mainframe 
support is needed less as we re-engineer and move to a client/server model wherein the mainframe plays 
a le.&#38;s significant role in the overall U.Va. organization. lTC has decided to address these issues 
by instituting a Staff Internship Program.  INTHEBEGINNING... The idea for the JTC Staff Internship 
program had a number of origins, all of which happened at about the same time. ITC had implemented a 
Training Committee whose charge was to assess stafftraining needs within our organization and propose 
to senior management ways to meet these needs, including estimated funding for these proposals. JTC Management, 
at about the same time as this committee was completing its work, conducted an Employee Quality of Life 
survey wherein employees were afforded the opportunity to express anonymous opinions about the quality 
of life for staff within the organization and to propose solutions to difficulties that were perceived. 
From both of these sources came requests for opportunities to create self-development within the organization; 
it seems most of our staff liked working within the organization, but some were feeling the need to try 
something different and would like the opportunity to do this within the confines of the organization. 
At the same time that these two similar ideas were making their way to management, ITC hired a new Manager 
of Human Resources, who saw an Permission to make digitabhard copy of all orpart of this workforpersonal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributedforprofit or 
commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that coping is by permission of ACM, Inc.. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers 
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission an&#38;or fek. @1997ACMISBN#O-89791-990-4/97/0011 
$3.50 Are you Ready? StafsInternships or Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks internship program as a way for 
ITC to invest in its staff and itself by increasing the pool of qualified internal _ applicants for openings 
that might occur.  T@ PLAN EYOLVED . . . When+ITC management heard the request for internal internships 
from multiple spumes at about the same time, they discussed the issue. They looked at the plan that came 
from the Training Committee that was based p on the U.Va. Management Internship Program. The ITC Training 
Committeeproposed a formal application process for an internship that would exist for a year. It was 
felt that this length of time would give adequate time for people to learn new skills and to be of benefit 
to the group hosting the intern, i.e., real work could be accomplished. No guarantees would be made for 
new positions or promotions for, people who completed internships., Pay rates would be maintained for 
the interns; there would be no mcreases nor decreases in salary or wages while on an internship. Senior 
management of ITC were receptive to this vision of internal staff internships, but also concerned about 
how work would be accomplished if too many staff pursued new opportunities and how those groups losing 
people would accomplish their tasks with fewer people. They were also concerned that there might be a 
ripple . effect through the organization wherein an internship was assigned and then the Manager of that 
person would attempt to recruit someone else from someplace else in ITC to fill that person s absence. 
After much discussion, it w &#38; decided that an internship program would be established and funding 
would be provided so that managers would have the opportunity to hire a temporary person to replace an 
employee who was undertaking an internship. A budget of $60,000 - $65,000 was set. This was estimated 
to be sufficient to fund back-filling at the appropriate level for two to three people every six months. 
The responsibility for back-filling was given to the Human Resources Manager and the manager of the department 
that would have the vacancy when the person left to pursue the internship. These positions could be filled 
with part- time employees, temporary employees, student interns, or others. The Human Resources Manager 
had learned that under the Code of Virginia, a person could work outside his/her normal position for 
a maximum of six months before a formal redefinition of their job was mandated. Senior management also 
wanted a simple system for implementing and tracking the program. This was accomplished by providing 
a simple document to describe the program to the staff. The Manager of Training and Manager of Human 
Resources were asked to receive the applications, make recommendations on 12 . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Jayne 
Ashworth which proposals seemed possible, and to track the program. To insure that all divisions within 
ITC would have equal access to the program, each director of a division was asked to indicate his/her 
support before the project moved forward. THE WORD WENT OUT . . . . In October 1996, a description 
of the internship program was sent to all staff via an all-ITC-staff electronic mail message. It provided 
the location of a web page that staff could check for more information. It was planned that the selection 
process would be complete by November, that the internships would be awarded by December and the internships 
would begin in January 1997. The Manager of Training and the Manager of Human Resources talked with many 
people who had questions about the process. Mid-level managers found themselves having lunch with a variety 
of people as opportunities for internships were explored. When the deadline arrived, four people (each 
from a different division within ITC) had applied for internships. One person who had applied had submitted 
three proposals, each targeted to a different division of ITC. This person was asked to rank-order the 
proposals. Another person had proposed a half-time internship. Only one of the seven divisions in ITC 
received no application for internship. Not surprisingly, this was the Mainframe Operations Division. 
Three of the six proposals were approved by Training and Human Resources and were forwarded to senior 
management for consideration. All three were awarded. They were chosen with an eye to promoting success 
of the program. Success for the first interns was felt to be a key issue because Management knew that 
everyone would be watching the initial p.articipants to see how they fared., These people were selected 
with regard to: . the impact their absence would have on the group they were leaving (in one case, the 
impact was substantial but the internship was still approved) . the impact they would have on the group 
they were joining . the skills match between the person and the internship that would be undertaken 
. where the people were in their careers. The ITC Human Resources Manager then approached those people 
whose internships had been approved. The person who had submitted three applications was Are You Ready? 
 Staff Internships or Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks offered her third choice and she accepted that offer. 
Another person who had been approved accepted as well. The third person who had proposed the half-time 
internship thanked the ITC Human Resources person for the offer, but had decided that current workload 
and upcoming projects meant that he would prefer to remain in his present position. The fourth person, 
whose proposal was rejected, was invited to reapply at the next opportunity and counseled how to write 
a more effective proposal. THE MOVES WERE MADE . . . Since the selection process had taken longer than 
initially anticipated, the award announcements were made public in early January 1997. One person (Intern 
l), whose major projects were ending and whose division was undergoing organizational change, made the 
move and began the internship immediately. As the person s major projects were ending, back-filling was 
not attempted during the reorganization; instead, the duties were spread among others in the group. This 
person moved to a newly-formed division as a special assistant to its director to jump start new projects. 
The other person (Intern 2) had been in a stable group and in a position that needed continuous support. 
The manager of this group workedwith the Human Resources Manager to fill the this position by moving 
a part-time graduate student-intern (who was already assigned to the group) to the staff position. Funds 
to pay this person were allocated from the Staff Intern budget. A 3-month transition was planned, with 
this internship scheduled to begin on March 1, 1997. Advertising for the next round of internships began 
as the last move was made. The proposals were due May 5 and it was hoped that the internships would begin 
on July 1. AND IT WAS GOOD . . . Both participants in the internship hit the ground running. As ITC 
is located in five different physical sites on the Grounds of U.Va., both interns had to move to a new 
location. Interestingly, both moved to the same building. The new location housed offices for Network 
Systems, Unix Systems, Specialized Consulting, and Departmental Support and Customer Outreach personnel. 
Both interns took their desktop PCs to their new offices. New equipment had to be found for the graduate 
student who moved to the staff position. Intern 1 The assistant to the director of the new division 
began by working on student issues for Fall 1997. The culture in the new location differed from that 
the person had found in the previous location. In the previous location, most people were oriented towards 
support of systems on the mainframe computer. In the new location, the variety of tasks underway by the 
various groups sparked many occasional, impromptu cross-group problem solving sessions in the corridors. 
The cross-group ideas were also present in formal meetings on projects. This benefited our customers 
as new viewpoints were shared and new possibilities moved back and forth from new location to old location 
through the intern. It rapidly became apparent that as the focus of much of the work of this person was 
to the incoming students, the internship for this person would have to be renewed for an additional six 
months so that they could complete the work they had begun. This was approved by the ITC Senior Management. 
This intern has become a strong advocate of finding a single site at U.Va. where all of ITC can be co-located. 
Intern 2 The other intern joined a subgroup within the Specialized Consulting Division (SCD). The Desktop 
Consulting (DTC) group was working on developing network tools that provided access to software packages, 
in particular on the development of installers for packages that would be accessible via a web page. 
The intern had the opportunity to learn to use a package that created software installers and to consider 
the issues associated with the packages on the various platforms and operating systems. There was also 
cross- group coordination here, as documentation sometimes resided with people in other areas of support 
and changes had to be coordinated so that they avoided a negative impact on training efforts. Shortly 
after this internship began, this group was also assigned the task of producing a CD-ROM for the Local 
Support Providers that were a part of the ITC Departmental Support effort and for the incoming Fall 1997 
students. Documentation on how to configure packages and contacting vendors for redistribution permissions, 
as well as learning how to make a CD-ROM, were thrown into the mix of tasks. As these projects were completed, 
the intern was asked to focus on electronic communications support, a new area for the Desktop Consulting 
group. Areas of interest here were postmaster support, electronic mail package support, dealing with 
issues of Are you Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997.13 Staff Internships or Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks Jayne 
Ashworth misbehavior/abuse within the realm of electronic communications support, electronic conferencing, 
and perhaps Usenet news support. It rapidly became apparent that these areas needed to be addressed full- 
time within the DTC group. The DTC Manager and the SCD Divison Director worked with JTC s Chief Operating 
Officer to put responsibilities for this work into DTC and to propose to Senior Management that the intern 
be allowed to pursue this position on a full-time basis. Senior Management approved this appointment. 
The ITC Human Resources Manager began working with the manager of the intern s previous group to seek 
ways to permanently fill the position the graduate student-intern was occupying. : , 1 The Next Wavk 
df Interns 1 Four proposals were received for the second group of intern positions. Two have been approved, 
both of which require physical moves on the part of the interns. One will be working with the~brterim 
Director of Applications and Data Services on the Year 2000 project that is currently underway; the other 
will work with our Advanced Technology Group on the development of web pages.  WISDOM GAINED The first 
internships were a learning experience both for the people who filled the positions and for the organization. 
. The organization thought that it had addressed all issues with respect to back-filling but was caught 
unprepared for the issue of staff machines. This issue was addressed in time to avoid this difficulty 
for the second round of interns. . Both interns expanded their knowledge of the organization as a whole 
and gained a greater appreciation for what others in the organization do. This is difficult to do under 
other situations because the different physical locations do not promote the types of interchange that 
have been available to the interns. a While six months was seen as an optimal time to , participate 
in an internship, both of the first two internships have been either extended or moved to full-time support 
in the new areas. It was hoped that six months would provide enough time to learn the skills needed to 
support a new area and avoid losing all skills from the old area. This has not 1.1 been the case with 
the first two interns, so how this will resolve itself, given State of Virginia Code, remains to be seen. 
Learning curves as people bring existing skills to new areas are somewhat steep, but their insights and 
ability to use their existing skills in new ways have enhanced the organization. The structure of the 
internship process has prevented a ripple effect of ITC staff moving from group to group to back-fill 
a position left open from occurring. Both of the first interns were put into their new situations without 
back-filling from other ITC staff and it appears that this will be avoided for the second group of interns 
as well. Participants have found the experience to be fulfilling. It has provided an opportunity to try 
new tasks in an environment where it was safe to do so; had the interns not functioned well in their 
new environments, it would have been simple to move back to old duties without penalty. The applications 
for internships that have been received not only sought to provide a new career path for an individual 
but also to further develop skills within an existing area. It seems that ITC people want to grow, want 
challenges and new opportunities, and want to be rejuvenated in what they do. Each intern must have a 
mentor assigned who can work closely with the intern to maximize the effects for both the intern and 
for JTC and who can act as a coach for the intern. Costs are being tracked and experiences with the first 
group and the second group of interns are being monitored. The program will be evaluated at the end of 
the second internship cycle.  PLUSES AND MINUSES Senior management has found that the learning curve 
takes time away from other tasks and that this can impact our customers. They also found that in an organization 
where office space is a perpetual challenge, finding an appropriate physical location for 14. ACM SIGUCCS 
XXV 1997 Are You Ready? Jayne Ashworth StaffInternships or Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks an intern is 
sometimes difficult. They have a concern that many more people will begin applying for internships and 
then feel frustrated if their proposals are not accepted. Lastly, they are concerned that an intern will 
move to a new area, acquire new skills and then be disappointed if a permanent change cannot be made. 
Interns have found the opportunity to try new areas without great risk. Skills have been developed and 
horizons expanded. Appreciation of other groups and divisions has spread. The interns feel valued and 
supported by ITC. Other staff have seen this and have been encouraged to apply for internships. Senior 
management has found that removing an experienced person from a project (but keeping them within the 
organization) has not had as much negative effect as might have been imagined and has afforded the opportunity 
for those who remain in a group to expand their skills as they work to cover the tasks that remain behind. 
 THEFUTURE After the first two sets of interns have completed their terms, the Senior Management will 
look at what has happened, Some thoughts that are being considered at the present time are: . Formally 
evaluate each internship at three months and again five months to decide if it needs to be extended . 
 Extend internships to areas other than with ITC, perhaps allowing people to work elsewhere within the 
University or even within other governmental agencies in the area . Publish experiences of internships 
more widely in the organization either through formal presentations or brown bag lunches . Publish a 
list of projects that could be undertaken, each with a defined skill set that is needed to begin the 
internship and the skills that would be developed during the internship. This list would help internship 
applicants by making the application process simpler. It would help those awarding the internships by 
helping them make better matches. This information might also encourage a higher participation as people 
realize that they, too, have skills that others could use Use money that is allocated for internship 
back-fills that is not used to provide for cross-training of other individuals within lTC Find a way 
to communicate to all staff that everyone can participate regardless of what they are doing at the present 
time . Find a way to encourage people who would like to participate in an internship to find someone 
in another group with whom they could swap positions; this would allow more internships at any one time 
as the two would essentially back-fill for each other. Find a way for staff to participate in cross- 
divisional projects which would require less overhead than a formal internship As the terms of the first 
interns are not yet officially complete and the terms of the second interns are just beginning, it is 
too early to tell if staff retention has been improved. The initial internship participants have felt 
the experience has been valuable in terms of learning about other groups within the organization, experiencing 
other office cultures and in being able to provide a cross-group perspective to both their previous group 
and their internship group. None of the managers involved has expressed concern over either the absence 
of staff from their group or the addition of staff to their group. Senior management will look closely 
at what has happened with both groups of interns when they evaluate this program in early 1998. SAMPLE 
ANNOUNCEMENT ITC Internship Program for July - December 1997 Are you Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997.15 Staff 
Internships or Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks Jayne Ashworth Did you ever want to try out a different position 
in ITC? Did you ever want to learn skills from a different lTC area? Information Technology and Communication 
(DC) invites applications from all of its staff for the ITC Staff Internship Program. The program is 
designed for ITC staff who believe they will benefit from a mentoring experience in new areas of interest. 
The primary goal is to help ITC staff in their self-development. Applications are due May 5,1997. CHECK 
IT OUT: For more details, please visit the website at: [URL GIVEN] If you have any questions, please 
contact: [Name] Manager of Human Resources (e-mail address) or [Name] Manager of Training Services (e-mail 
address)   SAMPLE INFORMATION FROM WEB PAGE ITC INTERNS- PROGRAM Information Technology and Comunication 
(TX) invites applications from all of itsemployees for the ITC Internship Program. The program is designed 
for ITC staff who believe they will benefit from a mentoring experience in new areas of interest. The 
program can have as many as three interns chosen per year. A successful intern will achieve the following 
personal objectives: . enhanced knowledge and skills . experience in a new environment . greater visibility 
. expanded career options 16 . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 The Experience Prior to the start of the internship 
period, each intern researches and identifies a placement. Then the intern negotiates a plan with the 
manager with whom she or he is placed. Developed with the guidance of the Manager of ITC-Training or 
the Manager of ITC-Human Resources, the plan states the intern s specific goals as well as ITC s expectations. 
Managers will assign mentors for the interns. Mentors come from the ranks of the division/group in which 
the intern will be working. Interns have office space in their primary mentor s area and work as colleagues 
of the permanent staff. Interns observe a range of activities and participate injoint projects with other 
ITC staff. As their terms progress, interns assume increasing responsibility for assignments. They may 
attend appropriate workshops and academic courses to foster their professional development. Internships 
can be of any length less than one year. It is recommended that internships be six-months in length. 
 The Results The purpose of the program is to assist participants with their professional development. 
While thisprogram is intended to increase the pool of qualified applicants within ITC, promotional opportunities 
cannot be guaranteed. Qualifications for Application First consideration is given to full-time ITC 
classified staff, who have been an ITC employee for at least two years. Candidates who do not fit these 
criteria may also apply, but will be considered only if space and funds are available. Applicants are 
judged on their accomplishments and their potential for success. A review panel screens applications 
and makes recommendations to the ITC Directors Group. The Directors group will make the final decisions. 
 Salary and benefits Are You Ready? Jayne Ashworth Interns receive the same monthly salary and benefits 
as they would have received in their previous position during the program. Additionally, interns will 
be eligible for the same salary increases as their previous position, ITC provides funds to each interns 
home unit to pay the personal-services costs of replacing her or him during the internship period. Interns 
must return to their previous position or other ITC position after the end of the program. Application 
and Selection Each applicant should submit a resume and letter. The letter (not to exceed two pages) 
should outline the applicant s professional goals, detail how she or he will achieve the personal objectives 
listed above, and describe their aspirations for the internship. If a pair of applicants would like to 
switch positions as part of the internship, please note that in the application. Application materials 
should be sent to: [Name], Manager, ITC Human Resources, Carruthers Hall Applications for July - December 
1997 must be received no later than May 5, 1997. These interns will be announced by June 2,1997. Inquiries 
should be addressed to [Name] , Manager ITC Human Resources at (telephone number) or [Name], Manager, 
lTC Training at (telephone number). Process and Estimated Timetable May 5, 1997 Applications due May 
19,1997 Review panel makes recommendations June 2,1997 Directors approve recommendations June 16,1997 
Interns announced July 1, 1997 Interns start Are you Ready? Staff Zntemships or Teaching Old Dogs New 
Tricks The process for future interns will be integrated into the new human resource plan. The interns 
would be selected to start on January 1 and July 1 each year. ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997.17   
			