
 StarOS, a Nlultiprocessor Operating System for the Support of Task Forces Anita K. Jones, Robert J. 
Chansler Jr., Ivor Durham, Karsten Schwans and Steven R. Vegdahl Department of Computer Science Carnegie-Mellon 
University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 StarO$ Is a message-based, object-oriented, multlprocessor operating 
system, specifically designed to support task forces, large collections of concurrently executing processes 
that cooperate to accomplish a single purpose. StarOS has been implemented at Carnegie-Mellon University 
for the 50 processor Cm* multi-microprocessor computer. In this paper, we first discuss the attributes 
of task force software and of the Cm* architecture. We then discuss some of the facilities in StarOS 
that allow development and experimentation with task forces. StarO$ Itself is presented as an example 
task force. 1. Introduction Technological advances have made It attractive to Interconnect many less 
expensive processors and memories to construct a powerful, cost-effective computer. Potential benefits 
Include increased cost-performance resulting from the exploitation of many cheap processors, enhanced 
reliability in the Integrity of data and in the availability of useful processing cycles, and a physically 
adaptable computer whose capacity can be expanded or reduced by addition or removal of modular components. 
This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency' (DOD), ARPA Order No. 3597, 
monitored by the Air Force Avionios Laboratory Under Contract F33615-78-C- 1551. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency or the 
US Government. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the 
copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the 
title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the 
Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific 
permission. &#38;#169; 1979 ACM 0-89791-009-5/79/1200/0117 $00.75 Realizing these potential benefits 
requires software structures that make effective use of the hardware. StarOS Is an experimental operating 
system for Cm*, a multi-microprocessor with approximately 50 processors and 3M bytes of main memory (in 
1979) [5]. StarOS Is designed for the support of and experimentation with task forces, software composed 
of many cooperating, communicating "small" processes, together with supporting code and data. Collectively, 
the task force components accomplish a single task. Our objective is to determine whether task force 
software is conducive to achieving the potential benefits of multiprocessors, and to understand the design 
issues related to operating system facilities that support task forces. A limited Version of StarOS has 
been running since 1977. An adapted and expanded version Is now being completed. It is appropriate to 
analyze task forces in detail. Processes of a task force are typically small in comparison to counterparts 
in a uniprocessor multiprogramming system, and there are more of them. The desirability of many small 
processes, rather than a few larger ones, derives directly from the three potential benefits listed above: 
To achieve cost-performance or even absolute performance, a computation is decomposed into small parts, 
each of which is performed by a separate process executing in parallel with the others. This strategy 
maximizes usage of the available parallelism. Enhanced reliability may result if the task is decomposed 
such that no one process performs an Indispensable function. If an error can be contained so that it 
results in the destruction of no more than one process, the task might still be completed. In this case, 
a more reliable implementation results. The third potential benefit of hardware adaptability will be 
well served if the task force can grow (or shrink) with the addition (or removal) of processor and memory 
resources. This Is particularly easy if data structures are separately Iocatable and addressable entities 
whose size or number can vary. Likewise, it is particularly easy to 117 do when the task force is composed, 
In part, of duplicated processes or deta. An individual process in a task force is specialized; it has 
only a small part of the overall work of the task force to accomplish. Hence, it needs to access relatively 
little data or code. As a result, the address domain of a process may be small. This st,ggests that each 
unit of code and each data structure should be separately addressable so that address domains can be' 
tailored to the requirements of the individual process. Processes of a task force rely more on other 
processes than is the case in time typical multiprogramming system. What is performed by a subroutine 
in the multiprogramming system may be performed by a separate process in the task force. Inter-process 
communication and synchronization are substantially more frequent. Hence, each process must be able to 
address some data objects, such as mailboxes and semaphores, for communication and synchronization. Task 
forces vary along dimensions not even found in multiprogramming systems. For example, the number of processes 
in a single task force may vary not with the number of functions to be performed, but with available 
resources. Where several processors are available, Input data may be partitioned and processes replicated 
so that each process performs the same function, but on a restricted portion of data. In summary, the 
process in a task force is small--small because the function it executes Is a small portion of the Overall 
task, and small in the size of its addressing domain. A task force consists of potentially a large number 
of components, related In a complex structure. The structure and composition of a task force may vary 
to a considerable extent dynamically. The task force is the unit of responsibility for any functionality 
other than the most primitive. Hence, It Is the unit of accountability and the unit for which major resource 
scheduling decisions are made. We have defined task forces quite generally. For example, a sequence of 
three processes connected via Unix pipes would constitute a task force [14]. However, such a task force 
Is exceedingly simple: neither Its structure, nor its composition, change dynamically; it does not require 
any but straightforward synchronization based on data passing through the pipes; it exhibits no communication 
paths or organizational structure for handling errors so that they can be related to the task force as 
a whole, rather than a single process; and it provides no basis for coordinating time output that appears 
o=1 the user termlnah While an extremely useful program organization, such structures are not sufficient 
to cope with the problems that arise in large applications designed to exploit the parallelism inherent 
in distributed systems--whether loosely or tightly coupled. It is our objective to explore facilities 
that do so. 2. Cm* Architecture The destgn of an operating system Is influenced by the hardware resources 
i;c manages. Hence, it is appropriate to sketch the salient aspects of the Cm* architecture. Additional 
descriptive detail can be found In papers by Fuller and Swan, et al. [5, 15]. Cm~ was designed and a 
prototype implemented at Carnegie-Mellon University. The prototype began running'in Spring, 1077. By 
Fall, 1070 it included .50 processors. The Cm* multi-miniprocessor consists of interconnected computer 
modules, each an autonomous computing engine I In the existing system each computer module Is implemented 
by a DEC LSI-11, a standard LSI-11 bus, memory, and devices. All primary memory in the system Is potentially 
accessible to each processor. Each computer module Includes a local switch, the Slocal, which selectively 
routes processor memory references either to the local memory of the computer module or else onto the 
Map Bus. The Slocal likewise accepts references to its local memory that emanate from distant processors. 
Up to fourteen computer modules may be connected to a Map Bus so that they share the use of a single 
Kmap, a processor responsible for routing memory requests and data between Slocals. Together, the Slocals 
and the Kmap implement a distributed switch. The computer modules, Kmap, and Map Bus together comprise 
a cluster. Clusters are connected via Intercluster Buses running between the Kmaps. ACm, configuration 
can have an arbitrary number of clusters, although clusters need not have direct Intercluster Bus connections 
to every other cluster in a configuration. The number of computer modules In a cluster and the number 
of clusters In a system may vary. Currently, our Cm* Implementation consists of five clusters, 50 processors, 
and 3 megabytes of primary memory distributed relatively evenly across the clusters and across the computer 
modules. Synchronous Line Units are provided on several processors for connecting terminal devices or 
multiplexors. Each cluster is connected to to a DEC KLIO processor with higll speed "DA Links." For 
on-line storage of data, each cluster is provided with one or more moving-head disk controllors. An example 
1The name Cm = stands for an arbitrary number of Cm's, or Computer Modules. The x is derived from the 
notation introduced by Kleene for regular expressions. 118  INTEP.GLUSTER BU~ 1 MAP I~U5 --<~ PPP°t| 
BUS SEKI/~L L|NIES PA LINK5 .. III I_ , II Figure 1=Five Cluster Cm* Configuration configuration of 
Cm* is shown in Figure 1. It is quite similar to the current Implementation. Collectively, the Kmaps 
mediate each processor reference placed on the Map Bus; thus they can sustain the appearance of a single 
large memory. However, memory Is organized in a performance hierarchy; approximate inter-reference times 
for local, intracluster, and Intercluster references are 3, g, and 26 /~s, respectively, as measured 
In benchmark tests [4]. The distributed switch consisting of the Slocals, Kmaps and associated busses 
is message switched; references are Interleaved. Using the 4 kiloword writable control store of the Kmap, 
operating system functions beyond those for address mapping may be mlcroprogrammed to increase system 
performance. The Kmap is multiprogrammed, and can retain sufficient context to manage up to eight active 
requests for memory references or microcoded operating system functions at once. 3. StarOS Architecture 
I he objectives of StarOS are to support the construction and execution of task forces and to exploit, 
and to allow the user to exploit, the facilities present in the Cm* architecture. An additional StarOS 
objective Is to support experimentation and measurement with system behavior. StarOS is an object-oriented 
system. In this regard It is similar to Ple~,sey 250 [2], CAL time sharing system [10], CAP [12], and 
Hydra [16]. All information Is encoded and stored In objects. Objects are typed; the type of an object 
determines that set of functions, which alone determine the behavior of the object. All objects are distinct 
and unique. To access an object to extract information stored In It, or to alter the object, a process 
invokes some function defined on the object. To be successful In making such an access a process must 
possess a capability or "protected address" for the object [g, 3, 16]. A capability not only names a 
distinct, unique object; It also specifies authority to manipulate the object using some subset of the 
functions defined for Lhat object. Permission to perform a specific function on an object Is called a 
right. The size of an object's representation In StarO$ is between 2 and 4006 bytes. An object Is comprised 
of" two disjoint portions: the data portion, which contains a sequence of data words, and the capability 
list portion, which contains a sequence of capabilities. The symbolic names provided by the programming 
language can be used to mask the segregation of data from capabilities. StarO$ differs from the Plessey 
119 250 system in which objects contain either data or Capabilities, but not both. Each process has 
two name spaces, the capability name space and the Immediate addressing space of 64 kilobytes, divided 
into 16 windows. The Load function will cause the 4 kilobytes of addresses of a specific window to address 
bytes of the data portion of an object. When this occurs, we refer to the object as mapped. In this manner, 
processor memory references have immediate access to the data portion of an object--that Is, the data 
may be manipulated using the instructions of the LSI-11. This is in contrast to HYDRA where a kernel 
entry is required to read and write individual bytes in the data portion of all objects other then 8 
kilobyte "page objects". The advantage of immediate addressing is that users are not penalized for using 
s~nall objects tailored to the needs of the application. The capability name space of a process is defined 
by the capability list portion of the process object (to be described later). A process may directly 
name all objects for which capabilities appear in this list together with the components of those objects. 
The microcoded capability functions can interpret these direct names for objects and perform the required 
function without software Intervention. If an object Is not directly nameable, some capability function 
must be performed to make it directly nameable. Only then may it be used as a parameter for some function. 
The StarOS system defines several types of objects. In addition, users may freely define additional 
types together with the associated functions. Strong typing is uniformly enforced. To explain some of 
the ramifications of dynamic type creation by users, we first distinguish between abstract types and 
representation types. Representation types are defined by StarOS and are the basis for building all abstract 
types. Here we discuss the most useful two" basic and deque. The most general purpose type ts called 
basic. It contains a vector of data words and a vector of capabilities. Individual words or capabilities 
may be named by Index. The functions defined on data words include: - Read the value, - Write the value, 
- Increment the value indivisibly, and -Decrement the value indivisibly if It is not zero. The increment 
and Decrement functions are the basis for programming simple software locks. Cm* processors cannot otherwise 
perform an indivisible read-modify-write action. The basic type is defined so that tf a basic object 
is mapped to the immediate address space of a process, the processor memory requests perform Read and 
Write functions on the data portion of the object. In this way the data portion behaves as a conventional 
memory segment. Program code is typically stored in basic objects that have no capability list. A variety 
of functions are defined for the manipulation of capabilities: Copy a capability from a position In the 
capability list portion of an object into another position in the same or some different capability list, 
-Restrict rights recorded in a capability,. and Transfer a capability stored in one position to another 
position, perhaps in a different object. (Note that the original capability is erased.) Another generally 
useful representation type is the deque, defined to buffer 16-bit words of data. Associated functions 
include: - PushFront--to insert a data word at the front of the deque, -PushRear--to Insert a data word 
at the rear of the deque, - PopFront--to remove a data word at the front of the deque, If any, -PopRear--to 
remove a data word from the rear of the deque, If any. Deques may be used to implement stacks by employing 
only the PushFront and PopFront functions, or queues by employing only the PushRear and PopFront functions, 
or deques, by using all the defined functions. When the deque is mapped onto the immediate address space 
of a process, memory references to the deque are interpreted by the Kmap as Invocations on the deque 
functionsl .the specific function Invoked depends on the specific address within the window. 3.1, Synchronization 
and Message Communication StarOS Is a message-based system. The motivation for this is to allow concurrent, 
and possible parallel, execution whenever feasible--that is, whenever not restricted by the logic of 
the algorithm. The scheduler and multiplexor are responsible for ensuring that concurrent processes exectlte 
in parallel whenever possible, consistent with the scheduling policy. In this message-based system processes 
frequently send messages, which are requests for work to be done. A process may have multiple requests 
outstanding. Wherever possible, the StarOS design does not preempt the user% ability to program concurrent 
processes. Hence, a process does not ever suspend execution as a side-effect of a message send or receive. 
The process explicitly controls when execution is to be suspended to await the completion of actions 
taken by other processes. StarOS supplies an event mechanism which processes may use to await the occurrence 
of specific events. A set of events Is defined by each process. The process may Block, that is, suspend 
execution, awaiting any one of a subset of the defined events to occur. Routinely, a process associates 
an event with the receipt of a message from a specific mailbox. To support rapid message communication 
.among processes, StarOS implements a mailbox type of object. It is capable of buffering messages which 
are either single data words or single capabilities. When created, a mailbox is defined to buffer either 
data messages or capability messages, but not both. The type-specific functions are Send and Receive. 
First consider the Receive function: it will remove, then return, a buffered message if the mailbox is 
not empty. If the mailbox is empty, the Receive function will act differently depending on whether Receive 
was invoked In conditional or registration mode. In conditional mode the Receive function merely returns 
with no message. If the invoker specified registration mode, then the name of the invoker together with 
an event name is written onto the Registration queue associated with the mailbox. The process must have 
defined the event to be associated with tile receipt of a message from the particular mailbox. To define 
the event, the process specifies an event name, a capability for the mailbox, and a location within the 
address space of the process capable of storing a message delivered from the mailbox. The process may 
then select that event as a condition for the Block function. Send will deliver a message to a registered 
receiver, If one Is listed in the registration queue. Alternatively, Send will buffer the message if 
the registration queue is empty and the mailbox is not full. Send will fail if the mailbox is full. If 
the message Is transmitted to a receiver, the receiver is removed from the registration queue, the transmitted 
message is stored in the location associated with the event. The event named In the registration queue 
is then Signalled to the receiving process. If the process is Blocked waiting on that event, execution 
of the process will be resumed. Note that StarOS mailboxes are finite and that processes communicating 
via tile mailboxes are not Blocked as side-effect of performing a message function on a mailbox. Note 
also that the mailbox functions complete before the invoker is permitted to continue operation. Mailbox 
functions are implemented partially in microcode and partially in software. 8.2. Program and Process 
Construction Module objects are the basis for program construction and the dynamic creation of processes. 
From a behavioral point of view, a module defines and exports a set of functions for use by code in other 
modules. It may also define a new type of object. At any Instant, each user or system process Is executing 
a particular function of a particular module. From an Implementation point of view, a module is an object 
containing capabilities for those code and data objects shared by the processes executing the functions 
of the module. The Invoke function Is defined on modules. Before invoking an asynchronously executed 
function, a process prepares a carrier to hold Invocation parameters. A carrier Is a small basic object; 
a capability for It will be sent to the process that Is to execute the invoked function. One parameter 
always included in the carrier is a capability for a mailbox. The process executing the function will 
return the carrier to this mailbox when the function is completed. The requesting process can wait for 
the function completion by Blocking on an event associated with this mailbox. Transmittal of the carrier 
may occur in several ways. In the simplest case, Invoke will cause the creation of a new process to execute 
the invoked function. That new process will be created with what is referred to as an "invocation" mailbox. 
Invocation is complete when the carrier is sent to the invocation mailbox of the new process. Such a 
process Is said to be "transient" because it will terminate after the function execution is completed. 
Alternatively, one or more processes may be pre-lnitlalized to execute a particular function. Such processes 
are cyclic; they Block on a common invocation mailbox, awaiting arrival of a carrier that represents 
a function request. If one or more such processes exist executing the function, we refer to the function 
as being "present". Note that if multiple processes exist for the same present function, they share the 
module object, the invocation mailbox, and all objects for which there are capabilities in the module 
object. It should be evident that the StarOS Implementation of modules and processes provides support 
for  3.3. Scheduling programming according to the tenets of the "data abstraction" methodology [11, 
18]. Recall that a module may define some new type of abstract object. The functions exported for invocation 
by code external to the module can implement the functions of the abstract type. Hence, only the code 
of the module can directly access the data words and capabilities that in the object of representation 
type that implements the representation of the object of abstract type. The mechanism to support dynamic 
type creation Is as follows. To create a new type, an initialization function of the module would dynamically 
request StarOS to create a new type token, which it would then place in the module object. To create 
an Instance of the new abstract object, a function of the module would first create an object of the 
proper representation type. It would then manipulate the data and capability positiorts in that object 
to initialize the abstract object's repTesentation. It would then mark the object as bein G of the abstract 
type by storing the name of the module in the descriptor of the object, maintained by StarOS. The type 
token is sufficient authority to mark an object. The type token also allows the Conversion of capabilities 
for the object into abstract capabilities. An abstract capability is a pointer to an abstract object; 
it authorizes no functions of the representation type of the object, but rather authorizes Invocation 
of functions of the module that defines the abstract type. Functions In a module defining some abstract 
type may, using the type token, Amplify an al~stract capability to produce a capability for the representation 
object. Hence, Amplify returns a capability for the same object witb rights so that the object can be 
manipulated using those functions defined as part of its representation type. To maintain complete control 
over the behavior of all Instances of the abstract type it defines, a module must observe the following: 
-The type token must not be exercised by any process, other than those executing the functions of the 
module. - All capabilities for objects defined by a module must be Converted to be abstract, before being 
transmitted to processes executing code that is outside the module. If these rules are followed, no 
manipulation of the object can be accomplished except via the functions of the module. The responsibility 
for scheduling is divided between processes, which are called schedulers, and a low level mechanism called 
the multiplexor, which Is executed by each LSI-11 processor independently. The multiplexor makes short 
term decisions about which process to assign to execute on each processor. Each scheduler is designed 
to Implement a specific policy. The StarOS multiplexor may be Initialized to Implement a variety of policies: 
round-robin, preemptive, first-come/first-serve, priority, and the scheduling of processes on prefered 
processors so that a process will execute in the same computer module where the objects containing the 
code and data are located. We intend to experiment with alternative scheduling policies, but have not 
yet done so. At system load time, we associate--with each processor--a priority ordered set of mailboxes 
to serve as queues of processes. These sets of run queues may overlap arbitrarily, and the priority order 
is processor-specific. When it is appropriate for a processor to switch what process it is executing, 
the multiplexor determines the next process to execute by searching the queues in priority order. The 
selected process is assigned to execute on the processor for a prescribed maximum time quantum. If the 
sum total of time which the process executes ever exceeds a scheduler determined value, the multiplexor 
will Send the process back to the scheduler. It is assumed that only one scheduler is resPonsible for 
each process. Multiple schedulers may coexist. It is possible for a scheduler to alter the priority 
of a run queue for some processor or it may add or remove a queue from the set associated with a processor. 
It is assumed that if multiple schedulers exist, they do not act In conflict with one another. 3.4. 
StarOS Instructions In a distributed system, parallelism is natural. Hence, for any function, its designer 
must decide if it is to be executed sequentially or concurrently with respect to further execution by 
its invoker. Where a function is to be performed sequentially, it can be viewed as an extension of the 
LSI-11 processor instruction set. Where we wish to state explicitly that a function is performed sequentially 
with respect to its invoker, we will refer to it as an instruction. All functions defined for representation 
types are instructions. All instructions are invoked, or triggered, by making a LSI-11 reference to a 
mapped object, or to special addresses reserved for communication between a process and its underlying 
machine. References to mapped objects are interpreted by the Kmap. If more than a single 16 bit parameter 
is 122 required, the process first Initializes a parameter block--typically on the process stack--and 
then then makes an appropriate mapped reference to transmit the address of the parameter block to the 
part of StarOS that implements instructions. The Kmap has "first refusal" of all StarOS instructions. 
Requests for Instructions not in firmware are passed to software. An Instruction may be implemented in 
software, firmware, or a mixture of the two. We have given an overview of many StarOS functions. Those 
implemented as instructions, are in the following categories: accessing the representation types of objects, 
synchronization, message passing, invocation of a function, process switching, and trap and interrupt 
handling. The latter three categories are predominantly implemented in software. All other StarOS functions 
are asynchronous. That is, the invoking process may continue execution in parallel with the invoked function, 
which is executed by another process. The invoker may choose if and when it will await a reply from the 
invoked function. The important point to be made here is that only a modest portion of the operating 
system is defined to be synchronous. 4. Task Force Descriptions To realize a task force in StarOS, we 
distinguish between the executable task force--that set of processes with supporting code and data objects 
that actually performs the desired computation--and the static task force--that code and perhaps initial 
input data from which the executable task force Is Instantiated. The difference between the two Is analogous 
to the difference between an executing instance of a procedure and the procedure declaration In a programming 
language. As an aid for the construction of task forces, StarOS supports the TASK languager8]. The author 
of a task force describes the components of his task force--code, input data, processes, and communication 
mailboxes. The TASK compiler generates a list of the sequence of functions calls that must be executed 
by the StarOS program loader. TASK provides three specialized services. Initialization of the capability 
name space and the immediate address space of the task force processes; interface to the BLISS[l] programming 
language used to implement task forces to provide symbolic names for objects; and specification of the 
initial placement and assignment decisions for the objects and process of the task force to improve system 
performance. In the following two sections we describe StarOS itself as an example task force. This will 
permit us simultaneously to show both a task force with Interestii~g structure, and to explain some ramifications 
of its implementation. We do not intend to suggest that StarOS is a typical task force, or even an example 
of the style in which a large class of users might structure their applications. 4.1. The StarOS Static 
Task Force Following the data abstraction methodology, we assume a static task force to be a set of modules, 
each exporting a set of functions, together with some input data. It is in this static form that the 
task force is originally constructed and updated. The StarOS loader creates module objects for each module 
in the static task force. Data may exist in the StarOS file system or In the DEC TOPS-IO system to which 
Cm* Is directly connected via the high speed DA Link. We have already discussed selected functions from 
some StarOS modules and the representation or abstract types which they define. StarOS includes modules 
for capability addressing of objects, defining basic objects and deque objects, message communication, 
dynamic type creation, object management (e.g. primary memory management), creation and maintenance of 
module objects and process objects, input/output transmission, the file system, loader, scheduler, clock, 
and reconfiguration. Logically, the static 8tarOS task force is tile collection of modules, each divided 
into levels. Each level is dependent only on lower levels of itself or levels of other modules. The levels 
form a hierarchy as defined by Habermann, et al. [6]. Detailed discussion of the structure of the original 
StarOS system are discussed in [7]. We do not discuss the static task force structure of the revised 
system in any further here, but turn to the executable task force. 4,2. The StarOS Executable Task Force 
In this section we describe tile components of the StarOS executable task force and their realization 
as $tarOS objects. As discussed earlier, a subset of the StarOS functions, referred to as instructions, 
are defined to execute sequentially and synchronously with the process requesting the function; that 
is, the process is suspended for the duration of the function's execution. Collectively, the StarOS Instructions 
are called the nucleus and they define the sequential portion of the abstract machine that StarOS provides 
to its users. The remaining functions are all performed by processes other than that of the requesting 
process, so that the two may execute concurrently. The nucleus is implemented partly in Kmap mlcrocode 
(about 2000 80-bit micro-instructions), and partly in software (roughly 4 kilobytes). The microcoded 
Kmap has "first refusal" of each request to execute a StarOS Instruction. If it can perform the Instruction, 
it does so while both the requesting process and its processor are suspended. If the Instruction is not 
implemented in microcode, the Kmap arranges for the suspended processor to accept a trap into the "kernel 
addressing space" where tile nucleus software commences execution. The Slocal and Kmap hardware allows 
StarOS to support two Independent address spaces for each processor. These address spaces roughly correspond 
to the distinction between "kernel/supervisor/monitor" mode and "user" mode of a conventional processor. 
The kernel address space Is reserved by StarOS for the nucleus. The multiplexor, part of the nucleus, 
chooses a process for the "user address space". Traps, Interrupts and StarOS instruction invocations 
may cause a switch between spaces. As noted earlier, the nucleus software performs any StarOS Instructions 
refused by the Kmap, or any instructions that could not be completed by the Kmap because of error or 
an unduely complicated situation. For almost all purposes, the nucleus software that executes on each 
computer module appears to run as a standard StarOS process. In fact, it is implemented as s StarOS process 
object. It, like all other processes, Is constrained to perform only those actions for which It has proper 
authority. In particular, it cannot access an object for which it does not possess a capability. However, 
by virtue of executing In the kernel space, the hardware permits the nucleus to execute tl~e "privileged 
machine Instructions" that change processor state such as the Interrupt priority level. The nucleus Is 
constrained more than other processes; It may not Invoke any concurrent function, thus the nucleus is 
not dependent on the correct execution of other processes. At any instant, the StarOS executable task 
force consists of a separate nucleus process for each physical computer module, together with a set of 
present and transitory processes that were created as a result of the invocation of asynchronous 8tarOS 
functions. The exact configuration of the executable task force will vary: transitory processes are created 
and terminate. Multiple present processes to perform the same function may exist. The assignment of specific 
processes to processors, or sets of processors, may change dynamically or with each system Initialization. 
System initialization is performed by functions of the reconfiguration module. The first program loaded 
Includes the reconfiguratlon functions tl~at measure the amount of available memory in the computer module; 
define the first few objects; provide the Kmap with the information required locate objects; and Initialize 
the nucleus process. It is then possible for a reconfiguration function to execute as a StarOS process. 
This function locates and Initializes tile other computer modules in the cluster. A nucleus process will 
be created and installed in each computer module successfully initialized. Subsequently, the reconfiguration 
process will attempt to configure additional clusters into the system if instructed to do so. Currently, 
the reconfiguration process expects to find the nucleus microcode already loaded, though we have plans 
to have microcode loaded automatically as part of system startup. Initialization is completed by creating 
the other modules of the StarOS task force and executing their initialization functions. For both enhanced 
reliability and performance, the few thousand bytes of the nucleus code is typically duplicated In each 
computer module's memory; each nucleus process executes code from Its local memory. Typically, but not 
necessarily, we configure $tarOS so that each Cm* cluster Is functionally complete: each StarOS function 
can be executed within the cluster. During system initialization the reconfiguratlon function determines 
the number of replicated, present processes to be createcl for each function, the placement of code for 
the function in specific physical memory, and the assignment of processes to run queues, and hence to 
Individual processors or sets of processors. As part of nucleus initialization, each module which has 
some function Implemented in the nucleus has tl~e opportunity to execute initialization code. For example, 
it Is this initialization code wldch creates the desired run queues and the priority ordered search list 
for each multiplexor. Figure 2 depicts an example StarOS configuration on one cluster. A large rectangular 
box represents a physical computer module processor and its memory. Solid ovals represent present processes 
that are assigned to execute on the computer module; their code may be assumed to be local. Note that 
each computer module has a private nucleus process with local code. Dotted ovals represent transitory 
processes that exist only for the duration of the single invocation tl~at they service. Alternative configurations 
can be loaded. For example, it is possible to configure the task force so that two object manager processes 
share some or all of their code and that they execute on the same or different processors. 4,8, Variation 
in Configurations As was mentioned above, StarOS is typically configured so that a cluster is functiona, 
lly complete. Cluster autonomy, however, depends upon the behavior of resource managers as well as upon 
the Cemputer Compu4w Computer Compu|ef Module I Module 2 Module 3 Module N I Loader ! @@ r.Cre, tio"., 
@ @@ @ G Kmap Figure 2: The StarOS Executable Task Force configuration decisions. For example, the StarOS 
object manager partitions the physical memory into clusters. The object manager processes that execute 
in a cluster have jurisdiction over allocating physical memory in only that cluster. Any request to allocate 
space in a remote cluster is mailed to a companion object manager in .the remote cluster. Object manager 
initialization provides the mailboxes for such communication. Reliability is one of the potentials of 
a multiprocessor. To achieve this the software must be constructed so that single failures do not render 
an entire module useless. To cite one example, the object manager is designed so that a process responding 
to an allocation request will contain internal state about only a single request at a time. In addition, 
a separate data structure is used to record the allocation state of each computer module% memory. An 
object manager process may lock only one such structure at a time. In case of failure of a process, the 
module will continue to provide for object management, though in a possibly degraded fashion. The configuration 
of StarOS may change from time to time for any of three reasons: performance enhancement, fault recovery, 
and accommodating environmental changes. Ideally, StarOS should respond to changing demands for its services. 
For Instance, If demand for a particular function is high, more processes can be created to perform that 
function. Processes executing reconfiguration functions examine the environment and adjust the $tarOS 
configuration to Improve system performance. Note that the system does not spontaneously duplicate processes 
or physically move objects to enhance performance at the present time. Dynamic reconfiguratlon can be 
exploited so that the system may recover from hardware or software failure. For instanc~;, if ar, object 
manager process were to fail, a reconfiguratlon function could destroy that process, and then create 
another to assume Its management responsibilities. Similarly, if the physical environment changes--such 
as the addition of a new computer module or entire cluster, StarOS could be expanded to take advantage 
of this. Alternatively, if physical resources are removed, the task force configuration can be redtlced. 
In this way an engineer might Instruct the system to exclude a particular system resource from use so 
that it might be repaired. 4.4. Process Relations The executable task force can be usefully envisioned 
as a graph of processes. For this purpose we ignore the module, code, data and mailbox objects which 
are also components of this task force. Such a graph can be constructed in different ways to reflect 
the different relations processes in a task force may have to one another. We will discuss two of the 
relations which StarOS supports. The first relation is the dependence relation. Whenever a process is 
created as a result of an invocation, it is either dependent on the invoking process, or on a distinguished 
StarOS reconfiguration process. The choice is statically determined by a value recorded in the module 
of the function used to create the process--that is, it is determined by the author of the module of 
which the invoked function is a part. The (lependence relation defines forests of trees; it is uSed as 
the ba.,;Is for process suspension and abnormal termination. For example, the function Kill will destroy 
all processes In the dependence tree rooted in the specified process. Note the following behavior based 
on the dependence relation. Suppose that a user process invoked a StarOS function which resulted in the 
creation of a new process P that is not dependent on the invoker. Killing the invoker process will not 
cause the destruction of the system process P, and P will be able to complete its work, restoring system 
data structures to a consistent state before terminating normally. Certainly, caution must be exercised 
1;o ensure that arbitrary users do not create such processes indiscriminately. 125 The bailout relation 
Induces a second relation among processes. When a process is created, a bailout mailbox is associated 
with It. This mailbox is either specified by the invoker, or it is a system mailbox supplied by StarOS. 
When a process becomes Incapable of further execution because of an internal error that it Is unable 
to cope with, the process is suspended and a capability for the process is .mailed to its bailout mailbox. 
Presumably, the receiver of a bailout message can respond to the process failure. Users are free to relate 
processes arbitrarily using the bailout relation. The dependence relation among the StarOS processes 
establishes a shallow tree in each cluster. The roots are the reconfiguration processes for each cluster. 
All nucleus processes and any present processes are directly dependent on the reeonfiguration processes 
of the cluster. Reconfiguration processes in different clusters are not dependent. Likewise, a mailbox 
serviced by the reconfiguration process Is the bailout mailbox for all StarOS processes in a cluster, 
and for processes of user task forces that elect not to handle bailout processing. 15. Concluding Remarks 
Because experience with the system is limited, It Is uncertain how well StarOS facilities will support 
application task forces. However, a retrospective look at the $tarO$ design reveals some characteristics 
of the system are pervasive In the StarOS task force. It Is likely that they would Influence the design 
of any application task force. The consistent use of typed objects and capability-based authorization. 
Except for the object manager, which creates capabilities and objects, and the nucleus which implements 
object addressing, no StarOS function can access an object without referencing It with a capability. 
2 Two benefits accrue. First, processes are endowed with a limited sphere of Influence derived from the 
corresponding module object. A process is granted authority commensurate wltl~ Its responsibility, and 
thus the effects of process--both good and bad--are restricted to a limited domain. Second, the low level 
facilities of the system provide an attractive means of structuring the elements of computation. The 
system encourages the programmer to build multi-level strucftures in a natural way. 2Because the addresses 
generated by direct memory access I./0 devices cannot be mapped by the Slocal or Kmap, functions controlling 
these devices must make use of the physical address of the objects used as buffers, We view this as a 
defficiency, and not an opportunity. Interface Uniformity. From both within and without the StarOS system, 
functions are requested and executed in a uniform manner. For example, access to words or capabilities 
within representation types of objects is independent of the size or location of the object. This gives 
the user and system freedom to separa'te the Issues of task force performance and task force correctness. 
At a higher level, the StarOS instruction Invoke provides a single uniform means of requesting functions 
of modules whether the modules belong to the StarOS task force or to a user task force. Because of the 
resulting uniformity of structures, StarOS processes can be distinguished from user processes only by 
examining the Interprocess relations that define task forces. Preservation of the multi-processor aspects 
of Cm*. The Invoke instruction results in the parallel execution of concurrent processes. The basic mechanisms 
for communication are built around the asynchronous transmission of messages. This type of process structure 
is well-suited to the asynchronous parallel execution of the Cm* processors. There is, of course, the 
constraint of processor scheduling. For the user . who wishes to concern himself with the details of 
process assignment and scheduling, It is possible to obtain 'the proper capabilities for the user's processes 
and for a subset of the run queues. This is possible because StarOS distinguishes the basic mechanisms 
for the multiplexor from the management decisions made by system or user scheduler processes. Allocation 
of overheads. For the most part, the use of simple features of the system does not Incur overheads associated 
with the implementation of more complex features. For example, a reference to the data portion of a StarOS 
basic object requires about the same time as a similar memory reference In the most simple Cm* system. 
In general, the cost of referencing a StarOS object Is directly proportional to the amount of data that 
must be transferred. For this reason, once processes have been created, an overhead directly related 
to the Invoke Instruction," they may communicate rapidly using message communications. The cost of moving 
messages to and from mailbox objects Is low. 6. Acknowledgments No serious software is developed in a 
vacuum. StarOS was developed at CMU in an environment where there Is a long history of Interest in multiprocesslng. 
A previous multiprocessor, C.mmp, its operating system Hydra, and the experiments performed on Hydra 
influenced us. Likewise, the FAMOS project, developed to investigate families of operating systems with 
differing versions of components, also influenced us [B]. We learned from i the successes and the tailures 
of these efforts as [8] well as several otller system efforts outside our Immediate community. So we 
owe a debt to the people involved. Likewise, we would like to acknowledge Sam Fuller and Ricllard Swan, 
who were principals In the development of the Cm~ hardware. References to-1 [1] W. Wulf, et al. Bliss 
Reference Manual. [lO] DEC, 1 970. [2] D. England. Capability Concept Mechanisms and Structure In System 
250. In Protection in Operating Systems, pages [11] 63-82. IRIA, 1974. [ol R. Fabry. Capability Based 
Addressing. Communications of the ACM 17(7):403-412, [12-1 1974. [4-1 S. Fuller, A. Jones, and I. Durham, 
eds. Crn* Review, June 1977. Technical Report, Carnegie-Mellon University Computer Science Department, 
1977. [13-1 [s] S. Fuller, J. Ousterhout, L. Raskin, P. Rubinfeld, P.Sindhu and R. Swan. Multi-microprocessors: 
An Overview and Working Example. Proceedings of the IEEE 66(2):216-228, rl 4] Rebruary, 1978. [03 A. 
Habermann, L. Flon, and L. Cooprider. Modularization and Hierarchy In a Family of [1 5] Operating Systems. 
Communications of the ACM 19:266-272, 1976. [7-1 A. Jones, R. Chansler Jr., I. Durham, P. Feller and 
K. Schwans. [le) Software Management of Cm~--a Distributed Multiprocessor. In Proceedings National Computer 
Conference, pages 657-663. AFIPS, 1977. A. Jones and K. Sehwans. TASK Forces: Distributed Software for 
Solving Problems of Substantial Size. In Fourth International conference os Software Engineering. SIGSOFT-ACM, 
1979. B. Lampson. Protection. In Proc. Fifth Annual Princeton Conference on Information Sciences and 
Systems, pages 437-443. Princeton University, 1971. B. Lampson and H. Sturgis. Refelctions on ari Operating 
System Design. Communications of the ACM 19:251-265, 1976. B. Liskov and S. Zilles. ProgrAmming with 
Abstract Data Types. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Very High Level Languages, pages 
50-50. ACM, 1974. R. Needham and R. Walker. The Cambridge CAP Computer and Its Protection System. In 
Sixth Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages 1-10. ACM, 1977. D. Parnas. On the Criteria to 
be Used in Decomposing Systems into Modules. Communications of the ACM 15:1053-1058, 1 072. D. Rltchie 
and K. Thompson. The UNIX Time-Sharing system. Communications of the ACM 17(7), 1974. R. Swan, S. Fuller 
and P. Siewiorek. Cm*: a Modular, Multi-microprocessor. In Proceedings National Computer Conference, 
 pages 637-644. AFIPS, 1977. Wulf, W., et al. HYDRA: The Kernel of a Multlprocessor Operating System. 
Communications of the ACM 17(6):337-345, 1 974.  
			