
 SUPPORT TO THE MANAGEMENT OF CLINICAL ACTIVITIES IN THE CONTEXT OF PROTOCOL-BASED CARE Domenico M. 
Pisanelli a, Fabrizio Consorti b a. Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Rome, Italy. b. Universit,~ di Roma "La Sapienza", Policlinico "Umberto I", Rome, Italy. Keywords: Guidelines, 
Protocols, Medical Informatics, Clinical Information Systems ABSTRACT In this paper we describe the system 
SMART (Supporting Medical Activities in Real-Time). The goal of the system is real-time assistance to 
physicians who execute diagnostic or therapeutic protocols in a clinical context. SMART is able to retrieve 
a protocol from its knowledge base and to monitor its execution step by step for a single patient. Diffe~'ent 
protocols for different patients can be followed at the same time in a health care structure. The prototype 
realized supports the execution of protocols for evaluating surgical risks. It has been implemented according 
to the specifications given by the 4th Surgical Clinic of "Policlinico Umberto I" and reflects the activities 
actually performed in that hospital. However, the protocol model defined is general-purpose and we envisage 
an easy application to other contexts and therefore to the informatization of other protocols. 1. INTRODUCTION 
Guidelines for clinical practice are being introduced in an extensive way in more and more different 
fields of medicine [1-3]. They have the goal of indicating the most appropriate decisional and procedural 
behavior optimizing health outcomes, costs, and clinical decisions. Guidelines can be expressed in a 
textual way as recommendations or in a more formal and rigid way as protocols or flow diagrams. In different 
contexts they can be a either loose indication for a preferred set of choices or they can be considered 
a normative set of rules. Although their diffusion is increasing, there are still concerns that guidelines 
could harm patient care, mainly because of their low flexibility. Tools helping in selecting the proper 
guideline for a specific patient and monitoring its execution step by step are highly needed. They could 
relieve the clinicians from the management of the guideline itself, letting them free to concentrate 
more on clinical decisions. Several efforts have been devoted in the last few years in realizing computerized 
tools for guidelines management "'Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
Ibr profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice ,and the full citation on the first 
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned bv others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To cop3' otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee." tz 1997 ACM 0-89791-850-9 97 0002 3.50 [4-8]. Formal 
representation models and methodologies for electronic implementation have been investigated [9- 11]. 
An essential role for telematics is expected, especially for World-Wide Web based tools [12-14]. In this 
paper we focus on the computerized support to clinical activities in the context of protocol-based care. 
By protocol we do not mean a mere list of actions, but a structured, flexible, and coherent descriptions 
of activities aimed at solving specific problems [ 15]. We present the system SMART (Supporting Medical 
Activities in Real-Time) whose aim is real-time assistance to physicians who execute diagnostic or therapeutic 
protocols in a clinical context. In the next paragraph we show the graphic formalism adopted for representing 
protocols. The third paragraph sketches out architecture and functionalities of SMART and the fourth 
one reports its application at the University Hospital of Rome for supporting the evaluation of surgical 
risks. In conclusion we emphasize the added value that such a system can offer in a clinical environment. 
2. REPRESENTATION OF PROTOCOLS We have defined a simple graphic formalism for modeling the sequence of 
activities executed in a clinical environment when a protocol is followed. It is possible to represent 
activities running in parallel, mutually exclusive activities, cycles and optional activities. In order 
to interact effectively with the physicians who define and formalize the protocols, a graphic formalism 
has been designed. Such a formalism features an immediate visualization of the actions to be perlbrmed 
(see also figure 5 for a fragment of an actual protocol). The symbols adopted are reported in figure 
1. The ovals "in" and "out" represents respectively the start and the end of a protocol or a sequence 
of activities. An elementary activity, like "act a" in the figure, is depicted by a rectangle. Composite 
activities, like "act b", are represented by a wider border rectangle. An example of composite activity 
is "hypertension diagnostic exams" which consists of different sub-activities. The other symbols are: 
"= in" and "= out" which mark the beginning and the end of a set of activities to be executed in parallel. 
If some of these activities may be omitted, the symbols are: '% in" and "+ out", whereas if one and only 
one can be done "- in" and "- out" are used. 3.5 In such a cases the decision pertains to the physician, 
the point in which it is taken is denoted by an oval. @@  I act a I actbl @ @@ @@ @@ @@ Figure 1 The 
symbols adopted in the graphic formalism. Figure 2 reports an example in which either activity "x" or 
"y" must be executed. Figure 2 A conditional choice between two activities. Performing an activity is 
not always an immediate task, rather it goes through several steps that an information system should 
be able to trace. Therefore we singled out those states relevant to be reported for each activity, following 
the work already done in the context of other projects [ 16- 17] (see table 1 ). A state-transition diagram 
16 is associated to the list of states representing the allowed transitions (e.g. a typical path is: 
1-2-4-6-7-8-13-14). 1. relevant 8. started 2. established 9. suspended 3. discarded 10. abandoned 
4. requested 1 l. aborted 5. rejected 12. notneeded 6. accepted 13. executed 7. scheduled 14. reported 
 Table l The possible states of an activity.  3. THE SYSTEM SMART The system SMART is able to store 
protocols represented according to the formalism described in the previous paragraph. SMART is able to 
retrieve a protocol from its knowledge base and to monitor its execution step by step for a single patient. 
Different protocols for different patients can be followed at the same time in a clinical structure. 
The system runs in a PC environment on a Windows TM platform and has been implemented using the Microsoft 
Access TM relational data base and the Access-Basic TM programming language. The modular architecture 
of SMART is shown in figure 3. Activity [ Editor ]/ Editor System Report I,,i'1 DataBase[ Generator 
] Figure 3 The architecture of SMART. The Activity Editor captures the information describing medical 
activities related to the various protocols. Such information is stored in the Activities' Repository 
in form of relational data. For each activity a state-transition diagram is associated. Each activity 
can have its own peculiar set of states and its respective diagram of transitions allowed. Usually the 
states are those defined in table 1, but this configuration can be changed. In the example reported in 
figure 4, the activity "coronarography" (in Italian "coronarografia") is being added to the repository. 
Data entry includes the associated set of states and its transition diagram ("diagramma di stato"), typical 
agent or agents ("agente") performing the activity, typical environment ("ambiente") and resources ("risorsa"). 
-t M~..... .A ..... t"!: File Modifica Visualizza Record Finestr~ Figure 4 The Activity Editor. The 
Protocol Editor allows the user to pick up activities from the repository and to build up a graph representing 
the protocol according to the formalism defined. The nodes of this graph are both the activities themselves 
and the control symbols introduced in figure 1 representing parallelization, cycles, and conditional 
execution. The graph is stored in relational format in the Protocol Knowledge Base. Activities may be 
decomposed in sub-activities and such a refinement may be applied recursively. The activity and the protocol 
editors are not employed directly in the patient management, but for defining the protocols which will 
be executed. Their use should be restricted to physicians responsible of the clinical structure in the 
customization phase and for future updates of the system. The other modules of SMART support the process 
of care in real-time, therefore all the physicians performing care should be enabled to interact with 
them. In particular, the Protocol Management System allows the physician to match a protocol with a patient. 
This module writes and updates the Patient Data Base with data reporting the status of a patient with 
respect to the execution of his/her protocol. 17 The Protocol Management System interfaces directly with 
the physician in the context of care provision. He/she reads the step which has to be performed and updates 
the system when such a step is completed. The Report Generator queries the Patient Data Base for getting 
information such as the status of a patient (which protocol is he/she following? is it completed?). It 
is able to generate a report with different levels of detail. At the greatest level it is possible to 
check -for each activity performed - when the single activity states occured (e.g. when the skull radiography 
was scheduled, when was it executed and reported). This module can be also employed for checking the 
situation from the point of view of the ward. For example it is possible to retrieve for all the patients 
the activities scheduled, but not yet executed. This facility is useful when a large number of patients 
is being cared simultaneously in a clinical structure. The report generator is also useful in managed 
care, since it allows to keep track of activities executed and respective costs. From the quality point 
of view, the reports are able to show whether the process of care followed the optimal path. 5. THE EVALUATION 
OF SURGICAL RISK The 4th Surgical Clinic of "Policlinico Umberto I" (the Hospital of the first University 
of Rome) has developed a set of clinical guidelines for pre-operative and post- operative management 
of patients under~oing the most frequent types of surgery. A special attention has been devoted to guidelines 
for the evaluation and reduction of risks related to surgery and a first attempt was made to integrate 
those guidelines with the clinical information system running at the department [18]. However, as soon 
as the number and the complexity of the adopted guidelines increased, it became evident the need for 
a more effective modelling of protocols and a more powerful management system for the protocol- related 
activities. The system SMART has been conceived to answer such needs. The 4th Surgical Clinic is currently 
testing SMART for managing the protocol of surgical risk evaluation. Many different data are collected 
in order to reach a decision, the investigation being carried on several domains. It includes the assessment 
of cardiac conditions and lung conditions as well as estimating the probability of haemorragy. Some routinary 
activities are always performed in order to check if the patient would risk too much in a possible operation 
(e.g. anamnesis, ECG). Should the situation be unclear, a deeper level is explored, i.e. further analyses 
and diagnostic images are made. The protocol actually followed in that clinical context has been modeled 
according to the graphic formalism introduced in section 2 (see figure 5). The formalism has the expressive 
power of representing the complexity of the protocol which is not a simple list of actions. M;croso. 
Ac¢=ss I" :, = ~lle k4odlflca ~lsuailzza Becord Flnestre echocardio-ECG scinti-graphy ]under stress ] 
graphv risk evaluation aro-[ Figure 5 A fragment from the protocol of surgical risk evaluation.  After 
having successfully tested the expressive power of the graphic formalism, the case study involved the 
real- time management of patients. SMART was thus employed for monitoring the execution of the protocol 
of surgical risk evaluation. At the beginning the system stores personal data on the patient, then it 
starts showing the list of activities to be executed keeping track of their status (figure 6). As soon 
as an activity evolves (e.g. from "scheduled" to "executed"), the system is updated. When a life-cycle 
of an activity is completed (see table 1), the next one is retrieved from the protocol knowledge base 
or decision criteria and possible choices presented to the physician. In this way SMART follows step 
by step the execution of a protocol, documenting the evolution of patient care. Each step is recorded 
and each activity to be done is put in evidence. Many patients and many protocols may run in parallel. 
Managing a sin,.zle protocol for a single patient may be trivial, but tracing the numerous activities 
performed on many patients, as well as supporting their parallel execution is the real added value of 
this system. Figure 6 The system shows a list of activities to be executed for a patient in the context 
of the chosen protocol. 6.CONCLUSIONS The optimization of patient management must consider two essential 
aspects of care provision: the interaction and co-operation of a clinical department with the diagnostic 
services (request of appointments, preparation of patients for the exam, scheduling, negotiation...) 
and the execution of different parallel activities pertaining to different protocols for the same patient. 
For example, the treatment of a patient candidate to major rectal surgery who presents chronic respiratory 
failure, hypertension, and myocardial ischemic damages implies the execution of three different protocols. 
They could be optimised to run in parallel, requiring tile interaction with a number of different services 
(respiratory. physiopathology, cardiology, department of imaging). The full potentialities of SMART can 
be exploited in such an environment where different protocols are executed in parallel on several patients. 
In this context the system is able to retrieve the updated situation of every patient, as well as to 
give an overall report on the ward. Keeping track of the parallel activities performed, it avoids unnecessary 
duplication of tasks, but it also prevents possible omissions. The case study has confirmed the flexibility 
of the graphic formalism for representing protocols. An extension of the protocol knowledge base is foreseen 
in order to satisfy the requirements of our experimental site. A visual interface for entering and updating 
protocol will replace the present editor. Currently the system is as a stand-alone application, but the 
migration to a client-server architecture is foreseen (a HTML interface for the protocol management system 
is being implemented). Other extension regards a tight integration with other information systems (e,, 
computerized patient records, scheduling and resource allocation systems) in a context of interaction 
and co- operation of a clinical department with the diagnostic i8 services. REFERENCES Guidelines through 
an Interactive World-Wide- Web Interface.Proceedings of 19th SCAMC, [1] Woolf SH. Practice Guidelines, 
a New Reality in 1995; 223-227. Medicine: Impact on Patient Care. Arch Intern Med, 1993; 153: 2646-2655. 
[15] Grifoni P, Lalle C, Luzi D, Pisanelli DM, Ricci FL, Serbanati LD, Modeling the Management of [2] 
Grimshaw JM, Russell IT. Effect of Clinical Protocols as the Kernel of a Healthcare Guidelines on Medical 
Practice: a Systematic Information System. Proceedings of MEDINFO Review of Rigorous Evaluations. Lancet, 
1993; 95, 1995; 502-505. 342: 1317-1322. [16] Pisanelli DM, Ferri F, Ricci FL. An Object- [3] Grilli 
R, Penna A, Liberati A. Migliorare la Oriented Tool for the Generation and Management pratica clinica: 
come promuovere ed implementare of Multimedia Patient Folder. Proceedings of 18th linee-guida. Roma, 
I1 Pensiero Scientifico SCAMC, 1994; 524-528. Editore, 1995. [17] Herbert S, Gordon C, Jackson-Smale 
A, Renaud- [4] Vissers MC, Hasman A, van der Linden CJ. Salis JL. Protocols for Clinical Care. Proceedings 
Protocol Processing System (ProtoVIEW) to of 12th International Congress of European Support Residents 
at the Emergency Federation of Medical Informatics, 1994; 30-35. Ward.Proceedings of 12th International 
Congress of European Federation of Medical Informatics. 1994; 138-143. [18] Consorti F, Assenza M, Ferri 
F, Gargiulo A, Lombardi A, Martinis G, Di Paola M. MSR: A Decision Support System for the Decision [5] 
Lobach DF, Hammond WE. Development and Strategy of Surgeon. Proceedings "of llth Evaluation of a Computer-Assisted 
Management International Congress of European Federation of Protocol (CAMP): Improved Compliance with 
Medical Informatics, 1993; 90-94. Care Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus. Proceedings of 18th SCAMC, 1994: 
787-791. [6] Shiffman RN. Towards Effective Implementation of a Pediatric Asthma Guideline: Integration 
of Decision Support and Clinical Workflow Support. Proceedings of 18th SCAMC. 1994; 797-801. [7] Schriger 
DE, Baraff LJ. Hassanvand M, Cretin S. Presentation of Clinical Guidelines Via a Rule- based Expert Charting 
System. Proceedings of MEDINFO 95, 1995; 1018-102l. [8] Willson D, Ashton C, Wingate N, Goff C, Horn 
S, Davies M, Buxton R, Computerized Support of Pressure Ulcer Prevention and Treatment Protocols.Proceedings 
of 19th SCAMC, 1995; 646-650. [9] Starren J, Xie G. Comparison of Three Knowledge Representation Formalisms 
for Encoding the NCEP Cholesterol Guidelines.Proceedings of 18th SCAMC, 1994;- 792-796. [10] Gordon C, 
Christensen JP (eds.). Health Telematics for Clinical Guidelines and Protocols. Amsterdam, IOS Press, 
1995. [11] Lobach DF. A Model for Adapting Clinical Guidelines for Electronic Implementation in Primary 
Care.Proceedings of 19th SCAMC, 1995:581-585. [121 Barnes M, Barnett GO. An Architecture for a Distributed 
Guideline Server.Proceedings of 19th SCAMC, 1995; 233-237. [13] Cimino JJ, Socratous SA. Automated Guidelines 
Implemented via the World Wide We b. Proceedings of 19th SCA MC, 1995; 94 I. [14] Liem EB, Obeid JS. 
Shareck EP, Sato L, Greenes RA. Representation of Clinical Practice 19  
			