
 SUPPORTING THE VIRTUAL (NETWORKED) COMMUNITY BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE Jodi-Ann Chu Manager, Information 
Services University of Hawaii Information Technology Services 2565 The Mall, Keller Hall Honolulu, HI 
96822 Phone: (808) 956-2400 Fax: (808) 956-2412 E-Mail: jodi @uhunix.uhcc.hawaii. edu ABSTRACT We are 
facing a rapidly changing and growing techno­logical environment and we are charged with providing adequate 
support for our respective communities. With the changes in telecommunications regulations, decreasing 
costs of computers and modems, and exponential increase in the recognition of the value and utility of 
accessing the Intemet, more and more people are starting to use the network to communicate, access information 
and otherwise perform their daily jobs. Soon dependence on the network will be as ubiquitous as using 
the telephone. Additionally as remote access to the network becomes cheaper and cost effective, the population 
using the network is becoming very dispersed. So, as we undergo organiza­tional changes at the University 
of Hawaii, our challenges are to build an information technology infrastructure capable of supporting 
a growing population dispersed across a wide geographic region and to be flexible enough to change with 
our changing environment. BACKGROUND The University of Hawaii system is comprised of 15 campuses and 
education centers scattered across the state on six islands. The campuses provide a variety of graduate, 
4­year and 2-year degrees and various certificate programs. The entire system supports over 50,000 students, 
faculty, and staff members. The primary campus, University of Hawaii at Manoa, is located on the island 
of Oahu. Each campus maintains its own budget and decision-making autonomy making the success of any 
technology project dependent upon the cooperation and coordination among the technology leaders of each 
campus. VIDEO AND DATA INFRASTRUCTURE Already in place at the University of Hawaii is an extensive video 
network called the Hawaii Interactive Television System (HITS). A combination of ITFS and microwave, 
HITS provides two-way video and two-way audio to most campus media studios. The instructor can see the 
students at each site, and the students can see the instructor and communicate interactively via micro­phones. 
Due to the limited amount of channel capacity, we are approaching the maximum number of classes tha~ 
can be delivered via HITS. In addition, classes are being delivered over our state-wide public education 
cable system#here students can view the classes from home via their local cable station. The UH inter-campus 
data network infrastructure combined with each campus network infrastructure combine to form the University 
of Hawaii Network (UHNet). UHNet connects each campus to UH Manoa via TI connections. Currently, access 
to the Internet is provided via a T1 link to NASA Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California. 
The high-speed connectivity between campuses allows everyone on each campus to communicate, collaborate, 
and access electronic resources anytime of the day or night. Prima~ uses of the network are to: exchange 
data and information among faculty, students, colleagues and researchers on a global basis; disseminate 
information; provide access to world-wide information resources; participate in global discussion groups; 
and conduct electronic office hours. Distance and isolation are no longer regarded as barriers to educational 
opportunities. THE NEW ORGANIZATION Beginning in 1993, under the leadership of a new president, the University 
of Hawaii is undergoing a major reorganization of top-level administration. Included in the re-shuffling, 
is the reorganization of four separate information technology (IT) support units into one single unit 
under the direction of a Chief Information Officer (CIO). The four units are: Management Systems Office 
(MSO) responsible for administrative computing and applications; Computing Center (UHCC) responsible 
for academic computing and support, Telecommunications responsible for voice operations, and the Office 
of Informa­tion Technology (OIT) responsible for distance education and video operations. There is a 
significant amount of redundant services provided among these 4 units. Combin­ing these units would streamline 
the organization and promote greater efficiency. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its akta appea< and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machine~, to copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee anaYor speczjic permission. 01994 ACM 0-89791-656-5/94/459940 $3.50 Meet the Shadowy Future The 
new organization, under the leadership of our CIO, is called Information Technology Services (ITS) and 
has 9 groups: . Administration: reception and clerical support, fiscal support, facilities and inventory, 
site license administra­tion, computer accounting, and human resources develop­ment . Management Information 
Systems (MIS): administrative applications, mainframe systems and operations, data base management, security, 
access to data, production services, and data entry Distance Education and Instructional Technology: 
distance education coordination, interactive television operation, instructional design and support, 
and computer­based instruction support Telecommunications: voice telecommunications, moves/ addslchanges, 
telecommunications accounting, and wiring infrastructure Interactive Systems: systems administration 
and mainte­nance of the academic systems (VAWVMS, UNIX, workstations) Information Services: help desk, 
host-based applications support, UNIXIVAX support, newsletter, publications, user training coordination, 
on-line information services, and public-access microcomputer laboratories Networking: data and video 
networking Desktop Support Services: desktop system support, LAN support, and microcomputer repair Special 
Projects: project planning and support for complex and unique major initiatives with systemwide and statewide 
consequences The reorganization of these IT units will position the University to leverage its strengths 
and buildup its weak­nesses to better support Information Technology and its deployment and use. PLANS 
AND PARTNERSHIPS Now that the reorganization is underway, we are developing a plan to support the population 
as identified earlier. Traditionally and historically much of the academic computing support was provided 
through several methods: a consulting office that provided walk-in and phone support during working hours 
(M-F 9:30-4:30); by appointment with a full-time staff member; by electronic mail; and documentation. 
Academic training was provided with instructor-led short courses which provided a general orientation 
on various topics. These course often were often an hour in length and were held once a semester. Attendees 
were required to attend classes on the Manoa campus making it difficult and expensive for participation 
by those not resident on the island of Oahu. Administrative support was handled through a hot-line and 
by appointment, and electronic mail. Very detailed classes, often spanning several days, were provided 
for administrative users. Additionally, within the past few years, there has been a strong demand and 
substantial administrative support for the University s distance education program. The distance education 
program provides equitable educational opportu­nities for residents throughout the entire state of Hawaii. 
This has created a new community within the University relying on information technology to fulfill its 
mission. Classes are delivered over HITS and public cable channels. Electronic mail and computer conferencing 
are used by instructors and students to communicate and interact outside of their allocated class times. 
Our traditional support and training strategies required substantial staff time but only fulfilled the 
needs of a small population and did not fulfill the requirements for the distance education program. 
We now need to develop and implement a new training and support strategy that will service the entire 
University community ubiquitous support to all regardless of their location. The plan calls for training 
and support to be conducted differently, maintaining some of the existing methods but redesigning and 
adding new strategies to account for the diverse knowledge base and learning styles and the geo­graphic 
dispersion of our population. SUPPORT PLAN One of the changes we are making is with our consult­ing operation. 
Currently, it is a source of assistance prima­rily for walk-in users. With our growing population of 
users requiring assistance on a diverse range of computing environments and applications and locations, 
we must re­think how we provide assistance. The consulting office will be changed to a reference center 
to maximize staff (expert) resources. Manned by well-trained student assistants, any questions that they 
are unable to answer would be forwarded to the appropriate staff member. The staff member would then 
be responsible for answering the question within the advertised turnaround time. Questions and answers 
would be tracked and logged to determine where support efforts should be concentrated and to build a 
database of frequently asked questions that would be accessible to the users so that they can research 
their own questions first. Additionally, other information sources such as Internet archives and databases, 
locally written documentation, etc. will be made available electroni­cally. Our emphasis will be to provide 
as much support as possible on-line thus utilizing technology to support the technology. TRAINING STRATEGIES 
As diverse as our user community is, our tmining strategies will also have to be as varied. Training 
will need to be provided via a variety of delivery methods using various media and technologies for both 
haditional and non­traditional learners. We will need to maintain our current paper-based ACM SIGUCCS 
XXII documentation library but will additionally make it available electronically so that people can 
print out their own copies or view the document on-line. This will allow users the option of having 
a printed, hard copy or reviewing the information at their convenience from any location. In addition, 
interactive tutorials are being developed in hypertext markup language (HMTL), The tutorials would then 
be accessible through UHNet and the World-Wide Web (WWW) and can be viewed with graphical, multimedia 
browsers such as Mosaic. Training will still be done with instructor-led classes but the classes are 
being broadcast over HITS allowing people on other islands to participate from their local media center. 
Additionally, the classes are being recorded and tapes made available for users to borrow providing viewing 
flexibility for those who are unable to attend the classes. To assist those who need hands-on experiences, 
we are planning to develop video training tapes to provide tutorials and exercise lessons. These tapes 
will be short and concise. Each module will focus on a specific topic. People can borrow the only ones 
that they need. The tapes will be available for check-out for home viewing on all islands. These tapes 
will also be made available in various campus public-access labs. The other new technology that we are 
investigating as a support tool is multicasting over the Internet. Multicasting would allow us to broadcast 
video from a single source to several recipients utilizing our existing network infrastruc­ture. By setting 
up video-capable workstations in each of the media centers, we could provide a place for distance education 
instructors and students to have offIce hours and consulting from ITS staff and other experts. This has 
great potential and we envision integrating it into our support plan in the near future. PARTNERSHIPS 
As we are faced with a decreasing budget and fixed staffhg levels, in order to continue to support our 
growing user population, we must look at establishing partnerships and liaisons within the University 
community. Some of the support teams that we are attempting to coordinate are Campus Computing Coordinators 
and Departmental Liaisons. The Campus Computing Coordinators group consists of the computing and technology 
leaders from each campus. This is the team we rely heavily upon to ensure that systemwide technology 
projects will be successful. Some of the tasks that the group is addressing are development of access 
and usage policies, development of computing standards, and deployment of the Access For All (AFA) project. 
AFA rdlows every student, faculty, and staff member of the University of Hawaii system to apply for an 
id on our UNIX systems which in turns allows them access to all Internet tools and services. The Departmental 
Liaisons program is still in its infancy stages. We have recently formed an informal liaison with our 
Library unit to assist them in training their staff on Internet tools and services and they will assist 
us in includ­ing Internet training in their public service classes offered to the University community. 
Additionally, they will provide access to the UH Campus Information Server from their system s menu and 
we will assist them in maintaining a gopher server for their information. Our other departmental liaison 
is with the Educational Media Center at Kapiolani Community College. We have been assisting them with 
the production of a community program aired on our local public cable channel. The show is called Island 
Connexion and focuses on issues and activities regarding how technol­ogy is used in higher education. 
They have offered to assist us with the production of our video training modules. FUTURE Much of what 
has been described here is new for us at the University of Hawaii:. A new organization, with new leadership, 
and new ideas and focuses. The transition will be rocky but with continued effort and energy and enthusiasm, 
there is great hope that the outcome will far outweigh the problems. We look forward to implementing 
our new dreams and plans and to bringing the future into our grasp. Meet the Shadowy Future 
			