
 System Demonstrations: Abstracts Marc Rittberger Demonstrations Chair Informationswissenschaft Universitat 
Konstanz P.O. BOX 5560 78434 Constance, Germany Tel.: +49-7531-88-3595, Fax: +49-7531-882601 E-mail: 
Marc.Rittberger@ uni-konstanz.de IR Application Development with FireWorks David J. Harper, David G. 
Hendry, Jan-Jaap IJdens, and Jeomon Jose Abstract We are developing two different architectures that 
support the development of IR applications. Eclair is a C++ class library that provides abstractions 
for the representation, storage, and retrieval of multimedia documents. FireWorks is a user-interface 
archi­tecture, consisting of IR-specific toolkit and frameworks, for constructing a wide range of IR 
applications. Both architectures are built on top of Objectstore, a state-of-the-art distributed object 
data management system. The goal of this demonstration is to show the broad range of IR applications 
can be implemented with these frameworks. Contact Person Prof. David Harper, School of Computer and Mathematical 
Sciences, The Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen AB 1 lHG, UK, Tel: +44-O-1224-262785, Fax: +44-O-1224-262727, 
E-mail: d.harper@scms.rgu. ac.uk A Novel Client-server Protocol for the Demanding Opac User E.J. Yannakoudakis 
Abstract We aim to demonstrate an integrated multilingual OPAC module that offers several novel features, 
including SDI, free-text retrieval and a full thesaurus tree, using an open logical client­server protocol. 
The module was implemented under Windows 3. 1/95 and a UNIX server running INFORMIX-4GL while the communication 
layer is operational under both serial and TCP/IP standards. Note that the new module is part of the 
integrated library automation system LIBREZTO which has already been installed at several sites in Greece. 
The need for a new system to manage our catalogue became even greater as we attempted to process thesaurus 
relationships using Greek character sets, to define character mappings, to switch from one language to 
another, to produce logical lexicographic orderings, to process voice, image, video, andcardex information, 
etc.. The protocol is based on ASCII packages which are exchanged using the format: Header% [Flags] Data 
[Flags], where the header comprises one to four characters and is used to denote the command function 
or the result set. The first and the second set of flags are used by some commands to enhance their meaning. 
For example, in the free text search, the flag 10100000000 is used to limit the search into two specific 
database fields, in this case the TITLE and the AUTHOR. Data contains command parameters or result information. 
Contact Person E.J. Yannakoudakis, Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics, 76 Patission 
Street, Athens 10434, Greece, Tel: +30-1-8214145, Fax: +30-1-8081645, E-mail: eyan@aueb.gr WING: System 
A Multiple-view Smooth Information Retrieval Toshiyuki Kouichi Masui, Kashiwagi MItsuru Minakuchi, George 
R. Borden, and Abstract WING (Whole Interactive Nara Guide) is a system to enable smooth information 
retrieval by integrating multiple search strategies such as 3-D map visualization, hypertext, keyword 
search, and category search with the same smooth zooming interface. Nara, located about 40 kilometers 
south of Kyoto, is an ancient capital of Japan and full of tourist attractions like old shrines and temples. 
Using WING, any vague knowledge about the data can be utilized to narrow the search space, and users 
can smoothly navigate through Nara at will, by modifying the search area in each view. Visuahzing Search 
Results with Envision Lucy Terry Newell, Robert K. France, and Edward A. Fox Abstract Envision, a multimedia 
digital library of computer science literature, is unique in the variety of document characteristics 
visualized and in the flexibility afforded users to change the visualization to suit their current information 
needs. Envision s Graphic View window displays search results as a matrix of icons. Using controls provided 
in the user interface, the layout of the matrix may be changed to visualize estimated relevance to query, 
publication year, document type, document size, author names, and index terms. Icon character sties used 
in the visualizations include placement relative to the x-axis and y-axis and an alphanumeric icon label, 
as well as icon size, shape, and 338 color. Visualizations supporting a wide range of user tasks will 
be demonstrated. Contact Person Edward A. Fox, Virginia Tech Dept. of Computer Science &#38; Computing 
Center, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA, Tel: +1-703­231-5113, Fax: +1-703-23 1-6075, E-mail: fox@vt.cdu Ariadne: 
Electronic Information for Computer Scientists Markus Dreger, Stefan Lohrum, Kai Grossjohann, and Claus 
Dieter Ziegler Abstract Ariadne is a WWW-based system that combines several services in one information 
system. Quick access to references of relevant publications, preprints, software, etc. about Computer 
Science is provided by its main service, the navigational part. This is a repository of links, structured 
hierarchically according to the ACM Classification Scheme. The repository is maintained by the cooperation 
of the users ( give and take ). They suggest new links to be added which then undergo a cooperative peer 
review (also by the users) which ensures the quality of information. A search interface is included, 
as well. Ariadne offers two profiling services. The first regularly checks a URL and notifies the user 
if the information has changed; the second (known as SFprofile) regularly issues queries to freeWAIS-sf 
databases with an SFgate WWW forms interface. SFprofile supports in-place (in the HTML form) editing 
of profiles and a variety of processing options. Contact Person Claus Dieter Ziegler, Fachinformationszentrum 
Karlsruhe, Abteilung Mathematik und Informatik, Franklinstrasse 1, 10587 Berlin, Germany, Tel: +49-30-3923000, 
Fax: +49-30-3927009, E-mail: cdz @?zblmath.fiz-karlsruhe.de WebCompass: An Agent-based Metasearch and 
Metadata Discovery Tool for the Web Brad Allen, John Jensen, Jay Nelson, Brian Ulicny, Kristina Lerman, 
and Linda Rudell-Betts Abstract WebCompass is an agent-based system that automatically gathers and organizes 
information from the World Wide Web for personal or workgroup use. Given a specification of user interest 
in the form of thesaurus topics, WebCompass performs metasearch to retrieve potentially relevant Web 
pages, and then automatically summarizes, classifies and clusters the retrieved Web pages, creating a 
relational database of metadata about Web pages, organized by topic. WebCompass periodically updates 
the database, providing the user with an up-to-date overview of Web content of interest. Contact Person 
Bradley P, Allen, Limbex Corporation, 13160 Mindano Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292, USA, Tel: 1-310-309-4281, 
Fax: +1­310-309-4282, E-mail: bpa@limbex.tom, http://www. limbex.cond Querying Hierarchically Structured 
Texts with Generalized Context-free Grammars Yves Marcoux and Martin Sevigny Abstract The system demonstrated 
is a prototype of information retrieval system for hierarchically structured text. It is based on a new 
model in which queries are expressed as generalized context-free grammars that allow complementation 
and intersection operations on the right-hand side of productions. The prototype also incorporates new 
user-interface elements especially designed for assisting users in retrieving information from large 
structured­document bases, Such elements include succinct and detailed guides to the structure of the 
document base. The prototype is demonstrated operating on a document base of SGML documents. Contact 
Person Yves Marcoux, EBSI, Universit6 de Montr6al, C.P. 6128, Succursale Centre-ville, Montr6al, Quebec, 
Canada H3C 3J7, Tel: +1-514-343-7750, Fax: +1-514-343-5753, E-mail: marcoux@ere.unmontreal .ca The CD-ROM 
of Crete: A Multimedia Tourism Application, Based on Geographic Interaction and Information Retrieval 
Techniques N. Moumoutzis and M. Frangonikolakis Abstract During the last years, MUSIC has undertaken 
a number of competitive research and development projects in the area of multimedia tourism information 
systems. A powerful model has been elaborated supporting the detailed description of areas of touristic 
interest with their sites and facilities hierarchically organized. An extensive multimedia information 
base for the region of Crete has been established. Tools have been developed to maintain this information 
base. A hypermedia model has been implemented in order to create hypermedia presentations with detailed 
and accurate geographic maps, diagrams and architectural sketches. Commercially available tools have 
been integrated for creating synthetic multimedia presentations, virtual navigations, and multimedia 
data processing. Graphical queries supported are classified into (a) boolean queries, that are expressed 
graphically on trees representing type hierarchies and (b) similarity queries, that are meaningful only 
for type hierarchies with weights. These two classes of queries can be combined together. The CD-ROM 
of Crete is an Interactive Multimedia Tourism Application developed on this Software Bench that exploits 
all the above mentioned capabilities. Contact Person Nekatoris Moumoutzis, Multimedia Systems Center 
S.A., Proti Parodos Karaiskaki, Kounoupidiana, Chania, Greese 73110, Tel: +30-83 1-64803, Fax: +30-821-69720, 
E-mail: nektar@ced.tuc.gr 339 
			