
 Figure1: Drawing Characters Figure2: Creating Stories onTabletop Figure3:ASnapshotof Animation 1 Introduction 
From childhood, we often make stories extemporarily by drawing characters and/or playing puppets by hands. 
On the other hand, when we make animations using computer software, we usually haveto usea mouseandakeyboard.For 
creating animation stories easily and extemporarily, more intuitive interfaces are needed. To improve 
these conditions, recently several systems for digi­tal storytelling have been proposed [Lindinger et 
al. 2006][Barnes et al. 2008][Igarashi et al. 2005]. This time, we focused on tabletop physical objects 
as an interface and propose a novel support sys­tem for creating animations named Tablescape Animation 
. In this system, users can draw charactersby hands and control the charac­ter actions by handling tabletop 
physical objects as well as playing puppets. In the result, an animation is generated in a computer. 
 2 Tablescape Animation In this system, users make animations in three processes as follow­ings. In the 
.rst process, users draw characters on a tablet monitor. Users illustrateseveral patternsofa character(e.g. 
frontview,back view, side view, running pose, jumping pose). For switching these illustrations of the 
character, users also set animation rules. The second process is for controlling characters. Character 
im­ages are projected onto the physical objects on a tabletop display. Users can control the characters 
by moving and connecting these objects. According to the animation rules, images change in real­time. 
Moreover,users can record theirvoices throughamicrophone to match characters actions taking place on 
the tabletop. In the third process, an animation is generated in a monitor accord­ingtothe characterimages,theactiondataandthe 
usersvoicedata. In this process, users can change the virtual camera position inter­actively, while watching 
the animation. Finally, this system writes this animation to a video .le. *e-mail: tabletop@hc.ic.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 3 Implementation and Future Works We have implemented a prototype system of Tablescape Anima­tion. As 
shown in Figure 1, users can draw character images and set rules interactively. In the current implementation, 
we utilized a pentablet(WACOMCintiq21UX).Asfortherulesetting, usersas­sign conditions for switching illustrations 
among prepared options. To display and control the characters, we utilized our tabeltop dis­play system 
Tablescape Plus [Kakehi et al. 2007]. This system can project different images both onto the table surface 
and onto upstandingphysical objects simultaneously. Thus, users can see the characters and a background 
image on the tabletop without wear­ing anyspecial equipment (see Figure 2). Moreover, the actions of 
the characters change accordingto the rules. Then, users canwatch the generated animationina computer 
monitor. Figure3showsa snapshot of the animation. In the future, we plan to hold workshops for kids with 
this system anddevelopa graphical programmingenvironmenttoset morevar­ious and complex animation rules 
and effects in intuitive ways. References BARNES,C., ETAL. 2008.Video Puppetry:APerformative Inter­face 
for Cutout Animation. In Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH ASIA) 27 (5),ACM. IGARASHI, T., ET 
AL. 2005. As-Rigid-As-Possible Shape Ma­nipulation. In Transactions on Computer Graphics(Proc. SIG-GRAPH2005) 
24 (3),ACM. KAKEHI, Y., NAEMURA, T., AND MATSUSHITA, M. 2007. Ta­blescape Plus: Interactive Small-sized 
Displays Upstanding on Tabletop Display. InTabletop 2007, IEEE, 155 162. LINDINGER, C., ET AL. 2006. 
Mixed Reality Installation Gul­liver s World : Interactive Content Creation in Nonlinear Ex­hibition 
Design. In Technologies for Interactive Digital Story­telling and Entertainment, 312 323. Copyright is 
held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2009, New Orleans, Louisiana, August 3 7, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-726-4/09/0008 
 
			