
 TAG You re I.T. Jennifer McIntosh-Elkins Valparaiso University 1410 Chapel Drive Valparaiso, IN 46383 
01-219-464-6141 Jeni.McIntosh-Elkins@valpo.edu ABSTRACT With a new CIO on board bringing new methodologies, 
procedures, and department restructures, Valparaiso University s Office of Information Technology was 
presented with the challenge of managing the changing culture of their department. Their answer: develop 
the TAG (Teamwork Achieving Goals) Team. This team was given the responsibility of providing social events 
for staff members; providing recognition for jobs well done; and providing seminars and quick training 
activities to enhance team-building, communication, and work styles. The development of the ABC (Above 
and Beyond the Call) award has provided only one of many avenues of recognition used by this team. Their 
first event, a root beer float social, included a prize drawing and a survey that assisted in the development 
of other events, seminars, and a web page to provide more information about each other and to allow new 
staff members to identify everyone in the department. This team has helped the IT department keep morale 
and motivation up through the transitions.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.1 Project and People 
Management  General Terms Management, Human Factors. Keywords Team building, Recognition, Training, 
Social Interaction, Communication 1. INTRODUCTION Valparaiso University is a coeducational, four-year, 
private residential Lutheran institution located in northwest Indiana. Our Information Technology department 
serves approximately 3,000 undergraduate and 900 graduate and Law School students, 350 faculty, and 625 
staff members, as well as Valparaiso University retirees and community members. This is a total customer 
base of more than 5,000. In the Office of Information Technology, we Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7 10, 2007, Orlando, Florida, 
USA. Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010...$5.00. have 36 full-time staff members in the departments 
of Network and User Services, Management Information Systems, Instructional and Learning Services, and 
Administration. Additionally, we recently added a new student employment program, IT Fellows, that allows 
us to employ up to 100 student staff. This new program is an honors program of student employment and 
replaces our present student aide employment program. Trying to find ways to bring everyone together 
as a cohesive unit despite varied backgrounds is the challenge of our new TAG (Teamwork Achieving Goals) 
team. The academic year 2006-2007 brought to our department a new CIO and new thoughts. This year has 
brought a lot of change and developments to our organization. Knowing that change is not easy and wanting 
to recognize the efforts of our staff, the development of the TAG team was part of the effort to provide 
opportunities for interaction among staff members, including professional skill-building activities, 
community service, and casual social events. It was developed on the premise that, if we build better 
relationships, we can work more effectively as a team. 2. TEAM DEVELOPMENT The first hurdle to jump 
over was how to formulate a team that would have the charge of bringing people together, providing ways 
for them to interact, developing mechanisms of recognition, and creating new methods of training. Another 
initial concern was how we could keep this group from becoming stale or taking too much from one group 
of employees. Our Marketing and Communications Committee decided to make this new group a standing committee 
that would rotate members. Two permanent members would be selected and would serve a two year term. Five 
other members would be selected to serve a term of six months and then rotate to new membership. Thus, 
we could have the ideas of many members rotating through this committee, and more voices would be heard. 
To begin the process, we began the two permanent members with differing lengths of terms one serving 
only a year and the other serving the standard of two years. This way, there would always be a permanent 
member with the history of the most recent actions of the group who could continue the momentum. The 
first set of temporary members (six-month standard term) was asked to serve nine months to allow the 
group to develop the drive we needed. Once the structure was established, the committee looked at our 
staff list to identify members from each department within our group and looked for a blend of personality 
types to allow for better chances of participation across the department. A list of possible permanent 
and temporary members was developed along with a few alternates should there be any who could not serve 
for some reason. Nominees were notified. Once they accepted, the team was developed. 3. WHO ARE WE? 
Once nominations were accepted, we began to meet. With our present emphasis on marketing, our first question 
of the day was what to call this group. We had already gotten the nickname of the fun committee and we 
needed to have a way to identify ourselves as we moved forward. We gathered together and brainstormed 
several ideas. Some of our group members wanted to hold on to the fun name in some way and came up with 
the idea of playing with this term and computerizing it into the acronym phun, meaning People Helping 
to Unite Nerds. However, we quickly learned that various members of the group disliked it because it 
may be seen as not inclusive or inviting to all of the staff. So .Phun or fun was out for our name. The 
name became a stumbling block for our group, and we started with brainstorming different terms over a 
few meetings. As we continued to brainstorm, we tried to find an acronym that would be fun and easy to 
remember. We had several lists of words with a variety of terms and played with ideas until we uncovered 
TAG. TAG is used to mean Teamwork Achieving Goals. We then took the concept one step further and stepped 
back into our fun role and developed a marketing scheme of TAG You re I.T. 4. OUR FIRST EVENT How to 
get the ball rolling and introduce ourselves was our next dilemma. Our answer was to invite all department 
members to gather to receive a surprise at an appointed time and place. The surprise was to be a root 
beer social where the only focus was to interact with each other. Staff members were given a tag invitation 
with TAG You re I.T. on one side and A treat is coming your way! Visit: www.valpo.edu/it/tag for more 
info written on the other side. At the website, only the time and location of the event was listed, and 
TAG team members were sworn to secrecy. It was not long before staff resorted to many methodologies to 
try to get the information from committee members. However, we held fast to the information, the day 
came, and so did our staff. As our colleagues came in the door, they were greeted and given the option 
of a root beer or coke float. We also provided snack items such as cookies, chips and salsa, and pretzels 
for their enjoyment. For two hours, staff members were allowed to interact, take a brief survey of their 
interests, and participate in a drawing for the grand prize of what else? A gift certificate for more 
ice cream from the local Cold Stone Creamery--won by one of the newest members of our staff. 5. THE 
SURVEY At our first event, we gave everyone a survey to find out what items we should be planning to 
enhance the level of participation in events. Questions asked included the following: What activities/hobbies 
do you pursue outside of work? What is an interesting piece of information about yourself that most 
people do not know, and would like to know?  If you were to schedule an event to help build camaraderie 
within the department what would it be?  What team building event would you most likely attend?  What 
kind of presentations/speakers would you like to see to help build communication within the department? 
 Additionally, we used this survey to introduce the three main goals of the committee by placing the 
following at the bottom of the survey: The TAG Team strives to provide . . . Social interaction to bind 
our staff together Seminars to enhance communication and work styles Recognition for jobs well done At 
the end of our Root Beer Social, we calculated the survey results. We used them to assist us in developing 
events tailored to our staff s interests and activities. We were not terribly surprised to learn that 
what would literally bring our staff to the table at events was food. Additionally, we found an interest 
in charitable causes, athletic events, and seminars providing real information such as communication 
methods and work styles. We plan to use these results in establishing/developing upcoming events and 
training sessions. 6. ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES 6.1 Welcoming Candidates Our department is beginning a new 
program next year called IT Fellows, an honors program of student employment. As such, we were recruiting 
high school seniors to the program and had scheduled two days for them to come to campus and interview 
for a slot in the program. Once selected for this program, the fellows participate in a year-long training 
program prior to serving year­long internships through their college years. The goal is to prepare the 
students for their future careers. Although they are student employees, they will join our staff as peers. 
As such, the TAG team jumped into action and sponsored a Green Room for the candidates and the family 
members who came with them. We opened the room one hour prior to the interview sessions and closed it 
one hour after. It assisted the process by giving all candidates one location to report to even though 
there were multiple interview locations. It also allowed the interviewers better control of their time 
as they all picked up the candidates from the same location. Additionally, we used this room to provide 
refreshments and information about the new program to nervous parents. A side benefit to this room was 
the casual conversation that it allowed between interviewers and interviewees and their family members. 
The more casual atmosphere allowed for pleasantries and conversations to occur that otherwise would not 
have happened and would have made us miss the bigger picture in some of our candidates. The room helped 
to calm the nerves of our candidates and permitted their parents a place to gather information about 
the place and the programs they were considering for their children. Overall, this initiative of having 
a holding area for candidates and family members served our new program well and will be used in the 
years to come. 6.2 Enter Stage Right Within our department, there was a group that was known for not 
participating in much of anything. Many a time, we would try to get them involved in picnics and other 
events only to hear that they did not have time or were too busy or Imagine our surprise when they were 
one of the first groups to approach our newly formed TAG Team with a fundraising concept for participating 
in the Porter County Relay for Life--a non-profit group that was near and dear to the team for many reasons. 
We readily accepted the challenge and began coordinating the effort to support this area of our department 
in their interest. 6.1.1 The Team and Its Goals Our department began our event by establishing a team. 
Our goal was to have 20 members and raise $2,000. At the writing of this paper, we are still involved 
in this event. However, we presently have recruited 22 I.T. staff members on our team and have raised 
over $3,000 for the non-profit organization. Next, we had to start planning fundraising events. 6.1.2 
The Fundraisers One of the fundraising events was a preplanned carnival game type event hosted at a local 
business on a Sunday afternoon. Many ideas were explored for this event including I.T. Trivia, I.T. Jeopardy, 
etc. In the end, however, we settled for a duck pull game, in which rubber duckies with hidden labels 
were pulled from a pool, with candies and other small items as prizes. We staffed the event and profited 
about $40 for four hours of effort in addition to the amount promised by the sponsoring organization 
that pledged $1,000 to be divided among the teams who participated. For our individual fundraising event, 
our team decided to rely on one of our strengths food. We sponsored a BBQ on campus with brats, burgers, 
hot dogs, chips, drinks, baked goods, etc. With very little advertising (due to time constraints), we 
were able to profit $300 for a four hour time span. We are planning to increase the results of this effort 
in the future by marketing the event well in advance. We are most definitely looking forward to our next 
BBQ event. In addition to providing money to a worthy cause, our team quickly realized the public relations 
benefit of our efforts as we interacted with the campus as a whole. It truly was beneficial on many levels. 
 6.1.3 The Relay We have one more event in this endeavor where all the teams gather and finalize the 
fundraising efforts. We will have completed our efforts with this non-profit organization by the end 
of June. Even so, we have already surpassed all of our goals and have enjoyed the process. [Don t you 
also have to do the relay itself? Do you expect that to be a good social event for the IT staff? Can 
you update this section before you submit the paper?]  7. STAFF PICNIC As stated earlier, food is a 
motivator among our staff. Traditionally, we have had a Christmas potluck and an end of the school year 
picnic. As this team has taken over the social events of the department, we have inherited these items 
as well. We began to plan for the staff picnic and tried to find new ways to increase the social side 
of the event. As our student staff picnic had been hosted at my home the previous week, we had noticed 
that some of the outdoor games were popular with the full time staff who had attended. Thus, we added 
a bean bag toss to our plans for the full time staff picnic. The toss game was a success in bringing 
together our staff members with a little friendly competition. We are looking forward to adding additional 
games to future picnics both athletic such as basketball and some not so athletic such as card games. 
Another item that was added to the picnic this year was that our Help Desk was notified that we would 
all be at the picnic for a two hour duration and that we were to be paged if needed .but we allowed all 
of our staff the ability to be off campus and participate as a reward for a job well done. As usual, 
we had recruited our famous grillmeisters (mostly because they run the grills at all our events), to 
run the grills. We had an excellent array of items to choose from in the food arena. All in all, we had 
a very good time that day and great weather! 8. STAFF MEETINGS As part of our charge, we were to provide 
seminars and training. We have started moving toward this objective by providing an activity at each 
staff meeting. At our most recent staff meeting, our colleagues were given assigned seats so that they 
would be seated next to members that they may not normally sit with on their own. Next, each table was 
given the charge to find ten items that they all had in common and they could not include things like 
clothing or body parts (as in we all have two eyes, etc.). We had the normal we all live in such and 
such county or we all like to cook but we also found some travelers, some Simpson fans, baseball fans 
(though of rival teams), and a few other items that we had not known before. It is our plan to continue 
providing some informational activity at each meeting. Additionally, we plan to look at both external 
and internal sources to provide additional seminars to our full time staff. 9. RESULTS ALREADY SEEN Prior 
to this group, we had always gathered at least twice a year to partake in a potluck or picnic event in 
addition to any staff meetings that we held. However, the development of this group has provided our 
staff with a new outlet for ideas to bring our staff together and to provide recognition and training 
opportunities that did not previously exist. As previously indicated we have seen non-participating members 
of the past jump in and bring a new excitement to our group. We have learned more about each other in 
the past year than we had known previously and are working as a more cohesive unit. Although we have 
not had 100% percent participation in our events, we have seen successes both great and small. Our department 
is open to the concepts and participates in a variety of ways. With the fundraiser, there were those 
who jumped in and worked while others merely stopped by to purchase their lunch and offer their support. 
Either way, they participated in the process. There are those who look at it as forced fun even as they 
participate. However, it is small steps to the main objective and we are creating waves in the department. 
Who would have thought that 22 of us would be raising $3,000 in a short time for a portion of the department 
that used to not participate in much of anything? Who would have developed the casual conversation that 
occurred between candidates, parents and staff that allowed us to calm nerves and have better interviews? 
How else would we have had some of the casual conversations that have led to better programs and projects 
in the department? All in all, TAG You re I.T. has allowed us the ability to create and develop new items 
and, in the process, has assisted us with the public relations aspect of our department. The TAG team 
is looking at events for the entire year that will allow us to keep this momentum. 10. FUTURE PLANS Although 
we have readily identified the ABC (Above and Beyond the Call) award as a mechanism of recognition, we 
have yet to define its parameters and its usage. It is our hope to implement this new program of recognition 
soon so that we can identify those colleagues who do just that go Above and Beyond the Call in any given 
situation. We plan to develop seminars of training in a variety of areas including both IT related topics 
and soft skill topics in areas such as communication, work styles, etc. We also plan to continue working 
through the responses to our survey so that our events will coincide with the interests indicated by 
our staff members and so that everyone will have something that they enjoy. At this writing, all the 
planned events have not yet taken place, so at our presentation we will be able to more fully report 
enhanced customer experience, staff growth, and related projects and programs resulting from the TAG 
Team's efforts Additionally, once our respective terms are over, new members will take our place with 
new ideas, skill sets, and approaches. There is no telling just how far TAG You re I.T. will go. 11. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I wish to express my thanks to all the members of the newly formed TAG Team: Richard 
Orelup (System analyst/programmer), Judie Wilusz (Secretary), Kevin Ledbetter (Training Specialist), 
Michelle Alyea (Novell Network Specialist), Joanne Pesavento (One-Card Office Manager), and Heather Peters 
(Senior Web Developer). If you are looking for the seventh member, that would be me (Jeni Elkins, Coordinator 
of the I.T. Fellows Program &#38; Coordinator of the Help Desk). I would also like to thank all the members 
of our department. Their acceptance and participation in the new program has assisted in the development 
of our present and future successes.   
			