
 Teaqhing the Empiricd Approach to Designing Human- Computer Interaction via an Experiential Group Project 
 Matthew C. Clarke clarke@cs.unp.ac.za Computer Science and Information Systems University of Natal, 
Pietermaritzburg 1 South Africa / i Abstract * -I I: Empirical research plays an important role in the 
design of user-interfaces and is frequently included in university courses on human-computer interaction. 
For instance, the ACM SIGCHI guidelines refer to the importance of empirical research, although they 
do not specify how this approach to user-interface design should be taught. In an Honours (fourth-year) 
course at the University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg, the theoretical foundation of empirical research 
is augmented with a real experience of running a simple experiment. This experiment is planned, executed 
and analysed by the class as a whole. This paper idescriies the type of empirical studies carried out 
and discusses the benefits and limitations of such studies in this educational context. I 1 . Curricula 
for Human-Computer . Interaction Eberts and Eberts [5] identity four strategies for making decisions 
about user-interface design issues -the empiri- cal, cognitive, predictive modelling and anthropomorphic 
approaches.Theoretical aspects of each of these often appear in human-computer interaction @ICI) curricula 
and some. curricula even include project work to add a practical experience to the theory. There is a 
great benefit to be gained by students actually experiencing these design strategies rather than just 
learning about such research methods theoretically and it is the thesis of this paper that such experiences 
can and should be included in HCI courses. The paper suggests the sort .of project which would provide 
the experiential element for the empirical approach The ACM SIGCHI has suggested four curricula for HCI, 
namely The Human Aspects of Information Systems, User Inteflace Design and Development, Psychology of 
Human-Computer Interaction and Phenomena and Theories of Human-Computer Interaction [l]. The last of 
these includes some exposure to empirical methods, and suggests addition readings to support this topic 
[2, 121. But the curricuhun in which empirical methods play a larger role is P.ychologv of Human-Computer 
Interaction. This curricula assumesa background in applied statistics and experimental methods, and suggests 
that a later HCI Laboratory course might be the appropriate place in which / to put the theory into 
practice. None of the four curricula suggested by the SIGCHI include practical experience of empirical 
research methodology. There are at least the following two reasons for thinking that a greater emphasis 
on experiential exposure to empirical methods would benefit the student of HCI rather than just giving 
them a theoretical exposure to these ideas. Firstly, a well-established principle in much recent educational 
theory indicates that learning is constructed on experience. That is, experience provides the concrete 
foundation for the learning process. Understanding of abstract concepts is built through observation 
and reflection on experience [7]. One needn t be a Constructivist to recognise the difliculty of teaching 
abstract concepts when the learner has no experience of any instances of those concepts. In an ,HCI course 
which covers empirical methodology, the theoretical issues are more likely to be properly understood 
if the learner has seen examples of actual empirical research and even more so if they have participated 
in such research. Secondly, a wealth of research shows that students have difficulty transferring concepts 
learnt in one domain to a new domain (see, for instance, [ll]). They may learn of empirical research 
methods in another course, but not be able to applythese methods to user-interface design. Unless connections 
are explicitly ,made ,during the teaching process, it is likely that students will not make a clear connection 
between what they learn in an applied statistics course and what they learn in an HCI course. Participating 
in an experiment related to user-interface design is an effective technique for overcoming the difliculties 
of transfer. 2. Outline of the Teaching Approach at the University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg At the 
University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg, Honours students (that is, students in their fourth and linal 
year of a Bachelor s degree) may enrol in the course Human Factors of Computers which includes a substantial 
section on user- interface design. Various approaches to user-interIhce .design are studied, supported 
by readings such as [4], [S], [6] and [lo]. The theory presented in the lectures and readings is augmented 
with a major project which is completed by the class as a whole. The project requires the class to work 
together on the design, execution and analysis of some actual, though un-origim&#38; empirical research, 
typically in the form of a single-factor experiment Over an eight-week period, the Lecturer guides the 
group through the standard process of the experimental method. Some class time is spent on this project, 
,but the majority of work is carried out by the students outside class time. The phases of the experimental 
method - conception, de- sign, execution, analysis, and dissemination and -decision making-are well described 
in Chapter 4 of [6], ,adequate extracts of which were previously published as [9]. These six phases are 
applied to the HCI project as follows. 2.1. Conception To begin with, the Lecturer presents several 
possible topics for study but the class should be allowed to suggest other topics. Through negotiation, 
the class chases a topic which is both interesting and feasible. The chosen topic must be simple enough 
to provide a meaningfbl experience within the constraints of time and student competence. Bather than 
engage in pioneering work, we have always chosen topics which have been previously researched-the class 
s objet- tive is then to attempt to confirm previously reported con- elusions. The following topics have 
been examined over the past several years - -9 The effect of keyboard layout on novice typing speed. 
The class set up four types of keyboard - Qwerty, Dvorak, alphabetic and one on which the keys were arranged 
to read The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog . Subjects with no prior typing, experience were 
set some simple typing exercises and their speed (and incidentally their error rates) was measured over 
a twenty minute period. The data allowed some discussion of which layout was best suited to novice typists. 
. The effect of screen colours on time and err&#38; rate. In response to some earlier theoretical discussions 
on the importance of choosing appropriate colour combinations in computer software, the class in one 
year decided to study which colour combinations really did enhance or detract from efficient task completion. 
All subjects were assigned the same sequence of object-counting tasks but the foreground and background 
colours varied for each treatment group. By comparing the, time taken to complete the tasks and the extent 
of mis-counting in each treatment group, some conclusions could be drawn about the visual efficacy of 
the tested colour combina- tions. . Intuit&#38; interpretatioo? of icons. One type of icon commonly used 
in graphical userlinterfaces is a button which represents the status of some feature. Such a button has 
two positions -in and out - which corre- spend to the feature being on and off. Without addi- tional 
cues, the setting of a button is ambiguous - does the in position represent on and out represent off; 
. orvice-versa? Even when labels such as On or Off are added, au ambiguity remains - does a button la- 
belled On mean that the feature is currently switched on, or that the button should be pressed in order 
to turn the feature on? The class created an artitlcial task in which, fictional room lights were to 
be turned on and/or off using simple button icons. One treatment group was given buttons with labels 
and another without. The way the buttons were configured by the subjects in order to fhlfil the set task 
indicated the subjects natural interpretation of the buttons two positions. . The e#ect of font on reading 
speed. According to received wisdom, large amounts of text are more easily read when typeset in a serif 
rather than sans-serif typeface. The class decided to test whether this was still the case when text 
was being read from a computer screen rather than from paper. Two treatment groups were given the same 
text to read, but presented in difl%mnt fonts. Three simple comprehension questions were asked at the 
end to ensure that the automatically- recorded reading times were not invalidated by subjects who didn 
t actually read the text. l Technophobia. In the latest version of the course, the class steered away 
from the previous sort of experimen- tal . studies. and opted to replicate a Technophobia survey which 
had previously been undertaken in 23 other countries [13]. Although this study did not involve much. 
design since the survey instrument was identical to that used in, previous studies, this still provided 
a rich experience of data collection, analysis and report writing. After a topic has been selected, the 
students are required to read previous research in the field in order to gain an understanding of the 
issues they will address in their own experiment. This background reading may include references supplied 
by the Lecturer, but should also require the students to search for references themselves through . information 
resources in libraries and on the Internet. 2.2. Design As a group, the class and Lecturer need to precisely 
define the goal of the research in the form of null and alternate hypotheses, These terms need to be 
properly theoretically grounded through readings and input f?om the Lecturer, but the hypotheses should 
not be given to the class by the Lecturer. Bather, the students should show their understanding of the 
theoretical issues by coming up with an appropriate wording themselves. The construction of hypotheses 
will also require an understanding of the dependant and independent variables. Once again these and other 
potentially confounding variables should be identified by the class with the Lecturer playing a facilitative 
role. Once the goal has been clearly specified, the class determines which experimental structure will 
best test the hypothesis, ,The best approach may be to replicate a previous experiment, but whatever 
the decision, it will be based on the literature review already completed. Associated with the experimental 
structure, further decisions are made about what data needs to be collected and how will it be analysed. 
I, Apart from the,desigu of the experiment, this phase also includes, the specification of any software 
(and perhaps hardware) required for the experiment. It is helpful at this stage to split the class into 
task groups to subdivide responsibility for the hardware/sofbvare preparation, and for each of the following 
phases. 2:3. Preparation The Lecturer ,will probably be required to assist with logistical matters such 
as booking a venue for the experiment at appropriate times. Some arrangement must be made for enlisting 
subjects, typically student volunteers. Appropriate hardware must be configured and the specified software 
must be coded and tested. 2.4. Execution Once the preparation is complete - the experimental apparatus 
set up and tested and the subjects scheduled to turn up to the appointed venue -the task group responsible 
for running the experiment takes over. In the first four examples given in Section 2.1, the experiment 
entailed subjects interacting with PCs in batches of 30 (dictated by the capacity of the computer lab). 
Each experimental session follows the same pattern -the subjects are seated; instructions are given by 
one of the students; the subjects complete the required tasks while the computer automatically records 
the necessary measure- ments; the subjects are thanked for their time as they leave. To maximise participation, 
we have usually allowed several students to instruct and supervise the subjects during the experiment. 
However, a script is prepared beforehand so that the instructions are consistent across multiple experimental 
sessions. 2.5. Analysis The data from the numerous experimental sessions is collated and analysed by 
the next task group. The analysis is reasonably simple given the simple structure of the experiment and 
may be undertaken with a standard statistical package such as Statgraphics or SPSS. The analysis typically 
requires hypothesis testing based on a single-factor experimental design. 2.6. Dissemination and decision 
making The final task of the project is to write up the experimental findings in an acceptable academic 
style. This report should include the background to the research, the goal and methods used, the results 
of the dam analysis and a discussion of their implications for Mure user-interface design. The report 
should also show a clear understanding of the limitations of the research and describe the lessons which 
the class learnt from the experience. One task group may be responsible for collating and formatting 
thii report, but all task groups should write up their own section. 3: Benefits and Lfmltatlons As indicated 
in Section 1, the two intended benefits of project work such as that suggested here relate to the educational 
value of building theory on experience and of making explicit the application of previous knowledge to 
the current context. However, there are benefits other than , these, as well as some limitations. One 
notable result of providing a practical experience of empirical research is that students enthusiasm 
for the course seems to be increased. The practical experience helps to make the theory real for them. 
Working through the practicalities of an actual experiment motivates the student to understand the theory. 
Consequently, the students complete the course with a much greater understanding of the benefits and 
limitations of the empirical approach Apart from learning about the content of the project (i.e. the 
specific empirical issue being studied) and learning about the process of empirical research, these sort 
of group projects also promote learning about how to manage the logistics of venues, resources and people 
(both team members and experimental subjects), about written and verbal communication, and about teamwork 
and interpersonal interaction. Computer science students are not lmown for their abilities in written 
communication, however, they frequently find themselves in situations requiring such abilities after 
they graduate. In academia, industry and commerce computing professionals need to be able to write well 
for technical documentation, user guides, tenders and tender responses, funditig proposals, project progress 
reports etc. A comput- ing degree which does not include some substantial writing does not equip graduates 
for these needs. Projects of this sort will rarely yield significant results. Since the project has to 
be completed within the time and resource constraints of a 0neLsemester course, the sample size is likely 
to be fairly small. There are likely to be unforeseen problems when it comes to actually running the 
experiment but there is unlikely to be suBicient time to rectify any mistakes or repeat the experimentl. 
This may be seen as a limitation, but it must be kept in mind that the aim is not to produce novel research, 
but to.use a simple research topic for the purpose of educating the students. The students are novices 
and should not be expected to i / f ! I : execute the research perfectly. Nevertheless, they shouldnot 
be seen simply as research assistants to the Lecturer -the class needs to take responsibility for the 
project and its consequentsuccessor failure. Group work itself can cause some difficulties such as personality 
clashes and mis-communication. The Lecturer will need to play a fhcilitating/managing role to ensure 
that the group operates effectively. Group work also raises the question of how individuals within the 
group will be assessed. It may not be the case that all members of the group contributed equally and 
so it need not be the case that all members receive the same mark for the project There are various strategies 
for handling group mark allocation (see [3] and its reference list for general comments, and [S] for 
an example in a computer science course) and this need not be seen as a problem. 4. Conclusion Empirical 
studies play an important role in helping to make choices between user-interface design options. Many 
courses in human-computer interaction note the importance of empirical methods and in particular of experimentation. 
This paper has suggested that the topic of empirical research methodology should not just be presented 
to students in the abstract, but that their grasp of the topic will be greatly enhanced by giving them 
a real experience of designing and rmming an experiment, and of aualysing and reporting on the resulting 
data. Such experiences in empirical methods can be orchestrated to suit the abilities of novice researchers 
and the constraints of a one-semester course. The idea has been successfully implemented for several 
years in at the University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg. The benefits of such an experience may be summarised 
as follows- l The project provides au experiential basis for the subsequent understanding of theoretical 
issues in empirical research l The explicit link to prior knowledge aids knowledge transfer from the 
general domain of statistics to the specific domain of human-computer interaction. l The novelty of the 
experience increases student interest and motivation. l The process provides an exposure to broader .iife-skills 
such as verbal and written communication, and inter- personalinteractionina team. References 1. ACM SIGCHI 
Curricula for Human Computer Interaction, ACM Press, 1992 2. Campbell, S. K. Flaws and Fallacies in 
Statistical i%inking, Prentice-Hall, 1974 3. Conway, R, Kember, D., Sivan, A., and Wu, M. Peer Assessment 
of an Individual s Contribution to a  Group Project, Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 18,l 
(1983), pp. 45-56 4. Finlay, J., Abowd, G., Beale, R, and Dix, A. J. Human-Cqmputer Interaction, Prentice-Ha&#38; 
1997 5. Eberts, R E., and Eberts C. G. Four Approaches to Human-Computer Interaction. In Hancock, P. 
A., and Chignell, M. H. (eds) Intelligent Interfaces: Theory, &#38;search andDesign, North-Holland, 1989 
 6. Fenton, N. E., and Pfleeger, S. L. Sofzwae Metrics: A rigorous and practical approach, International 
Thomson, 1997 7. Kolb, D. A. Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of Iearning and development, 
Prentice-Hall, 1984 8. McNeill, J: B. Peer Appraisal of Group Projects, Proceedings of the 27th Annual 
Conference of the Southern A>ican Computer Lecturers Association, (1997) 9. Pfleeger, S. L. Experimental 
Design and Analysis in Software Engineering (Parts 1, 2 and 3), Software EngineeringNotes (Ott 1994, 
Jan 1995, Apr 1995) 10. Shneiderman, B. Designing the User Inteijke -Strategies for effective human-computer 
interaction, Addison-Wesley, 1992 11. Singley, M. K. The Transfer of Cognitive Skills, Harvard University, 
1989 12. Solso, R. L. An Introduction tb Experimental Design in Psychology: A case approach, Harper 
and ROW, 1984 13. We&#38; M. M., and Rosen, L. D. The Psychological Impact of Technology from a Global 
Perspective, Computers in Behaviour 11, 1 (1995)  Endnotes : l One particular pro blem which has arisen 
several times springs from inadequate software testing. Students will write a program for the experiment 
and test it with one or two users, but &#38;il to test it with a whole room of networked machines operated 
by the intended user population. The students are used to writing programs for which they are the only 
users, and fail to make the experimental software scalable or foolproof. There may be embarrassment when 
the software fails during the first session of the experiment and some data may have to be discarded, 
but this itselfprovides a learning experience. P~=ion to m&#38;e G$dhrd copies material for of all or 
part offis persona Or c~assmm use is granted Without fee provided aat the copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or cmnmercia~ advantage, the copy- rightuoti% the title ofthe publication and its &#38;te 
appw, ;md notice is given *at WPti ght in by permission oftbe ACM, Inc. -r. copy ofi&#38;sp, to republih 
to Pod on servers or to redistribute to lib, requires speczo permission and/or fee. SIGSCE 98 AtlantaGA 
UsA CJJPYra 1998 o-8979L994-7/9812...$5.00 . .    
			