
 Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, and 
A. F. Seila TEACHING SIMULATION: A PANEL DISCUSSION CO-CHAIRS Sheldon H. Jacobson Douglas J. Morrice 
ISE Department MSIS Department Virginia Tech University of Texas at Austin Blacksburg, Virginia 24061-0118 
Austin; Texas 78712-1175 PANELISTS David H. Withers Enver Yucesan W. David Kelton PO Box 933 INSEAD Department 
of Operations Mead Data Central European Institute of and Management Science Dayton, Ohio 45401 Business 
Administration Carlson School of Management Boulevard de Constance University of Minnesota 77305 Fontainebleau 
Cedex Minneapolis, MN 55455 France ABSTRACT 2 DAVID WITHERS The charge to the panel was, . . . what. 
. . are impor-This panel looks at the issue of teaching simulation. tant components of a simulation education 
and whatIt brings together three individuals with a wide diver­tools should students have when they complete 
a sim­sity of academic and industrial experience to discuss ulation course? I would prefer to address 
an alter­the key issues that should be taught in a simulation nate query: What skills should the BS/MS 
graduatecourse. Questions discussed include: Should a simula­(in a discrete event simulation curriculum) 
bring totion language or general modeling concepts be taught their first industrial assignment in modeling? 
The fol­in a simulation course? Should there be a difference lowing points are from the perspective of 
a managerbetween simulation courses taught to engineering and of industrial practitioners. business school 
students? What simulation tools and skills should be taught to satisfy the needs of industry Graduates 
should bring more than one approach who hire engineering and business school graduates? to the analysis 
of queuing systems: a skill in discrete These and other issues will be discussed. event simulation as 
well as an ability to deal with ana­lytic representations. If the only tool in your toolkit is a hammer, 
everything looks like a nail (unknown). Prospective modelers should possess something be- INTRODUCTION 
tween excellent and outstanding written and verbal communications skills, They should be capable of Over 
the past couple of years, there has been a grow­ing movement to revamp engineering and business Making 
formal presentations to peers, customers,school curricula. In several inst antes, these changes and domain 
experts, have had a direct impact on courses in OR/MS in general and simulation in particular. The main 
moti­ Preparing technical reports suitable for both ex­ vation for this panel was to bring together a 
group of ecutive and technical audiences, and experienced individuals from academia and industry to discuss 
simulation education, Describing an issue or concern in concise, non- The panelists will present their 
experiences and personal terms. perspectives on simulation education. In addition, they will also discuss 
future directions for the devel-Since approximately 50 percent of the modeler s opment and integration 
of simulation concepts into time is spent communicating with domain experts, a engineering and business 
curricula. knowledge of the domain of the system they will be 1378 Teaching modeling is crucial. They 
must at least know the vo­cabulary. A grounding in the sciences and engineer­ing is important, but equally 
so is an appreciation for literature, art, and business. Modelers must know how to build a model. See 
the IDEFO representation of the modeling process (With­ers et al. 1993). Critical skills are requirements 
as­similation, construction of a conceptual model, re­viewing one s own or another s model, building 
and debugging an executable model, holding a code re­view of one s own or another s model, designing 
the verification experiment, executing an experiment (keeping track of model versions, run conditions, 
etc.) ~ analyzing the results within and across runs, and developing and delivering a cogent report. 
Note that writing code is only one of many activities. An enthusiasm/thirst for additional knowledge 
and an appreciation for continuing education. BS grad­uates should know about at least one professional 
society and its publications. MS graduates should know about several relevant societies and their publi­cations. 
Any graduate should be a member of some­thing. Any graduate should know how to do a litera­ture search 
preferably using an electronic database. They should appreciate the advantage of continuing their education. 
A facility with at least one tool in each of the fol­lowing categories: High level programming language 
and an editor An operating system for PCs or workstations Spreadsheet Discrete event simulation language 
Word processor The selection should be from the most frequently used list in each category. Avoid special 
tools from aca­demic sources insist that the premier vendors pro­vide cost effective versions for student/educator 
use. ENVER YUCESAN For an MBA audience, the word (simulation has two immediate connotations: a spreadsheet 
exercise and a business game. My role as an instructor is to show that there is at least one more facet 
of the word sim­ulation which represents an extremely flexible anal­ysis tool. In doing so, however, 
I have to be extremely careful not to project the image that this tool is solely for engineers. I therefore 
frame the topic as process analysis. I try to drive home the idea that looking at the process Simulation 
1379 flow provides richer insights about the problem on hand than simply concentrating on a few frozen 
summary figures. This, in turn, may yield a wider portfolio of alternative solutions. Buzzwords such 
as time competition or business process re-engineering, which tend to take business schools by storm, 
are also helpful in generating interest and maintaining the enthusiasm. I then introduce tools for process 
analysis, starting from very simple ideas. Process flow diagrams (or process maps, as they are gloriously 
referred to re­cently) represent a good starting point depicting the key stages of a process in a natural 
fashion. This is fertile ground for further analysis. One can depict the different people and/or mechanisms 
responsible for the different stages of the process to identify any imbalances or to discover any holes. 
One can equally show the penetration point of different entities such as customers or {manufacturing 
division to iden­tify any mismatches. One can also superimpose pro­cessing time information and conduct 
a bottleneck analysis, measure the throughput time, identify the inventories. The next stage is to introduce 
the complicating scenarios such as sources of randomness or interac­ tions with other processes. Queueing 
models provide a rich portfolio of tools for representing the inherent variability in systems and its 
consequences. These models also enable a smooth transition to the discus­ sion of discrete-event simulation. 
For discrete-event simulation, I have two goals: For the do-it-yourselfers, I aim at providing the ba­sic 
principles needed to conduct sound experiments, hence, to avoid drawing any wrong conclusions. As for 
the others, I try to mould them into educated consumers of this technique so that, when they hire an 
engineer to do the job for them, they know the right questions to ask. In other words, they would get 
their money s worth. To this end, I follow the following outline in teach­ing discrete-event simulation: 
a Modeling and validation in process analysis Languages: strengths, weaknesses, criteria for adoption 
 Sources of randomness (coupled with spread­sheet exercises)  Basic variance reduction techniques (statistical 
efficiency)  Output analysis (comparisons, system design)  Support for decision making (ensuring the 
con­tinuing validity of models).  1380 Jacobson 4 W. DAVID KELTON My orders for this panel were to react 
to the above statements and to summarize, I ll try to do this, but will no doubt fail in avoiding the 
urge to elbow in a few gratuitous statements myself. Dave s piece focused on the fact that an analyst 
needs a toolbox with eclectic contents encompassing operations-research tools beyond just simulation, 
but also abilities well beyond O. R., like communication and an appreciation for the arts. This is a 
good ob­ ject lesson to those of us in universities in reminding us that we re not the point of the education 
indus­ try, as much as we might like to pretend that we are. Folks like Dave stand at the end of the 
pipeline and expect us to produce graduates who can actually do something. And so the question of what 
a simulation course ought to be is secondary, and derives only from the demand for our graduates skills. 
Dave re­ minds us that specialized simulation skills are not the only things he wants to see in a new 
graduate. Enver described the kinds of goals and approaches he uses in his classes, particularly with 
regard to the business-school environment. Key to this is his point that he teaches simulation in a context 
rather than as an isolated method with its own structure and inter­ nal justification. He faces a tough, 
skeptical audience, and must continually show cause as to why they are hearing about this, And, like 
Dave, Enver reminds us of breadth that simulation means a lot of very different things and it s essential 
that he sort these differences out for his students and put the picture in a larger and (for many of 
his students) more mean­ ingful setting. Are Dave and Enver in agreement? I think so. While Enver is 
looking at the production process of students that Dave would like to consume, both (interestingly) 
wind up stressing the breadth and the interdisciplinary nature of what they are about. En­ver needs to 
place simulation in a broader context of processes and flows, and Dave demands analysts (recently students) 
who can take simulation as one among many skills that they can apply appropriately and effectively. It 
is precisely this broad, interdisciplinary, eclec­tic nature of simulation that, in my opinion, gives 
it its strength; this also what drew me to it in the first place since it afforded me the opportunity 
to combine what I d learned in mathematics, probability, statis­tics, computer science, and stochastic 
processes (I m not so sure about the arts, but I probably just missed that). Simulation has always been 
a chameleon, and I suspect will continue to be so as it draws from what­ever sources seem appropriate 
to do the job. This et al. versatility and utter contempt for narrow dogma is reflected in Dave s demand 
for broad-thinking gradu­ ates, as well as in Enver s interesting menu of contexts for the classroom. 
I want to take Enver s class, then go work for Dave. I don t believe that there is a correct simulation 
course that can be prescribed, by me or anybody else. While it is obvious that differences in students, 
cur­ riculum, and potential employers should affect the particulars of a class, I think it is most important 
that the instructor exploit his or her own particular strengths (and, yes, maybe even biases). I m inter­ 
ested in computer networks so I do a lot of those kinds of examples in class; I know essentially noth­ 
ing about military operations and so I avoid such ex­ amples. The opposite might be true of somebody 
else, and the flavor of the class ought to shift accord­ ingly. This is what makes a class interesting 
(and, yes, maybe even fun) for everybody in the room. REFERENCE Withers, B. D., A.A.B. Pritsker, and 
D.H. Withers. A structured Definition of the modeling process. In Proceedings of the 1993 Winter Simulation 
Confer­ence, G. W. Evans, M, Mollaghasemi, E.C. Russell, and W.E. Biles (eds.), IEEE, 1993. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
SHELDON H. JACOBSON is an Assistant Pro­fessor in the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering 
at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech). He has a B. SC. and M. SC. in 
Mathematics from McGill University, and a Ph.D, in Operations Research from Cornell Univer­sity. His 
research interests include simulation opti­mization and sensitivity y analysis, frequency domain approaches 
to analyzing simulation outputs, and is­sues related to the complexity of analyzing structural properties 
of discrete event simulation models. DOUGLAS J. MORRICE is an assistant profes­sor in the Department 
of Management Science and Information Systems at The University of Texas at Austin. He received his undergraduate 
degree in Operations Research at Carleton University in Ot­tawa, Canada. He holds a M.S. and Ph.D. in 
Opera­tions Research and Industrial Engineering from Cor­nell University. His research interests include 
discrete event and qualitative simulation modeling, the statis­tical design and analysis of large scale 
simulation ex­periments, and the statistical aspects of quality con­trol. He is a member of the The Institute 
of Manage­ Teaching Simulation ment Science and the Operations Research Society of America. DAVID H. 
WITHERS is Director of Capacity Planning and Management for Mead Data Central. He received a BS in Engineering 
from the U.S. Coast Guard Academy, and MS degrees in mathematics and computer science from Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Insti­tute, He has held a variety of management and tech­nical positions with the U.S. Coast 
Guard and IBM. His research interests are improving the productiv­ity of model development. He will be 
General Chair of the 1997 WSC. He is a member of ACM, ORSA, TIMS, and the TIMS/College on Simulation. 
He is an Area Editor for the International Journal of In­dustrial Engineering -Applications and Practice, 
ENVER YUCESAN is an associate professor of operations research in the Technology Management Area of the 
European Institute of Business Admin­istration (INSEAD) at Fontainebleau, France. He holds a BSIE degree 
from Purdue University and MS and PhD degrees in OR from Cornell University, W. DAVID KELTON is Professor 
of Operations and Management Science in the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota, 
as well as a Fellow of the Minnesota Supercomputer Institute and a member of the Graduate Faculty in 
the Sci­entific Computation Program at Minnesota. He re­ceived a B.S. degree in Mathematics from the 
Univer­ sity of Wisconsin-Madison, an M ,S. degree in Math­ematics from Ohio University, and M.S, and 
Ph.D. degrees in Industrial Engineering from Wisconsin. 
			