
 Technology Training Partnerships - University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh City Schools and Community College 
of Allegheny County Jeffrey C. Cepull University of Pittsburgh Computing Services &#38; Systems Development 
419 Bellefield Hall 315 South Bellefield Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15260 (412) 648-7225 cepull+@pitt.edu 
 1. INTRODUCTION During the past five years a void has developed between the increasing number of jobs 
in the computing industry and the decreasing supply of college graduates majoring in programs associated 
with Information Technology (IT). A need has also emerged to identify "best fit" employment candidates 
who are technically proficient and capable, but not over-qualified for entry-level positions requiring 
less than a Bachelor's or Associate's Degree. The University of Pittsburgh has developed two training 
programs to attract individuals who have the aforementioned aptitude. In cooperation with the Pittsburgh 
City Schools, Computing Services and Systems Development has developed an apprenticeship program with 
the Electronics Technology magnet program at Schenley High School. Each year two high school graduates 
from Schenley High begin an 18 month apprentice program preparing the participants for entry level Systems 
Analysts I positions at the University. The program is an intensive combination of internal training, 
certification programs (MCSE and Sun), customer service preparation, and technical instruction. The Community 
College of Allegheny County (CCAC) and the University of Pittsburgh have created a twelve month internship 
program targeting Associate Degree graduates from CCAC who have completed their degree requirements and 
are looking for IT work experience, possibly leading to a full-time position. The program blends industry-recognized 
certification programs, hardware/software training classes and work experiences. A CSSD Systems Analyst 
is assigned to mentor each participant. The mentor is responsible for guiding the participant through 
a successful and timely completion of the IT training program. The mentor also helps to ensure that the 
program provides a productive and enriching experience for each participant. The mentor monitors the 
participant's progress through the program, providing guidance and assistance as necessary. Permission 
to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without 
fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 99, Denver, 
Colorado &#38;#169;1999 ACM 1-58113-144-5/99/0011..$5.00 This paper will outline the process used to 
establish the program and detail the curriculum, exercises, benchmarks and evaluations used throughout 
both programs. Keywords Partnership, information technology, public school, community college, training 
and mentor.  2. BACKGROUND During the past five years a void has developed between the increasing number 
of jobs related to the computing industry and the decreasing supply of college graduates majoring in 
programs associated with Information Technology (IT). A need has also emerged to identify "best fit" 
employment candidates who are technically proficient and capable, but not over-qualified for entry-level 
positions requiring less than a Bachelor's or Associate's Degree. The University of Pittsburgh's Computing 
Services and Systems Development group in cooperation with the City of Pittsburgh's Schenley High School 
has developed a program designed to prepare high school graduates for careers in the Information Technology 
(IT) field through a structured combination of intensive training materials and concurrent work experiences. 
The 18-month Technology Apprenticeship Program described in this document blends industry-recognized 
certification programs, hardware and software training classes and practical work experiences, preparing 
the participants for challenging positions in the IT field. Another segment of the post-secondary workforce 
are those graduates of community colleges who have received an Associate Degree in an area related to 
computing or information technology who are ready to begin working, but who have the motivation and aptitude 
to continue their studies toward a bachelor's degree. A second collaboration, this between the University 
of Pittsburgh and the Community College of Allegheny County has resulted in the development of a Technology 
Internship Program, specifically targeting the abovementioned Associate Degree graduates. The Technology 
Internship Program is intended to familiarize individuals with information technology development, services 
and support. The program will prepare individuals for a full-time IT staff position at the University 
of Pittsburgh. The intern will acquire the skills necessary for success in technology-related fields 
along with time management, customer support, project planning and teamwork skills required by a progressive 
workplace. The Technology Internship will last approximately 12 months. A CSSD Systems Analyst will serve 
as a mentor, guiding the intern throughout the year. Ideal candidates for the intern position should 
have completed their Associate Degree and demonstrate interest and abilities in the area of information 
technology.  3. PROGRAM OVERVIEW - TECHNOLOGY APPRENTICE PROGRAM The University of Pittsburgh has developed 
a Technology Apprenticeship Program intended to familiarize selected individuals with information technology 
services and support. The program will prepare individuals for a full-time IT staff position at the University 
of Pittsburgh. Apprentices will acquire the skills necessary for success in technology-related fields 
along with organizational, time management, customer support, and other work related skills. The Technology 
Apprenticeship will last approximately 18 months. A CSSD Systems Analyst will serve as a mentor, guiding 
the apprentice throughout the year. Candidates for the apprentice position should have graduated from 
high school and demonstrate interest and abilities in the area of information technology. The program 
consists of formal training, certifications and work experience. The following is a selection of training 
and work experience topics: Software Applications and Operating Systems  Introduction to Networks and 
Communications  Help Desk Operations  Telecommunications Port Installation and Wiring  PC Troubleshooting 
 Campus Computing Lab Operation  Local Area Network Configuration and PC Support  During the final 
six months of the program, the apprentice will determine an area of concentration and work with the assigned 
mentor to complete a research project. At the completion of the research project, the intern will be 
assigned to a specific area within Computing Services and Systems Development that coincides with the 
aforementioned area of concentration and research. At the conclusion of the program the apprentice will 
be eligible to apply for a full-time position within CSSD. 4. TECHNOLOGY APPRENTICE PROGRAM ACTIVITIES 
AND PROGRESS The Technology Apprenticeship Program is designed to familiarize and acclimate the participants 
with the information technologies used by the students, faculty and staff in the University of Pittsburgh's 
computing environment. Through a process involving one-on-one mentoring, technical training and customer 
support skills, the program will prepare apprentices for positions in this dynamic setting. The program 
includes the following training topics: Intro to Basic Telephone Skills  Intro to Customer Service 
Skills  Getting Started with MS Exchange and Outlook  Intro to Basic Office Productivity Tools  Six 
MS Certification Courses  A selection of the one-on-one mentoring experiences during the first year 
includes: Initial Rotation with a Contract Analyst  Residence Networking Program Rotation  24 hour 
Campus Computing Lab Rotation  Faculty Computing Program Rotation  Intro to Networks and Communications 
 PC Support and Basic Network Configurations  24 Hour Help Desk Rotation  Site License Service Rotation 
 Training Services Rotation  Desktop Services Rotation  Special IT Project  Figure 1. MS Project 
Gantt chart showing the breakdown of the assignments, scheduled training, and projects that the current 
Technology Apprentices have experienced to date. The program has a predetermined schedule of activities, 
but the nature of the environment and the unique opportunities that can arise require that the schedule 
remain fluid and accommodating. The apprentices are evaluated at the three and six month point of the 
program.  5. PROGRAM OVERVIEW - TECHNOLOGY INTERNSHIP PROGRAM The University of Pittsburgh has developed 
a Technology Internship Program intended to familiarize individuals with information technology development, 
services and support. The program will prepare individuals for a full-time IT staff position at the University 
of Pittsburgh. The intern will acquire the skills necessary for success in technology-related fields 
along with time management, customer support, project planning and teamwork skills required by a progressive 
workplace. The Technology Internship will last approximately 12 months. A CSSD Systems Analyst will serve 
as a mentor, guiding the intern throughout the year. Ideal candidates for the intern position should 
have completed their Associate Degree and demonstrate interest and abilities in the area of information 
technology. The program consists of formal training, certifications and work experience. The following 
is a selection of training and work experience topics: Software Applications and Operating Systems 
 Introduction to Networks and Communications  Help Desk Operations  Telecommunications Port Installation 
and Wiring  PC Troubleshooting  Campus Computing Lab Operation  Local Area Network Configuration and 
PC Support  During the latter portion of the program, the intern will determine an area of concentration 
and work with the assigned mentor to complete a research project. At the completion of the research project, 
the intern will be assigned to a specific area within Computing Services and Systems Development that 
coincides with the aforementioned area of concentration and research. At the conclusion of the program 
the intern will be eligible to apply for a full-time position within CSSD. Prospective participants in 
the Technology Internship Program should have successfully completed their high school diploma and have 
a demonstrated interest in technology. Individuals should be capable of working in a collaborative environment 
and must be willing to work in project teams. The Technology Internship Program is divided into two six-month 
phases. The first phase provides introductory through advanced training classes that cover a wide range 
of topics including fundamental IT concepts, hardware, operating systems, and software applications. 
Participants will acquire the necessary competencies for success in technology-related fields along with 
time management, customer support, project planning and teamwork skills required by a progressive workplace. 
Phase one also provides exposure to a diverse group of operating units within Computing Services and 
Systems Development (CSSD) and the University community, putting into practice many of the technical 
concepts and theories presented early in the program. Participants will work with staff within each of 
the CSSD units to acquire a thorough knowledge of the technologies employed, to learn the techniques 
required to effectively manage those technologies and master the customer service skills required to 
provide support in a large and diverse organization. As the first phase of the Technology Internship 
Program approaches its conclusion, the participants experiences will begin to transition from a training-dominated 
to the second phase, an applied workplace environment. Participants will be assigned to a unit within 
CSSD where the responsibilities will coincide with the interests and skills of each participant and will 
be interspersed with industry recognized certification training. A CSSD Systems Analyst will be assigned 
as a mentor to each participant. The mentor will be primarily responsible for guiding the participant 
through a successful and timely completion of the Technology Internship Program. The mentor will also 
help to ensure that the program provides a productive and enriching experience for each participant, 
focused on the application of newly acquired skills. The mentor will monitor the participant's progress 
through the program, providing guidance and assistance as necessary.  6. TECHNOLOGY INTERNSHIP PROGRAM 
- INTENSIVE TRAINING 6.1 Overview Participants will be provided with an overview of the information technology 
essentials and the many components that will be covered throughout the IT Training Program. The mentors 
will provide participants with an overview of the IT Training Program and acquaint the participants with 
the CSSD organization and the services CSSD/ provides to the University community. The participants will 
also attend Time Management and Professional Writing Skills training sessions. The topics covered in 
the general orientation portion of the program include: . Orientation and Overview of the IT Training 
Program . Introduction to Information Technology Concepts . Introduction to MS Outlook and Electronic 
Mail . Introduction to Phone Skills and Customer Service Skills  . Introduction to the Help Desk Operations 
 6.2 Basic Support Skills The classes listed below represent the areas of introductory training classes 
to be provided during this phase of the program. . Introduction to Personal Computers . Introduction 
to Operating Systems . Introduction to the Internet . Introduction to Productivity Software  6.3 Application 
Certification Program With the satisfactory completion of the basic support skills training classes, 
the participants will begin taking the advanced classes in the CSSD certification program. This program 
ensures that the basic operating systems and software application skills have been mastered. The mentor 
will work closely with the participant to monitor progress and ensure a thorough understanding of the 
information. The participants will have access to self-paced training, web-based training, instructor-led 
training, and video training materials. Training topics include: . Advanced Windows 95/NT Operating System 
. Advanced Apple Macintosh Operating System . Unix Operating System . Productivity Software Applications-Advanced 
Competencies . Web Development . Presentation and Project Management Software . Programming Fundamentals 
. Technology Evaluation and Selection  7. TECHNOLOGY INTERNSHIP PROGRAM - ADVANCED TRAINING AND WORK 
EXPERIENCE 7.1 Advanced Training During the second phase of the IT Training Program, participants will 
begin applying, in a prescribed work environment, the knowledge gained in the phase one training sessions. 
Using structured work experiences, participants will work with staff from various areas of CSSD. Participants 
will observe and engage in a wide variety of activities supported through the CSSD organization. The 
participants will be required to fulfill the advanced certification test for each area to complete this 
phase of the program. This second phase of the program gives the participants an opportunity to apply 
the training and skills gained throughout to first phase in an actual work environment. The activities 
will take into consideration each participant's skills and areas of interest. During the latter portion 
of this phase of the IT Training Program, each participant will be given responsibilities similar to 
those assigned to entry level full-time staff in the assigned CSSD area. Each participant's progress 
will be closely monitored. Formal performance appraisals and ongoing informal evaluations will occur. 
Hardware Basics: Participants will become familiar with the wide variety of maintenance tasks required 
to provide troubleshooting support. The basics of PC and printer hardware maintenance, including memory 
upgrades and hard drive installations, will be covered. The identification of criteria used to evaluate 
and select technical products for an organization will be covered. Networking: This section of the IT 
Training Program will provide an overview of an enterprise-wide network. Participants will learn how 
communication ports are installed, activated and maintained, and how wiring closets are configured and 
maintained. The participants will also gain an understanding of how various network components are interconnected. 
Operations: Participants will work with operations staff of CSSD to understand the requirements of an 
IT operations environment. Participants will learn about system backup requirements, procedures and machine 
room considerations. Telecommunications Port and Wiring: During this phase of the IT Training Program 
participants will accompany a member of the port and wiring group as they handle a variety of network 
ports and wiring requests. The Network Services staff will provide a summary of the complex telecommunications 
environment at the University. PC Troubleshooting Training and Certification Test: Before moving to the 
next assignment, participants will take the PC Troubleshooting class and certification examination. This 
test must be passed with a score of 80% or greater in order to advance through the IT Training Program. 
PC Support: Participants will work closely with CSSD systems analysts responding to routine Help Desk 
Tier 2 requests. This assignment will provide participants with an opportunity to understand how basic 
technical skills, developed earlier in the IT Training Program, are utilized in support of end-users. 
This component of the IT Training Program emphasizes the many technologies required to create an effectively 
integrated computing environment. Networks and Communications: This training will prepare the participants 
for the remainder of the IT Training Program. This four-day training session is conducted by senior CSSD 
analysts and will begin to introduce more complex computing topics. The training includes the following 
modules: . Local Area Network (LAN) Concepts . Novell NetWare . Windows NT Server . Remote Access 
 Support Network Analyst Rotation and Certification Tests: Participants will work with a CSSD network 
technology analyst to learn how end-user needs analyses are performed and written recommendations are 
developed. Participants will also be given an opportunity to participate in the installation of supported 
LAN network hardware and software. Upon completion of this component of the program, participants will 
take the Communications Basics, NetWare Basics, and NT Basics tests and complete them with a score of 
80% or greater. Desktop Services: Participants will work with systems analysts to gain an understanding 
of development and integration activities required to support desktop systems in the campus computing 
labs and in faculty offices. Software Licensing Services: Participants will learn about the responsibilities 
associated with software procurement, distribution and management. Participants will work with Software 
Licensing Staff to execute daily activities associated with software and software licensing management. 
Office and Departmental Support Tasks: This portion of the program will begin with a meeting between 
CSSD management and the participants to discuss areas of interest and skills. Each participant will be 
assigned to accompany a CSSD contract systems analyst to carry out support activities within a University 
department. Activities associated with individual contract departments vary widely. Each participant 
will be assigned to three different contract rotations, becoming familiar with the various administrative 
systems in use at the contract departments. Training Services: Each participant will assist the computer 
training group with development of course materials and delivery of training classes. Help Desk: The 
focus of this portion of the program will be on customer service and use of resource materials to resolve 
customer problems. Participants will learn how a Help Desk operates and the skills required to effectively 
support this activity. Help Desk analysts will provide training sessions on the call tracking software 
that is integral to their responsibility. Help Desk analysts will explain policies, procedures and assist 
the participants as they begin to answer Help Desk calls. The participants may choose to take one or 
both of the industry recognized certification programs provided through the University. Microsoft Certified 
Systems Engineer Certification: The participants will be eligible to participate in Microsoft training 
classes (four required, two electives) which are designed to prepare an individual for the MCSE certification 
examination. Training, course materials and certification testing by a third party testing agency will 
be provided. Sun Java Certification: The University of Pittsburgh is the first academic institution in 
the United States named by Sun Microsystems as an Authorized Academic Java Campus. Through this program 
the University is able to provide Java training and certification for Programming with Java, Advanced 
Design with Java, and Applications Development. This program will provide the participants with access 
to the latest application development solutions and environments. Training, course materials, and certification 
testing by a third part testing agency will be provided.   8. POST-TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES Participants 
will be eligible to apply for a permanent Systems Analyst position at the conclusion of the IT Training 
Program. The combination of skills, training and experience with the University's IT environment will 
make these individuals ideal candidates for vacancies in the University of Pittsburgh's Computing Services 
and Systems Development organization.  9. FUTURE PLANS The University of Pittsburgh's relationship with 
the Community College of Allegheny County and Schenley High School continues to develop. Our ongoing 
need for support and technical staff will grow. As the two programs develop, we would like to pursue 
an expansion that might constitute a small scale workforce development initiative.  
			