
 TECHNOLOGY MAGIC: SOFTWARE DISTRIBTION AT INDIANA UNIVERSITY 3. Shrink-wrapped diskettes, for $2.00, 
produced by a Bonnie R. Hites, Lead Department Computing Advisor commercial companyfrom our masters. 
 Department Computing Advising &#38; Support Indiana University 4. From UCS support servers. University 
Computing Services 2711 East 10 Street 5. Loan of media Bloomington, IN 47408-2671 voice: (812) 855-7384 
We expect to have a Web-hosted software distribution fax: (812) 855-7868 system developed for SoftServe 
by this fall, which we will call ZUware Online. This will make it easy and Richard White convenientfor 
those afiliated with ZU to obtain the Software Acquisitions and Distribution Specialist latest versions 
of all software licensed to their Departmental Support Lab particular campus. The system will include 
an University Computing Services authentication scheme to ensure that only those eligible Indiana University 
to use each sofhare applications will be able to see Indiana Memorial Union MO86 and install or download 
it. Bloomington, IN 47405 Ourpresentation will outline the products, processes, voice: (8 12) 855-8291 
 costs, and technical expertise needed to develop fax: (812) 855-9257 SoftServe and the Zuware CD for 
distribution of site- licensed sofhare. We will discuss our successes as . well as our problems and challenges. 
 ABSTRACT Acquiring site licenses to distribute various software INTRODUCTION packages at Zndiana University 
(IV) has become a crucial strategy for managing the cost and availability Indiana University (IU) aggressively 
pursues software of computing applications for our students, faculty, and licensing as a crucial strategy 
for managing the cost and stafi During the past year, distribution and easy availability of computing 
operating systems and installation of these site-licensed products has become software applications for 
it students, faculty, and staff. a major focus for several University Computing This is a team effort 
at IU, spanning several service Services (UC S) staff members; one employee even units UCS, as well as 
collaborations with departments works full time now with Ill s purchasing department to and campuses 
throughout the university system. In negotiate and coordinate sojtware licenses and volume cooperation 
with IU s purchasing department, UCS has purchase agreements for the entire &#38;campus university been 
able to provide a standard suite of personal system. UCS distributes site-licensed software in five productivity 
software to all those affiliated with the ways: university. UCS has saved many departments software purchasing 
expenditures by negotiating multi-user 1. Free installation from SoftServe, a LAN server agreements for 
specialized applications, engaging in available via the campus network volume purchases on behalf of 
departments and schools, and obtaining group licenses for specific needs. 2. A convenient CD-ROM, updated 
twice yearly, available for a $5.00 media fee. For licensing purposes, a site can be a particular group 
of workstations, a building, a department, a campus, or Permission to make digitabhard copy of all or 
part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made 
or distributedforprojit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and 
its date appear, and notice is given that coping is by permission of ACM, Inc.. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requiresprior specific permission and/orfee. 
@1997ACMISBN#O-89791-990-4l97lOOll $3.50 Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 0127 Technology Magic:Soj?ware 
Distribution at Indiana Hites - White the entire university, depending on the terms of the agreement. 
Sometimes the cost of a site license is based on the potential number of users; the software can then 
be metered or freely distributed, according to the agreement with the vendor. Distribution of site-licensed 
products is handled in a variety of ways. ,All IU affiliates are eligible for a free Network ID (an authenticated 
username and password, maintained in a central database) to access e-mail seriers, electronic file storage, 
local and wide-area campus networks, and the Internet. Software that is licensed to everyone with an 
IU affiliation can be downloaded or directly installed fioin SoffServe, a Novell server on the IU network, 
for no additional charge tB th e user. For convenience, especially for users who need access to software 
applications at home or from other off- campus locations, this software is also distributed on a compact 
disk (CD) entitled ZUware. The IUware CD, available from the Support Center for a $5.00 processing charge, 
is updated twice a year. We ll discuss the mechanisms for software distribution in greater detail below. 
Some of the smaller applicatidn s such as virus protection are also available on shrink- wrapped floppy 
disks at $2.00 each for users who eschew downloading. Discipline-specific software and operating systems 
are accessed through a variety of servers, including departmental servers (upon authentication from a 
local database) or the media can be loaned to users as needed, depending on the specific terms of the 
license agreements. Faculty can request special software to be installed on the Instruct server for their 
courses if a group license is negotiated., Some of the software is metered but not distributed. Sharing 
the Responsibility for Licensing and Volume Purchasing The UCS units that participate in the distribution 
of software on IU s Bloomington campus include Data Management Services (Sybase, ESRI ), the Stat/Math 
Center (SPSS, SAS, SYSTAT, Statistica, Econometrics Toolkit, Minitab, S-Plus, RATS, Resampling St&#38;i<tics, 
Gauss, Maple V, Matlab, Geometer s Sketchpad, and Mathematics), and the Unix Workstatioiz Sripport Group 
(a host of operating systems, programming languages, and applications for Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard 
9000 series, Silicon Graphics, IBM RS/6000, DEC and Alpha workstations, BSDi, and Linux systems). The 
Departmental Support Lab (DSL) is responsible for the most cominonly used products Such as communications 
softwar&#38;, word processors, the complete line of Novell s Netware, and virus protection. Each of these 
UCS units work autonomously, but each l28 . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 is aware of what the others offer in 
order to make referrals. A site license coordinator from the DSL works with IU s purchasing department 
to ensure that the campus negotiates the best possible deals from the variety of vendors whose products 
are in high demand at IU. The c;oordinator sends an e-mail bulletin called Sof&#38;ws to subscribers 
wheqever there are pricing changes, new opportunities to participate in volume purchases, or when new 
site licenses are added. Distribution of Operating Systems and Software Applications The methods for 
distribution vary, depending on the number of participants and the agreements with each of the vendors. 
The Stat/Math group issues perpetual licenses for some of its applications. A yearly leasing fee goes 
toward program updates and bug fixes, as well as maintenance of the software. Installations of other 
software can be done by system administrators who have signed the agreement, paid the licensing fee, 
verified that their systems meets requirements, and who have been authenticated via a database that allows 
them to download the software or borrow the media. Alternatively, a system administrator can provide 
Stat/Math staff access to his system and have the software installed for a fee of $40.00/hour. The Unix 
support group woiks in s similar manner. For software licensed to the entire campus, applications or 
operating system updates can be downloaded from Softserve or purchased on a CD-ROM by anyone who has 
a Network ID. UCS complies with licensing agreements by stating the terms of the agreement before distribution 
and asking the users to click on a button if they agree to abide by these terms. SoftServe automatically 
logs IDS, software types, and dates from those making installations or diskettes. Signatures and ID numbers 
are collected from all recipients of the CD and diskettes.  The Evolution of Softserve The need to distribute 
software from a central server began when IU negotiated its first university-wide site license for Novell 
products several years ago. While electronic distribution was certainly technically possible, ensuring 
that only people who had legal rights to download and use particular software made this task more complicated. 
Fortunately, UCS had some competent programmers among its support staff;,they began to collaborate on 
a software distribution system that could authenticate users with a Network ID and audit the downloading 
process. This system, currently known as SofrServe, Are You Ready? Hites -White resides on a Novell 
server, which is running a custom interface written in C-I-+. This program interacts with the workstation 
s client software to locate and install or download the desired applications to disks. When a user maps 
a drive to this server, the program checks to see if the client is properly configured; if not, it installs 
the appropriate DLLs. It then prompts the user for his Network ID (username and password) and verifies 
these against IU s central database of valid accounts. Therefore, no account maintenance is needed on 
the SoftServe server. Upon successful authentication, a screen of categories, such as word processors, 
network/communication, modem, anti-virus, presentation, and miscellaneous, is drawn. When a category 
is selected, a second screen is drawn with the choices available in that category, along with install 
and make disks icons. Optionally, the user may be presented with screens of information about the selected 
software; these may include any serial numbers the user might need, notes on known bugs, or licensing 
agreements by which the user must abide. When the user chooses to install the software directly on his 
system or write to disks for later installation, the interface records this information in its auditing 
database and automatically logs the user into another back-end server where the software actually resides 
and is securely maintained. The workstation client then runs either the custom installation or the disk 
copying program. This system is flexible and makes it easy for non-programming staff to maintain the 
software on the back-end server. *he back-end server s directories and executable files are not available 
to the user, and the. username and password for this server can be changed as often as needed for security. 
The interface is easy to use once the user has made the connection to SoftServe. A key advantage to using 
the SoftServe installation programs is that they don t require twice the application s disk space to 
install because they do not first download a compressed file and then expand it. Why Duplicate SoftServe 
on a CD? The number of IU student+, staff, and faculty who wanted to be able to use their familiar software 
applications at home began increasing a couple years ago. The new dial-in products and the increasing 
size of the IU modem pool created a demand for installation of these applications on home computers. 
Although IU s site licenses made thislegal, the installation time over the network could be frustrating; 
it also required unnecessarily long connect times. Therefore, UCS began to work on producing a CD-ROM 
that would Technology Magic:So$ware Distribution at Indiana have a snapshot of all the applications, 
operating system updates, service packs, and hot fixes that were on SoftServe. The amount of space available 
on the CD allowed the addition of extensive manuals such as WordPerfect documentation, which could then 
be run directly from the CD rather than taking up valuable space on a hard drive or costing additional 
money for hard copy. And because there was still plenty of room on the CD, adding a host of help files 
and answers to the questions most frequently asked of the Help Desk and Support Center consultants seemed 
like a good. idea, as well. However,, this task proved to be not quite as simple as it seemed at the 
outset. The custom installers that were already v&#38;ten for SoftServe could be used, but decisions 
about the look and feel of the interface and which help files to add required cross-unit collaborations. 
Because Microsoft s Internet Explorer was selkcted as the foundation upon which to build the interface, 
every member of the team had his own idea of what the screens and buttons should look like. Each had 
his own HTML editor and set to work formatting his part of the project. Atid when it came to testing 
the product, those who were not involved in the development lacked an appreciation for the difficulty 
of making major changes. Testing the results on all possible platforms was tedious, and some assumptions 
that were made later turned into major changes at an inappropriate phase of the project. After two months 
of hard work and extensive testing of two locally burned beta versions -- by a team of about eight programm&#38;s, 
supiort specialists, graphic artists, and editors -- the master CD and the camera-ready art work for 
the cover were shipped off to a manufacturer in early August of 1996. The production process of file 
to film conversions, mastering the CD-ROM, duplicating, printing disk sleeves, shrink-wrap packaging, 
and shipping took about another month. The cost to produce each CD was approximately $2.00. The group 
decided to tack on another $3.00 to cover the cost of interim expenses and administrative overhead associated 
with distributing the CD. No profit was intended. UCS ordered 2000 copies of the initial IUware CD for 
distribution on the Bloomington campus during the fall semester. This CD turned out to be so popular 
that another 3,500 were eventually ordered in three batches. During the six months after its release, 
UCS had sold 5,500 copies of IUware while also recording 22,600 logins to SoftServe by over 3,500 unique 
tisers. Other Campuses Wanted Cds Are You Ready? ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 0129 Technology Magic:So@are 
Distribution at Indiana Hites - White The first ZUware CD was intended only for IU s Bloomington campus, 
but soon the other IU campuses were asking for copies: Not all the information on the IUware CD applied 
to these campuses because many of the campus computing directors initiate their own site licenses or 
impose restrictions on what is supported locally. Thus the impetus for a second CD began to build. A 
new CD was planned for the Spring semester of 1997. By this time, everyone involved in the project had 
so many more ideas for how the CD could be improved as well as meet the needs of the other campuses. 
Because communication software is one of the most desired products on the CD, and IU was in the process 
of increasing the size of its modem pool as well as implementing new dial-in numbers, the developers 
had to wait for resohttion of these decisions before issuing a spring CD. As a result, the deadline for 
this version of the CD slipped through the summer, allowing more major changes for the CD released this 
fall. In the meantime, however, the team developed and issued 2000 copies of the IU iojware Pack, a CD 
that could be used by the other campuses by clicking on a button for the appropriate campus. Some campuses 
added their own communication software and one campus added some iocal help files and repackaged the 
CD in their own cover. Another 1000 copies were eventually ordered for this market. The development team 
did burn a few of the newest version of this CD locally and loaned them out by the day to those who needed 
the updated software for remote installations. A $15 deposit was required, which was refunded upon return 
of the media. . The new IU modem pool was finalized in July; so final preparations were made for combining 
the multi- campus version of the CD and the new features of ZUware. The CD released this fall offers 
the following features: The CD is set to expire one year from the date of, issue. (The software installed 
will still work, but no more installations of these versions of the software can be made.) The CD autoloads 
upon mounting and prompts the user for a key number -- distributed on stickers attached to the wrapper 
of each CD. (Each campus is issued a different key, which allows only the configurations valid for that 
campus to be accessed.) The user is presented with a customized welcome screen and menus for his campus. 
 . The user s workstation environment is configured to interact with Internet Explorer ~2.0. The program 
copies the user s preferences to a temporary file and then launches Internet Explorer. When an application 
is selected, the program checks the user s environment for appropriateness of that application-it will 
not allow incorrect updates of service packs or hot fixes to be applied to inappropriate versions of 
the user s system. The selected software is installed with the preferences recommended by UCS. (For example, 
Netscape installs with pre-configured bookmarks.) The program cleans up and reinstalls the user s preferences 
after execution of the installation. The developers feel that with a project manager who can keep each 
of the team members on task and working toward a common goal, they can now do a major upgrade to theIUware 
CD in about a month (including testing), but it still takes another month for the final-production and 
shipping. They caution that anyone,attempting such a project should give themselves a month longer than 
they think they ll need,  What s ahead for SoftServe? A UCS Programmer is now working on a platform- 
and protocol-independent scheme to distribute and automatically install sitellicensed software. The goal 
is to make an array of application software, support utilities, virus protection, and remote access tools 
available to IU s 5000 faculty-and staff and 35,000 IUB students, as well as to users on the other seven 
campusesi via a secure NT server. By negotiating campus-wide licensing agreements and volume purchases, 
University Computing Services is helping departmental computing support providers create their own standard 
computing environments through version control, security enhancements, and new options for downloading 
software and/or making installation Idiskettes. A custom-designed Web browser helper application will 
build in special controls that allow departmental system administrators to determine their users rights 
to various products. A billing module is being designed that will allow charging and automatic billing 
mechanisms for individual re-purchasing of software that is licensed to the university. To use the new 
IUware Online, all the user will need is a small client helper application and a . Network ID. The helper 
application will check for, or install, the latest version of the Web browser on the client s workstation, 
and then automate a log-in to the software server. Direct links to ZUware Online will be available from 
anywhere on the Web, especially from the UCS Help 130 . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 1997 Are You Ready? Hites -White 
Online and Knowledge Base files. Problems can be solved by immediately applying service packs or updating 
operating systems. Helping Other Schools with Software Distribution  The UCS SoftServe and CD developers 
have been asked for their help by support staff at several other universities, who are struggling with 
designing interfaces to do electronic software distribution. The team leader plans to write his own mini-web 
browser in the near future and add this to the helper applications and custom installation programs that 
the team has developed. All that will be needed on the part of the developers at other schools is some 
HTML coding to list the software they want to make available. This package may soon be available for 
a nominal fee from University Computing Services at Indiana University. If there is sufficient interest, 
the team will offer a technical tutorial at next year s SIGUCCS Conference, which will be held on IU 
s Bloomington campus. Technology Magic:Somare Distribution at Indiana Are You Ready? . ACM SIGUCCS XXV 
1997 ,131  
			