
 The Cyclone Display: Rotation, Re.ection, Flicker and Recognition combined to the pixels. Yoichi Ochiai* 
and Hiromu Takai* *University of Tsukuba, School of Information Science, College of Media Arts, Science 
and Technology  Figure 1: (top-left)Overviews of 37 pixels, (top-center) shows character 3 (top-right) 
Interaction with hand shadows and .icker (bottom-left)rainbow color on the pixels (bottom-center) enlargement 
of pixels, (bottom-right)texture variation of rotation disksIt s very dif.cult to take the picture as 
we see this display. It combines our color recognition and projected light. 1. Introduction Most of us 
remember playing with colorful spinning tops when we were children. Here in our research, wemade mechanical 
pixels with the spinning tops whichintroduces the mechanical display. This enables to en­large the pixels 
without the direct lighting. Those me­chanical pixels could be applied to make an ambientatmosphere in 
small or large space. We added some essentials factors to the tops such as.icker, projection, rotation 
speed. The combination en­ables us to make multicolored expression and to recog­nize the difference of 
rotating speed of the disks. This system should be able to contribute to a new kind of display engineering 
and interactive communication between display and humans. 2. Design The prototype of the Cyclone display 
is made up of 37 rotating mechanical pixels. The pixels consist of PWMmotor and pattern printing disk(Fig.1). 
Each pixel iscontrolled individually for its rotating speed. Now on .icker. Whether we use the .icker 
light or not we can see the colorful lines on rotating disks with variously printed patterns. So you 
could use rotating disk as apixel of no illuminated display. We can also observeseveral striped patterns 
by using white .icker or just by *email: ochyai@acm.org blinking the eyes. The colors and patterns depend 
on thespeeds of rotation and .icker. It is possible to change factors for each pixel according to the 
need and circumstance on the Cyclone display. Also I might add that if we use .ickered time-divided RGB 
lights, Cyclone display can express several color gradations. Cyclone display has many interesting factors 
and in­teractivity with the human(Fig. 2). By using natural body movement such as hands or eyes, the 
different color and different texture and different patterns are seen on theCyclone Display. 3. Application 
Cyclone Display offers the new and different approach for the interactions with the humans. We just have 
to wave our hand or blink the eyes. That enables us an in­dividual communication with the display. The 
individualcommunicability has a possibility for entertainment ap­plication. At the point of ambient display, 
it suggest thenew way to express Rotation and Recognition Pat­terns . Also, Cyclone pixels are easy to 
enlarge their sizes with low cost. Besides, we could choose the disk patterns to .t circumstances. 4. 
Future Work We introduced the prototype of Cyclone Display madeof printed-paper disks. If it was made 
of liquid crystalsdisplay we could change the patterns of each disk. On top of that, with projection 
images it would work as ro­tating disk screen for the new expression. It makes us to produce diffuse 
effect or re.ection effect on certain diskssuch as re.ective or unre.ective disks.They deepen thetexture 
expression of projected graphics. Furthermore, alittle illuminated Cyclone Display is good for decoration 
for buildings because of its low cost expansion fee and characterizing the individual/ambient communications. 
Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2011, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, August 
7 11, 2011. ISBN 978-1-4503-0921-9/11/0008  
			