
 Papers THE SAILOR MASTER TRAINER TRAINING PROGRAM Trudi Bellardo Hahn Lida Larsen Barbara Rush Division 
of Libraiy Development and Inform, Computer Science Center Information Technology Library ServicesMa~land 
State Depatiment of University ofMaryland at College Park Computer Science Center Education200 West Baltimore 
Stwet College Park, MD 20742-2411 UniversiQ of Maryland at College Park Baltimore, MD 21201 (301) 405-2936 
 (410) 767-0609 l13@ umail. umdedu th90@ umail. umd.edu INTRODUCTION Via the Sailor project, a joint 
effort between the Maryland State Department of Education, Division of Librmy Development and Services 
(DLDS), the University of Maryland, and the Maryland library community, the state of Maryland has moved 
into the fore­front of providing free and easy access to the Intemet for all its citi­zens. As a result, 
an unprecedented and enormous need has emerged for training thousands of librarians and school media 
spe­cialists to incorporate information sources from the Internet into their work and to assist end users 
of the Intemet, Federal funding for support of Sailor has paid for the mmmunications backbone and many 
ancillary services, but funds for training have been limited. Therefore, hiring expensive professional 
trainers was not an option. The solution to achieving a united Sailor training force and stan­dmd quality 
training was to create a Master Trainer Training (MTI ) program in early 1995 for about 50 librarians 
and information pro­fessionals from throughout the state. GOALS One of the goals of the MTT program 
was to build the skills of the master trainers themselves, both in the use of Sailor and the Intemet 
and in technical training. The MTT was intended to be a meaning­ful learning experience for the trainers, 
no matter what their prior experience in teaching or training or their level of knowledge of the Internet 
(both of which varied a lot). Another goal was to support Sailor training by acquiring and organizing 
training rescmrces, cre­ating lesson plans and trainer s guides, and identifying suitable computer laboratories 
and facilities throughout the state for Sailor trainers to use for hands-on training sessions. By the 
end of the MTT, the Sailor trainers were expected to be able to: . Describe the purpose, use and vision 
of Sailor. . Interpret and define functions of the Intemet. Identify four characteristics of adults 
learning to use a com­puter College Park, MD 20742-2411 (301) 405-2982 br19@umail.umd. edu . Outline 
a lesson plan for a training session including objec­tives, training methods, and evaluation. With a 
partner, present a half-hour training session on Sailor and the Intemet. . Describe three characteristics 
of technical training. . Identify five requirements for the logistics of a training ses­sion.  GENERAL 
APPROACH The M IT program was a cooperative undertaking between DLDS and the Maryland library community. 
DLDS staff and a consultant, hired as the overall Coordinator, designed the four-day program. The Coordinator 
worked with an M fT advisory group made up of individuals who would pmticipate in the MIT. The advisory 
group members were selected to be representative of the whole group, in regard to geographic distribution, 
levels of prior training experi­ence, and levels of Sailor and Intemet knowledge. Another con­sultant 
was hired to write trainers guides and she relied on the work of another state-wide Sailor committee 
that had outlined the desired training content. As a result, the M lT and the accompany­ing materials 
benetitted from wide input from the target commu­nity. In the fall of 1994, DLDS mailed a letter to public 
library achninis­trators, academic library directors, and school media administra­tors soliciting recommendations 
for participants for the MTT. DLDS asked for volunteers who had prior training experience andl or knowledge 
of using Sailor, and who were willing to commit to the training program through cdl four days and then 
be willing to offer Sailor training within their own organization and to at least two outside organizations. 
From the 90 people who volunteered and secured permission and endorsement from their employers, DLDS 
selected 54 who met the minimum requirements and who were spread geographically across the state and 
represented a vari­ety of institutions. Without these latter two selection criteria, some arias of the 
state and types of library systems would have been over-represented and others not at all. Some volunteers 
were Penmksion to make digitatid copy of part or all of this work for personal or c.kzssmom use is granted 
wuhout fee pmvtded that copies are not made or distributed forprofit or commercial advantage, the copyright 
notice, the title of the publication and its date appear and notice k given that copying is by perm.ixsion 
ofACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republisk to post on sewers, or to redistribute to lists, requirm prior 
specific permission anaYora fee. 61995 ACM ISBN # O-8979I-7O4-9I95KX)1O $3.50. Papers accepted even 
with weak credentials because of the populations they represented. The 54 individuals selected came from 
18 of the 23 Maryland counties, plus Baltimore City. Only 47 participants actually completed all the 
assignments through Day 4. fltose that dropped out did so because of the time commitment required, for 
health reasons, or because of moving out of the state. The volun­teers represented public, academic, 
school and special librarians. In retrospec~ the selection process might have been easier and more would 
have completed the program if the application form had asked for more information about the applicant 
s prior teach­ing and training experiences, and DLDS staff had taken time to double-check with all the 
supervisors to make sure that they under­stood and approved the time commitment that would be required. 
The four days of the M IT were spread over a two-month period. Day 1 was a plenary session to introduce 
some practical logistics of the state-wide training effor~ clarify the expectations of the master trainers, 
and review some Sailor features. Day 1 was fol­lowed about a week later by Days 2 and 3, which were held 
together, with an overnight stay at the University of Maryland, University College Conference Center. 
Days 2 and 3 were held twice because the group was too large for the computer lab facili­ties at the 
University of Maryland. The group was further split for Day 4, which was held in four separate sites. 
The Day 4 sessions were scheduled about a month or so later, to allow absorption of the skills, and to 
allow the participants, working in pairs, to pre­pare a half-hour presentation on some aspect of Sailor. 
The splitting up of the large group into two, and then four separate sections was necessary for practical 
reasons. Some of the partici­pants would have prefemsd to have stayed together with a small group through 
all four days, bonding tightly in a collegial network. However, all of the Day 1, 2, and 3 presentations 
would have had to be repeated four times, making that option expensive and time­consuming.  CONTENT 
OF THE MTT The content of the four-day program included Sailor/Tnternet skills, both what the trainers 
needed to teach and what they did not have to cover. Participants were given tip sheets and practice 
exer­cises. Pre-selected participants who had special Internet or training skills demonstrated both the 
content of Sailor and one or more spe­cific teaching methods. The others in the group thus learned Sailor 
content and observed a variety of presentation styles. They were encouraged to critique the training 
they just saw. Most of the responses, however, were questions about Sailor or the Internet. In spite 
of the lack of critical commentary, however, the Coordinator observed that participants did seem to be 
learning presentation techniques, and many incorporated what they Ieamed into their final presentations 
on Day 4. lb content also covered a wide variety of adult and technical training topics: . advantages 
and disadvantages of team training . technical feedback and coaching assessment of users needs how adults 
learn to use computers adult thinking styleslesson planning differences between demonstrations and hands-on 
training how to use evaluation to improve training dealing with pwple who do not want to attend trainirtg 
or who are afraid of computers dealing with various skill levels and expertise establishing norms (ground 
rules) for groups working together; using ice breakers to energize a group and create a relaxed atmosphere; 
 how to use a lab and keep the class togethe~ how to teach and run equipment at the same time; how 
to translate questions and speak in lay language; pre-planning and setting up training sessions; dealing 
with training problems. Throughout the MIT program, participants were encouraged to keep a training journal 
in which they recorded their own plans for using the training techniques they just saw demonstrated as 
well as ideas for developing their own training presentations.  EVALUATION OF THE DAY 4 PRESENTATIONS 
The trainers were videotaped as they made their Day 4 presenta­tions, and they received immediate critical 
feedback from the MIT Coordinator and their fellow trainers. The formal evaluation of the presentations 
incorporated, but was not limited to the following criteria How effectively did the trainer state the 
purpose of the ses­sion, give clear and accurate directions, explain the sequence of the activities, 
and make the norms and expecta­tions clear? Did the lminer select training methods appropriate to the 
topic? Did the trainer demonstrate a full grasp of the subject? How well did the trainer use appropriate 
techniques to help the learners, keep the group on task, encourage participa­tion, model good listening 
skills, and respond to non-verbal cues ? How well did the txainer show an awareness of timing and pacing, 
use correct language, diction, and pronunciation, and make a smooth transition from one activity to another? 
Nearly all of the presentations went extremely well and the pre­senters received lots of positive feedback. 
The few presenters whose sessions did not go well were given helpful advics by the MIT Coordinator, and 
encouraged to spend more time in prepara- Papers tion before beginning outside training. The MTT Coordinator 
reviewed the videotapes after the sessions were completed and provided additiortrd written comments. 
Overall, the MIT Coordi­nator tried to lower the stress associated with the Day 4 presenta­tions and 
to make the activity a positive and confidence-building experience. SUPPORT OF THE TRAINERS Most of 
the M IT volunteers felt that every effort was made to lis­ten to their needs, oblige their preferences, 
and give them excellent accommodations and amenities. They appreciated such details as gifts of mouse 
pads, license plate holders, and waterproof tote bags, and free campus parking. They were made to feel 
special and esteemed. Participants were supported also in other ways, beginning with the formal MIT program 
and continuing today. They each were given e-mail accounts, courtesy of the Computer Science Center at 
the University of Maryland, and an electronic mailist was established to facilitate rapid communication 
among the entire group and DLDS staff. Trainer s Guides for up to 12 hours of classroom instruction were 
written and distributed to the trainers. They received supplementary readings on adult learning styles, 
training models, and evaluation forms. Attractive, spiral-bound copies of the Sailor/Internet Reference 
Manual were made available to the Sailor trainers to distribute to their trainees. Each Sailor trainer 
prepand materials for the half-hour Day 4 presentations and these materials were made available by request 
to all the other Sailor trainers. Equipment for use in training and demonstration was pur­chased and 
is being loaned to trainers on request. The equipment includes two overhead projectors, two LCD panels, 
two computer/ video projectors, and four laptop computers equipped with high­speed modems, communications 
software, and PowerPoint presen­tation software. In addition to the four days of the M IT program, half-day 
sessions were scheduled throughout May to instruct the trainers hands-on in the use and maintenance of 
the equipment and software. Another full-day follow-up session was held in June to give the Sailor train­ers 
a chance to share their training experiences and war stories to date, receive an update on the latest 
Sailor developments, and practice making presentations using the PowerPoint software. PARTICIPANTS EXPERIENCES 
From the point of view of the participants in the MTT program, the experience was generally valuable 
and enjoyable. They made new friends. They learned a great deal about Sailor and the Internet that they 
did not already know, including newest developments and searching tips and tricks. In addition, they 
learned much about technical training: the usefulness of having back-up materials in the event of system 
or equipment failure, the importance of estab­lishing and stating training objectives, how to conduct 
a needs assessment, how to deal with problem trainees, how to be a facili­ tator rather than a teacher, 
how to respond to different learning styles, and ice breaker tips. They learned what attitudes and chal­ 
 lenges to expect from trainees and the importance of being pre­ pared well in advance of a @aining session 
with a formal lesson plan. They observed a variety of live demonstration and training techniques presented 
by their colleagues, and were encouraged to critique these demonstrations and hear other people s critical 
feed­back. For many participants, the sessions boosted their confidence in being able to conduct high-quality 
training sessions. The participants also had, however, some critical comments about the MTT. As would 
be expected in a group this large, not everyone understood the point and purpose of all the components, 
and they varied in the assessment of the value of each. For example, Day 1 began with an ice breaker. 
Small groups were each given a differ­ent piece of fruit (an apple, kiwi, banana, etc.). Members of each 
group listed ways that their fruit is like a Sailor trainer. The responses were funny--even silly--but 
sometimes insightful and wise. The activity was meant to stimulate padicipation and build rapport. Some 
really enjoyed it and others deemed it a waste of time. Some participants complained also of information 
overload, lack of enough hands-on training for themselves, and of an everring session on Day 2 for which 
they were too tired after a long day, and which was not worthwhile. Some participants wanted more time 
spent on learning Sailor. Others put greater value on understanding adult learners and mastering training 
techniques. Some participants wished for an expert on the imer workings of the Sailor telecommunications 
network to make a presentation on the behind-the-scenes technical aspects. These Sailor trainers wanted 
to develop more expertise themselves so as to be ready to field questions they might get in their own 
sessions. One unexpected response was from some participants who did not like the term master trainer. 
They felt that the word master implied expert, and they did not presume to be Sailor experts. They worried 
that their own trainees would expect too much of them, They saw their role to be a factltator of the 
learning process, where they would be learning along with their trainees. Conse­quently, the word master 
was largely dropped and this cadre of trainers are now referred to most often as simply Sailor Trainers. 
Future master training programs probably should require a certain level of expertise before the train-the-trainer 
program begins. Potential phcipants can be given training materials and exercises to complete and submit 
prior to beginning the program in order to build their skills and establish their credentials.  COSTS 
The cost of the fonrday program, including overnight accommo­dations and per diem expenses, computer 
laboratory use, meeting room use, notebooks and photocopying, video camera rental (for videotaping participants 
mini-presentations), the two education consultants, and miscellaneous minor expenses, was approxi­mately 
$34,000. The value of the many hours donated by DLDS staff, M lT participants, and other individuals 
who served on Sailor committees, cannot be calculated, but these contributions greatly enhanced the training 
program. The cost of the equipment for the Sailor trainers to use as they conduct demonstrations and 
hands-on training throughout the state was approximately $36,400.  FUTURE PLANS More Sailor trainers 
need to be prepared, especially from the more remote counties of Eastern and Western Mmyland not represented 
in the first group. The current Sailor trainers need advanced Inter­net training, especially in regard 
to the newest developments in World Wide Web browsers. The Sailor trainers also would benefit from more 
instruction in dealing with staff resistance to computers and change, writing measurable training objectives, 
and tailoring mainkg to different styles of adult learners.  
			