
 Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference D.J. Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. 
Manivannan, eds. THE FUTURE OF MARITIME FACILITY DESIGNS AND OPERATIONS Nora K. Ryan TranSystems Corporation 
2100 Reston Parkway, Suite 202 Reston, Virginia 20191, U.S.A.  ABSTRACT Cargo in ocean-going vessels 
continues to grow in volume. The typical current growth rate of 6% to 7% per year is expected to continue 
through the next decade or more, resulting in a doubling of total throughput volume. Facing this incredible 
growth, port authorities, railroads, and all levels of government agencies (municipal, regional, state, 
federal) are searching for solutions to an impending traffic nightmare. Proposed solutions range from 
new infrastructure inventions to improved and technology足assisted operating procedures. In order to review 
and validate the potential success of these ideas, computer simulation is increasingly a key tool. Simulation 
is allowing experimentation in infrastructure, technology and operations without the millions of dollars 
in actual construction. In addition, with the high level of competition in the industry and the razor 
thin margins which decide not only mode of transport but the choice of specific carriers, ports, railroads 
and trucking companies, simulation allows for experimentation without the potential penalty of lost productivity 
and customer share. This paper outlines two major concepts in handling the future cargo volumes: big 
ships and fast ships. INDUSTRY BACKGROUND &#38; TRENDS There are new dynamics in intermodal shipping 
today, caused by the elimination of international trade barriers, lower tariffs and shifting centroids 
of global manufacturing and consumption. Trade worldwide is growing at an unprecedented rate, with the 
majority of cargo shipped in containers. Worldwide containerized trade is growing at a 9% annual rate 
and the U.S. rate is 6%. The growth in containerized trade is anticipated to continue as more and more 
cargoes are transferred from break-bulk to containerized. By 2010, experts predict that 90 percent of 
all liner freight will be shipped in containers. Every major container port is expected to double and 
possibly triple its cargo by 2020. As these cargo volumes continue to grow, planners and engineers through 
the U.S. and the world are working on solutions to move cargo more efficiently. This push is prompted 
by: The ever-decreasing inventory which manufacturers and retailers keep on hand to supply assembly 
lines and customers  Increasing congestion around traditional maritime centers due to truck traffic 
and train service  Increasing competition for waterfront property for non-industrial uses, such as tourist 
and shopping centers, business parks and condominiums.  Two major ideas in ship design and operations 
are at the forefront of possible industry solutions. They are the Mega-Ship and the FastShip. 2 MEGA-SHIPS 
Containers are carried via specialized container ships. The first-generation ships held only 1,000 Twenty-Foot足Equivalent-Units 
(TEUs) or about 500 trucks worth of cargo. Since these first ships in the 1960s, subsequent generations 
of larger ships have been designed and put into service. The latest ships put into service by Maersk, 
a major international shipping line, hold over 6,000 TEUs. These ships are affecting dredge depth for 
major waterway channels and the waterside service equipment. In addition, as ships get larger, the surge 
of cargo flowing through a port becomes more intense. Shipping lines task ports with servicing a vessel 
as quickly as possible to minimize the down-time suffered when a vessel is not moving. Current service-window 
expectations for a mega-ship is 48 hours. This translates to over 6,000 truck trips or over 20 two足mile 
long double-stack trains in two days. 2.1 Agile Port Concept The ability of current port facilities to 
handle these surge situations is in question. Waterfront property is highly足valued and is often ecologically 
sensitive. Ports today commit large parcels of property to the storage of containers. A typical 1,200 
to 1,600 container discharge operation uses between 70 and 80 acres of storage area. As the ships grow 
in capacity, the number of containers requiring storage will increase. This storage requirement, combined 
with the increased truck and rail congestion in the surrounding community, is prompting the exploration 
of a new port concept: the agile port. The agile port removes the bulk of the storage from the waterfront 
to an inland storage and sorting location, the Intermodal Interface Center (IIC). Containers arriving 
via vessel to the port can be transferred onto railcars immediately upon discharge and moved inland. 
Conversely, containers destined for export on the vessel can be collected, sorted and stored at the IIC 
until vessel arrival and shuttled to the port via these same dedicated shuttle trains. By moving the 
storage and sorting functions inland, the port can save property and reduce congestion in the surrounding 
port community.  2.2 Agile Port Simulation TranSystems has performed multiple simulation experiments 
of this agile port concept, including one for the Kowloon Canton Railway Company (KCRC) in Hong Kong. 
KCRC wished to develop a system for moving port cargo out of the Hong Kong area more efficiently and 
with the potential for reducing the excessive truck traffic at the port and through the city. Using the 
agile port concept, containers from vessels would be drayed a short distance to the Port Rail Terminal 
(PRT) where they would be loaded onto short, double-stack trains which shuttle the cargo to an inland 
facility (IIC). At the IIC, trains would be sorted and sent to inland China for cargo distribution and 
pickup for return to Hong Kong. The trains headed into China will be single-stack due to bridge and tunnel 
clearance restrictions. For KCRC, TranSystems investigated a five-phase implementation of the system. 
The phases were: Phase 1: Only 25% of the port facility, the PRT, constructed, and no IIC constructed. 
Trains are loaded at the port and sent directly to China. Trains are only single-stack. Target of eight 
trains each way per day. Phase 2: Full build-out of PRT, or eight tracks. No IIC constructed. Trains 
are only single-stack. Target of 32 trains each way per day.  Phase 3: Full build-out of PRT. Partial 
IIC construction (50%). Target of 39 trains each way per day. Only 22% of the day s trains will use the 
IIC. The other 78% will function as in Phase 2.  Phase 4: Full build-out of PRT. Further IIC construction 
(67%). Target of 47 trains each way per day.  Phase 5: Full build-out of PRT (eight tracks) and IIC 
(18 tracks). Target of 54 trains each way per day. Each of these phases was simulated and key statistics 
reported, including:  Number of trains completed  PRT track utilization  PRT crane utilization  IIC 
track utilization  IIC crane utilization  IIC hostler (internal drayage) utilization  PRT lorry (external 
drayage) utilization  These statistics, along with queue waiting times and customized trace reports, 
were used to determine the adequacy of the infrastructure to meet the daily train schedule and to recommend 
equipment levels, including lorries, hostlers, railcars and locomotives. Equipment levels determined 
by the simulation analysis are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2. These simulated results can be extrapolated 
to forecast achievable annual throughput at each stage. These results are presented in Table 1. This 
table illustrates that KCRC can design the intermodal system to handle close to 3.8 million TEUs, or 
1.9 million trailers worth of cargo with this system. The largest intermodal facilities in operation 
today can handle less than half this amount. In addition, the amount of land which this system uses per 
cargo unit moved is much less than that of a conventional terminal, as illustrated in Table 2. 450 400 
350 300 250 150 100 50 0 8 32 39 47 54   Number of Trains (each way) Lorries Railcar Platforms Figure 
1: Required External Equipment 60 50 40  Number 30 Required 20 10 0 8 32 39 47 54 Number of Trains 
(each way) Hostlers Locomotives PRT Cranes IIC Cranes Figure 2: Required Internal Terminal Equipment 
Table 1: Extrapolated Annual Throughput for KCRC Phase Trains per Day Throughput Throughput (each way) 
per Day per Year 1 8 1,600 560,000 2 32 6,400 2,240,000 3 39 7,800 2,730,000 4 47 9,400 3,290,000 5 54 
10,800 3,780,000  FAST SHIPS Fast container ships represent an alternative line of development for advanced 
technology vessels. These vessels offer higher speeds than current vessels in exchange for higher construction 
and operating costs per TEU. This means that the longer the distance to be traversed, the more profitable 
and valuable the service, especially for high-value, time sensitive cargoes. Table 2: Intermodal Rail 
Throughput Comparison Facility Annual Facility Through Throughput Total put (TEUS) Acres per Acre LA 
Intermodal 1,400,000 190 7,300 Container Transfer Facility (ICTF) Tacoma 268,000 35 7,600 North Intermodal 
(NIM) KCRC Agile 3,780,000 220 17,100 Port System  3.1 FastShip Atlantic FastShip Atlantic (FSA) is 
a highly publicized fast container ship venture. FSA has designed a vessel which can travel at 37 to 
42 knots, versus 25 knots for the fastest conventional ships. FSA is planning to initiate transatlantic 
service in 2001, providing door-to-door service times of five to seven days, compared with fifteen to 
thirty days conventional service. While the speed of the ship will be a crucial element in the FSA service 
goal, the servicing of the ship at harbor is also critical. Since the ship is so expensive to operate 
($100 million per year), it is of paramount importance that the ship make as many transatlantic crossings 
as possible. The less time the ship must wait for loading and unloading service to be completed, the 
more sailing time available. To that end, FSA has designed a revolutionary discharge and load operation 
which differs from conventional service entirely. While conventional ships use wharf-side cranes to lift 
one container at a time from ship to shore or vice versa, the FSA ship and terminals will be designed 
to load strings of containers via a ramp and a series of container carriers. These lightweight platforms 
will be shipped with the containers and used to unload the containers off the vessel at destination. 
Yard tractors will be used to pull these container strings, which look like small trains, off of the 
ship into the terminal. Once the discharge strings have been removed, already loaded export strings will 
be pushed onto the vessel and the ship will be ready for departure. FSA has estimated the entire ship 
may be unloaded and reloaded in only four to six hours. An FSA vessel can hold 1,448 TEUs, so the load/unload 
rate is 480 to 720 TEUs per hour. A conventional wharf crane handles 70 TEUs per hour, so a comparable 
conventional facility would require six to ten cranes working simultaneously. Typical crane assignments 
per shift range between two and five.  3.2 FastShip Simulation With the rapid rate of discharge and 
loading, and the goal to service the ship in only six hours (compared with 24 to 48 hours for a conventional 
ship), the facility must be carefully designed to minimize congestion and be adequately staffed to process 
all of the trucks and trains servicing the facility. TranSystems has simulated the FSA design, at the 
request of the Delaware River Port Authority (DRPA), the U.S. East Coast port for FSA. The purpose of 
the simulation was to verify equipment requirements and examine the peaking of truck arrivals to the 
facility and their service performance. In addition, the percentage of containers which will arrive and 
depart via rail is predicted to be very high - around 75%. Cranes in the facility may lift containers 
directly from the vessel strings to railcars and vice versa, given that the railcar and vessel string 
are adjacent. Rail tracks and vessel strings are paired such that one crane spans one vessel string and 
one rail track. If the vessel strings are well planned, using a real-time terminal operating system, 
then a high percentage of containers may be lifted directly from vessel string to rail (or vice versa) 
with the crane. If the vessel strings are not well planned, only a small percentage of containers can 
benefit from a direct lift. All other containers will need to be lifted via the crane to a hostler (in-yard 
tractor). The hostler will move the container to the appropriate destination where another crane will 
lift it to either vessel string or railcar. The simulation examined several different levels of string 
planning efficiency in order to observe the effect, if any, on the system. This split was known as the 
Rail Pre-Planning Percentage (RPPP). The simulation looked at several key statistics, including: Ship 
Service Time: The time from ship arrival at the facility until the ship is ready for departure. Target 
is between four and six hours.  Truck Service Time: The time a trucker spends at the facility, including 
any waiting time to enter the facility gate. Usual service targets are under 30 minutes.  Required Rail 
Export Arrival Time: In order to have all of the export containers ready for the vessel, trains with 
containers need to arrive a certain minimum time prior to vessel arrival. If the trains arrive too late, 
they may not be finished when the vessel arrives, delaying vessel service or resulting in containers 
being left behind until the next ship call.  Hostlers Required: The simulation tracked the average 
and maximum number of in-yard hostlers required to shuffle containers from one yard location to another. 
 Cranes Required: The simulation also tracked the average and maximum number of cranes in use throughout 
the simulation duration.  The results of these statistics are presented in Figure 3. The results are 
shown for two extremes in the RPPP. If the RPPP is high, then 95% of the containers can be directly lifted 
between railcar and vessel string. If, on the other hand, the RPPP is low, then only 25% of the containers 
can be handled in this manner. All others must have a hostler move. 50 40 vs 23 40 vs 20 45 Minutes Hostlers 
40 35 30 25 20 8 vs 4 8 vs 4 15 Cranes 4.9 vs 4.3 10 Hours 5 0 Ship Truck Required Hostlers Cranes Service 
Service Rail Required Required Time Export Arrival  25% RPPP   Statistic 95% RPPP Figure 3: FastShip 
Terminal Performance Statistics Figure 3 illustrates how the RPPP affects the efficiency of the proposed 
system. While the ship time is not dramatically affected, all other statistics show a marked decrease 
in performance as the RPPP drops. Trucks which arrive to the facility to either drop off or pick up containers 
have a 74% increase in terminal time and fail to achieve the 30 minute service target. The rail service 
for trains is slowed to the point where trains may arrive to the facility no later than eight hours prior 
to vessel arrival, rather than four hours. Both of these decreases in performance are directly related 
to the increased equipment requirements shown. The number of hostlers in the yard must double due to 
all of the shuffling from track pair to track pair which must take place. In addition, the number of 
required trains must also double since the vast majority of containers now require two lifts per transfer 
(onto hostler, off of hostler) rather than just one. This extra equipment leads to yard congestion which 
slows down the truck service time. The average cycle time per container is increased due to the required 
hostler move, resulting in a longer overall time period needed to handle the export trains. The simulation 
illustrates two main points. First, the FSA terminal system can work and can service a ship in the four 
to six hour window. However, second, the terminal performance will be highly sensitive to the accuracy 
of the terminal operating system and the vessel planning and loading rules. While the facility will still 
operate with a poor planning system, the equipment requirements will cause an enormous increase in operating 
and capital expenses, the local trucking community may avoid the terminal due to excessive terminal time 
and more containers may miss the scheduled ship due to late train arrival.  CONCLUSIONS The face of 
the transportation industry continues to change. Propelled by the dynamic growth of international trade, 
shipping lines and other transportation providers will formulate potential advances in infrastructure, 
information technology and operations. The expense of these systems and the repercussions of disturbing 
today s operating trade gateways precludes the implementation of any proposed systems without extensive 
study. Computer simulation has been and will continue to be a prime tool in this study process. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work presented in this paper reflects work on many projects for multiple clients, including the Delaware 
River Port Authority, FastShip Atlantic, the Kowloon Canton Railway Company, the Center for the Commercial 
Deployment of Transportation Technologies and the Small Business Innovative Research Program. AUTHOR 
BIOGRAPHY NORA K. RYAN is an Associate and Assistant Vice President for TranSystems Corporation, where 
she is in charge of all operations analysis and simulation. Prior to joining TranSystems, Ms. Ryan was 
a simulation analyst for Pritsker corporation, performing technical support, training, quality assurance 
and consulting services. Ms. Ryan received a B.S. in Systems Engineering from Purdue University in 1988 
and a Masters Degree in Industrial Engineering in 1990, also from Purdue University. She is a member 
of IIE and has been involved with the American Association of Port Authorities (AAPA), the Transportation 
Research Board (TRB) and the Intelligent Transportation Society (ITS) of America. 
			