
 The Right Tool for the Job: A Quest for the Perfect Authoring Package Jeffrey N. Agnew GeorgeA. Palmer 
Private Networks Documentation Northern Telecom, Inc. 2100 Lakeside, MS A0503 Richardson, TX 75080 No 
single authoring tool is ideal for online documentation because none was designed specifically for it. 
Every tool commercially available was intended for a different audience. Some authoring packages evolved 
from computer-based training, others from multimedia and graphics. If you are contemplating developing 
online documentation, you must make some difficult choices selecting an authoring tool. The wrong decision 
could haunt you for years and cost you both money and customers. This paper compares Authorware and MacroMind 
Director, the two most popular authoring tools, and provides concrete information about hardware, cost. 
the learning curve, file &#38;anslation, and Macintosh versus PC platform differences. In 1991 our Northern 
Telecom documentation team produced and delivered our first two online Northern Telecom Publications 
(NTPs). Called FIND (For Interactive Network Documentation), these manuals documented the complex working 
of telecommunications features across a network of switches. These ftrst two FIND NTPs were developed 
using Macromedia s MacroMind Director. For subsequent projects we used Authorware Professional. These 
two packages comprise a large portion of the multimedia authoring market. Our experiences using both 
of these tools are the subject of this paper. BACKGROUND Our team had a perplexing problem. Northern 
Telecom (NT) manufactures four different telecommunications switches: the Mendian 1 and the Meridian 
100. installed at customers premises; the DMS-1OO, a local exchange carrien and the DMS-250, an interexchange 
carrier. NT arranges these switches in networks of bewildering vziety. How were we, an NT writing group 
in Richardson, Texas, to produce documentation for features that operate over such complex and varied 
networks, documentation which would both explain the operation of a cross-product feature and yet would 
remain accessible and intelligible to a broad range of P mmcqytimfm am~dmmtikpti ~ddtitie copies smnotmadeor 
dshibwd for direct comrnemial adwnage, tie ACM cvpyight noriee and k title of tlrepubticationappear, 
that copying is and its&#38;re and miceisgivembypeankion oftheAssrciatirm for Cnmpnring Machinezy To 
COPY othmvisc, or to republish, m(fu&#38;s a fee dim -C -on. users? Our answer was online, interactive, 
multimedia documentation. Bringing this answer to fruition, in the form of online Northern Telecom Publications 
(NTPs), entailed both a human and a technical struggle. In the initial stages of trying to understand 
how a complex telecommunications feature works on different switches. the NT writing team read the source 
material (usually design documents) and then ask the software designers and each other questions and 
discuss the answers. We often find ourselves resorting to drawing illustrations on whiteboaxds in an 
attempt to understand what is happening. For example, at one point the NT team determined that merely 
to describe all the permutations of one particular feature s operation would require between 30 and 40 
pages of text. How many of our customers would actuafly attempt to read those pages? Probably few. However, 
we found that we were able to present the equivalent of those 30 or 40 pages of information in a 45-second 
online animation, leaving no confusion in the user s mind about how the feature works. The NT team also 
learned that they had to think and write differently for online documentation than for paper. Paper manuals 
often grow in size because it is hard to decide whether to include certain information or to leave it 
out. To be on the safe side. the information usually gets included. Thus user manuals swell into unwieldy 
reference manuals, to the detriment of the user who may want to know only a series of commands. The comparatively 
smafl screen on which an online document runs militates against the inclusion of a large mass of text 
because reading it is even more maddening on a screen than on paper. Therefore, tie writer is compelled 
to distill from the mass of source material he encounters only that which is essential to the user. The 
rest is left out. So. in a way that has nothing directly to do with the twhnology, online documents tend 
to be easier to use. Besides, we designed these online manuals with the user s convenience in mind. It 
is easy to go directly to the information desired, to move to another section from anywhere, and to go 
into and out of the manual. The NT writers found themselves straitened in an unaccustomed way. A screen 
with one or mc)re graphics has little room for words of explanation and direction. So every  @ 1992 
ACM O89791-533-XJ92IOO1OIO253 $1.50 SiGDOC 92 word has to do its job. All adjectives, adverbs, and phrases 
found to be extraneous were removed. The NT team also realized an urianticipated benefit of doing online 
documentation. The draft review, an integral process if the writer is to produce an accurate manual but 
a bane of the software engineer s existence, came to be seen in a new light. When word got around that 
our writing group was circulating an online draft with animations and other graphics that was actually 
enjoyable to use, engineers called to ask if they might review it. From the feedback received by tie 
NT writing team it was clear that reviewers had given the online manual closer scrutiny than that usually 
given to the intimidating 200-page paper draft that thuds onto their desks. Before the NT team s grand 
experiment in or-dine, interactive, multimedia documentation was over, we found that, not only did our 
customers greet our new documents with a uniform chorus of approval, but Northern Telecom s production, 
updating and distribution costs were lower. Moreover, when our sales, marketing, and training people 
saw our online documents, they wanted copies of them for their own use. The appeal of the NT team s online 
documents has begun to spread. Recently, Northern Telecom released VISIT Voice and VISIT Video, computerltelephone 
integration and video conference products, with online, interactive documentation. This documentation 
mimics the operation of the application and is intended for use by the non-technical user. In addition, 
NT has released an interactive online master index that provides crucial software and documentation information 
to users of NT switch networks. Adequate preparation before beginning to develop online documentation 
will save much time and fruskation later. Before writing a paper document, authors often perform an audience 
analysis to be sure the intended content matches the user s skills and interests. Similarly, online documentation 
requires analyzing the user s delivery platform. It is pointless to develop an online manual that runs 
only on large, expensive computers that few users pssess. The NT team s fiist decision before developing 
FIND online documents was to specify the minimum delivery platform required to view the documents. Our 
product management insisted that FIND run on a monochrome PC or Macintosh to reach the widest audience 
possible. This issue of Macintosh/PC compatibility compelled us to narrow our choice of authoring packages. 
For instance, Spinnaker Software s PLUS translates code between HyperCard and Windows but lacks the pwer 
and sophistication necess~y for the online documents we had to produce. The only powerful program available 
to us in early 1991, when we began to plan our online documents, was MacroMind Director. Its Windows 
Player, which converts MacroMind Director Macintosh ffles for use with Windows 3.0, had already been 
announced by MacroMind but was not yet being shipped. We decided to buy a pre-release copy, hoping that 
the regular release version would arrive in time to convert our FIND documents before our deadline. We 
produced two online documents using MacroMind Director and, while the results were excellent from the 
user perspective, the effort required to develop them was substantial, more than we felt should have 
been the case. Then we found that the release version of MacroMind s Windows Player did not work as well 
as our pre-release copy. While we eventually worked around this problem and others, it was unsettling 
to confront our deadlines with tools we did not have full confidence in. Having finished the first two 
online documents, we concluded that, although MacroMind Director is excellent for animation, presentations, 
and graphic-laden interactions, it was not the perfect tool for producing user manuals or other text-intensive 
documents. In early 1992 we changed to Authorwsre Professional for Macintosh (APM) and its PC companion, 
Authorware Professional for Windows (APW). Marketed principally for computer-based Waking, Authorwxe 
was the only package that offered fully-functional software for both the Macintosh and the PC. Authorware 
files produced on the Macintosh can be opened and edited freely using the PC version. Authorware automates 
many of the tasks required to produce online documents. The same NT team produced the interactive user 
manuals for the VISIT Voice and VISIT Video products using both APM and APW. Having used both MacroMind 
Director and Authorwnre Professional and investing the time to learn them and the money to support them, 
we concluded that neither is ideally suited to producing large, complex interactive documentation. The 
one you select depends on what you require the program to do. HARDWARE Multimedia authoring packages 
require significant processing power. We consider the following to be the minimum configurations needed 
to use Authorware or MacroMind Director on PC and Macintosh. Macintosh needed recommended RAM 5Mb 8Mb 
hard drive 80Mb 160Mb monitor 16-inch 19-inch CPU Mac Itci Mac Iffx/Quadra Pc: RAM 4Mb extended 10Mb 
extended hard drive 80Mb 200Mb monitor 14-inch VGA 19-inch Super VGA CPU 386133Mhz 486/33Mhz The following 
peripherals are not necessary but the NT team found them useful to broaden the versatility of our online 
development system: CD-ROM drive, flatbed color scanner, and sound digitizer. If you can spend extra 
money in only one area, it is probably best spent to buy more RAM for your computer. You will switch 
between your authoring program and word processor, screen captwe, and graphics packages frequently. Opening 
and closing these applications slows the development process, so get the most memory your computer can 
use.  -SIGDOC 92 A large-screen monitor, providing the extra screen space in which to arrange open windows, 
facilitates your productivity. With MacroMind Director you will have the Score, Cast, Tools, Text, and 
probably Paint windows open most of the time. On a small monitor these windows either obscure the Stage 
(where you actually build the document) or you must make the windows so small as to render them useless. 
With Authorware you often keep windows open five or six levels into an interaction. You may use a menu 
command to hide all the windows, but it is easier to manipulate icons and see the results in the Presentation 
window when the screen can accommodate all the windows. Multimedia files occupy considerable disk space. 
It is the conventional wisdom that a big hard drive is of the highest priority. While a big hard drive 
is importan~ the NT team found that a large monitor was the more valuable element. You can always move 
fdes to other disks to make room. Consider using a shareware utility like Compactor Pro or StuffIt to 
reduce the size of infrequently used files. Furthermore, a background compression program like AutoDoubler 
or More Disk Space works during your computer s idle periods and can effectively double your hard drive 
s capacity. The NT team found that the Macintosh IIci is an excellent multimedia development platform 
and offers three NuBus expansion slots. MacroMind Director runs smoothly on a IIci equipped with 8Mb 
of RAM. Authorware s smaller application size enables it to run even faster. Any Macintosh slower than 
a IIsi is suitable for producing only the simplest interactive documentation. RAM SEllUNGS If you use 
a Macintosh, you must adjust the amount of RAM the computer allocates to MacroMind Director and Authorware. 
MacroMind Director s suggested 2Mb setting is too low for a large color tile or even a large black and 
white file. A setting of 3Mb is better, but if you have a kuge-screen color monitor, specify 4Mb of RAM. 
Authorware is somewhat less RAM-intensive than MacroMind Director. If you don t import large PICT fries 
for graphics, the recommended 1.5Mb setting should be enough. Increase it to 2Mb for color and 3 or 4Mb 
for a large-screen color monitor. When MacroMind Director begins to run out of memory, the computer s 
performance begins to deteriorate and it bas difficulty performing simple tasks such as cutting and pasting. 
To find out which elements of your file consume the most RAM, select the About Director item from the 
Apple menu to display a graph of memory use. This graph shows how much free RAM remains, as well as the 
total RAM used by different elements of the program. Hold down the Option key when selecting this same 
item to purge the memory buffer and free some additional space. Authorware for Macintosh locks up when 
it mns out of memory. It does give some warning but the warning often comes too late to finish a task. 
When it locks UP. the program can corrupt your file. If you get a warning of low memory, save your file 
immediately and quit the program. Then restart tie application. Save often and, if you have sufficient 
disk space, keep a duplicate copy of your document. COST The most obvious cost in procuring an authoring 
package is that of the software itself. Authorware is obviously aimed at the corporate market with a 
list price ten times that of MacroMind Director. If you intend to use the Windows Player to port Macintosh 
files to the PC, figure in the additional cost. A special academic version of Authorware is available 
to educational institutions. Discounts on quantity purchases or bundles of MacintoshJPC versions are 
also available. Often overlooked in multimedia development is the cost of licensing. Both Authorware 
and MacroMind Director produce files that can be packaged with run-time versions, which enable others 
to look at your work without having the application. Early versions of MacroMind Director charged fees 
for run-time licenses. Beginning with version 3.0 Macromedla waived this requirement and you may now 
distribute unlimited run-time copies of your commercial or non-profit document free of charge. Thk makes 
the package an excellent choice for a small business or an individual author. Authorware, befitting its 
computer-based training origins, requires a licensing fee based on the number of copies you make and 
the types of documents you produce. Don t forget to include the cost of training, software updates, and 
technical support in your estimate of the application s cost. MacroMind Director comes with some free 
technical support. The company maintains a technical support forum on America Online for subscribers. 
In addition, Macromedia sponsors training seminars in several cities to certify locaf users as qualfled 
develo~rs. Software upgrades to MacroMind Director me available. You may purchase technical support for 
Authorware and software updates are included in the annual support fee. THE LEARNING CURVE MacroMind 
Director has a deserved reputaticm as a program with a steep learning curve. It is relatively easy to 
produce simple multimedia presentations with Macro Mind Director after reading its user manuals. But 
to create the complex coding necessary to produce an interactive document requires many hours of study 
and training. Director employs a ftlmmaking metaphor. The program uses a linear, time-based Score window, 
 cast members are placed on a Stage and numerical representations of the cast members appew in frames 
in the Score. You extend a cast member across the number of frames in which you want it to appem. To 
erase an object from view. you simply remove it from the Score. Each block of text is a cast member which 
you can matupulate separately. Director comes with a rich scripting langua~e called Lingo. Similar to 
HyperTalk, Lingo gives the user powerful control over most interactivity features. If you are unfamiliar 
with HyperTalk or the basics of programming, however, you may have some trouble with Lingo. There is 
no cietailed tutorial to teach scripting and the task-based documentation is SIGDOC 92 superficial. 
Macromedia supplies an excellent Lingo reference manual. By contrast, Authorware relies on a graphical 
interface which uses 11 different icons to control most functions. The program opens to a vertical flow 
line to which you drag icons. There is a different icon for sound, interactions, animations, erasures, 
and calculations. To ch~ge a document s structure, you simply move the icons to a new position on the 
flow line. This graphical approach is deceptively simple and belies the program s complexity. Authorware 
s strength lies in how it automates many interactive functions. Drag an interaction icon to the flow 
line and a dialog box appears asking you to specify how you wish the user to respond to a display: with 
a click or touch, with text with a key press, etc. You may also attach conditional statements and calculations 
to a display. Moreover, it is possible to combine different res~nses in the same interaction. For example, 
a single screen may have a click­touch area to continue branching, a text input area, a trap to catch 
inmrrect responses, pull-down menus, and a calculation to j ump to an external file. Authorware provides 
a pull-down menu to copy and paste system variables and functions into your interactions. You may also 
create user variables and store them in the menu. The ability to paste pre-written pieces of code into 
your document is helpful for non-programmers and provides easy access to powerful features. Another pull-down 
menu provides models or templates. These are chunks of often-used sequences which you may paste into 
your project. Use your own models or copy any of the examples supplied. These models actually become 
part of the system code so you may use them in several different projects without reloading them each 
time. USING THE SOFIWARE You can create complex interactive documen~ with either MacroMind Director 
or Authorware. However, the difference in the approach of the two programs makes it essential that you 
match the tool to the type of document you wish to create. Most interactive documents rely on branching. 
The reader selects a topic he wants to explore and the software branches to that section of code. For 
example, using MacroMind Director to create a click-touch area to take the user to a new section is a 
multi-step procedure. You must enter background graphics, enter text objects for instructions, create 
the two­prat click-touch area (with an invisible cast member and, say, a button), use the Tool palette 
and the Inks menu to design the button, and use the Script window to specify where the click-touch area 
is to take the user. To create a stillar click-touch area with Authorware is easier. Drag an icon to 
the flow line for background graphics and text objects. Then drag an interaction icon to the flow line 
and a display icon to the right of the interaction icon. Select the click-touch option. Authorware makes 
it easy to create interactions. You select most related options from a dialog box. MacroMind Director. 
on the other hand, requires you to create each element of an interaction separately. However. owing to 
its origins in animation, MacroMind Director makes it easier than Authorware to automate movement. To 
make an object move with MacroMind Director, you place a cast member on the stage in the first and last 
frames in which it is to appear, highlight all the frames in between, and simply invoke a command. An 
Authotware animation is more complicated. Place the object to be moved in an icon and put an animation 
icon next to it on the flow line. Then specify in a dialog box the line the object is to follow. Because 
you must use a dialog box to add and subtract points along the object s path to alter its movemen~ editing 
an animation in Authorware can be a cumbersome undertaking. Authorware also lacks some basic transitions, 
such as wipes and reveals, which can simulate motion. While the Macintosh version of Authorware can import 
MacroMind Director animation files saved in PICT fortna~ they add considerably to Authorware s file size. 
FILE SIZE CONSTRAINTS MacroMind Director is excellent at resource management. For example, if you import 
a 300K background graphic, you may use it in one frame or in 30 frames and the MacroMind Director fide 
remains the same size. Each time you paste an object into an Authorware display icon, it becomes a new 
graphic, even if you have used it before. While there are ways to circumvent this limitation, it remains 
true that large file size is one of Authorware s principal drawbacks. One of our interactive manuals 
(9-inch screen, monochrome graphics, and screen captures) quickly grew to over 3Mb. Compact Pro compressed 
it to less than 600K. Curiously, MacroMind Director files converted to PC using the Player double in 
size, probably because the program creates a bit-map of everything on the screen and is unable to use 
the same resource management that is so effective on the Macintosh. Authorware fdes show virtually no 
size difference between the Macintosh and the PC versions. CROSS-PLATFORM ISSUES Producing a document 
to be displayed on both a Macintosh and a PC can be difficult. The color palettes of the two machines 
are different. as are the typical monitor screen sizes. All Macintoshes have built-in sound capability 
whereas PCs require an expansion card. You must use a neWork or third-party software to tnttsfer tiles 
between a Macintosh and a PC. The standard fonts on each machine diffe~ even the same point size of Times 
and Helvetica fonts appear differently on screen. All these issues require consideration before you begin 
development. CHOOSING COLOR Choosing to produce online documents in color removes many PC users from 
your audience. Most of our customers have older monochrome Macintoshes and PCs, so we developed our manuals 
in black and white. The online documents were not as flashy as we might have liked, but they run on any 
monitor. The use of black and white had the . SIGDOC 92 ancillary benefit of producing smaller file sizes. 
Color versions of the same documents would have been twice as large. The standard Macintosh color palette 
does not tmnslate directly to the PC. Almost any Macintosh is capable of 8-bit color (256 colors). Most 
PCs display only 16 or fewer colors (VGA). Fortunately, both the MacroMind Player and Atrthorwtie provide 
simulated PC 16-color palettes to let you develop on a Macintosh and be sure that your PC version looks 
the same. SOUND All Macintoshes play back digitized sound. PCs have only recently squired sound capability 
with the introduction of expansion cards such as Soundblaster. Both Authorware and MacroMind Director 
transfer any sounds contained in a Macintosh file when ported to PC. So a PC with the proper PC expansion 
card plays sounds properly. Since PC sound is such a recent developmen~ it is likely that most users 
do not yet have this capability. Thus, you must either forego sound entirely or create a different version 
of the document for each platform. The NT team s fust Macintosh documents made considerable use of telephone 
rings, busy signals, and tone dialing. After converting the files to PC, we discovered that our animations 
and demos were unintelligible without sound. So we had to modify the PC versions to include visual representations 
of the audio cues, such as making a phone icon flash when it rings. CONVERTING FILES Any Macintosh equipped 
with a SuperDrive can read and write to 3.5-inch DOS diskettes using Apple File Exchange. This is the 
easiest way to transfer files to the PC. However, since most of your files will be large, they may not 
fit on a 1.44Mb floppy. Most of the popular compression programs such as StuffIt or PICZip do not work 
on the opposite platform. A simple solution is to use MacLlnk Plus, a software program which includes 
an application for both Macintosh and PC and a serial cable to connect the two machines. MacLink has 
the added advantage of file translators to exchange information between the Macintosh and PC versions 
of common programs like Word, PageMaker, and Excel. It is easy to transfer files when both machines reside 
on a LAN. Use binary transfer to exchange an Authorware or MacroMind Director (Player) file between Macintosh 
and Pc. MacroMind D~ector files must be converted to PC format using the MacroMind Player. Conversion 
is straightforward and easy, but there are some limitations. For example, reverse ink effects do not 
translate; nor will some transitions. These limitations are explained in the Player documentation. Be 
sure to read the manual before you begin Macintosh development. The NT team received a beta copy of the 
Player after we had already begun to create a Macintosh document. We discovered that many of the elements 
we were using on the Macintosh version would not translate to PC. It took many hours of editing to make 
the document PC­capable. We also discovered that the Player converts all text to graphic bitmaps. Thus, 
the Macintosh fonts look exactly the same and require no adjustment of line endings or the fitting of 
text into spaces that are too tight. However, it is irrqmssible to edit the original MacroMind Director 
text. You must recreate the entire text block, convert it back to a bitmap, and then reconvert it to 
PC. To transfer Atrthorware fdes, save the Macintosh version of your document, adding the .apm extension. 
Transfer the file to your PC. Authorware Professional for Windows (APW) opens the file directly and converts 
it on the spot. APW does not convert text to bitmap. Instead, you may select an equivalent Windows font 
for the PC. Because the Macintosh and Windows versions of the same size font differ in screen size, APW 
lets you map fonts based on pixel size. For example, you may choose to convert all Macintosh Geneva fonts 
(12 point, 15 pixels) to PC Helvetica (10 point, 15 pixels). Matching the pixel height means tha~ you 
need do minimal editing after conversion. Because APW uses Windows fonts, you must be sure that your 
customer s machine has the same fonts. Rather than shipping extra fonts with each package, we decided 
to limit ourselves to the standard fonts that are part of every version of Windows 3.0. SPEED DIFFERENCES 
While it is probably not unusual to want the biggest, fastest machine on which to develop your online 
documents, remember that the average user has a less powerful computer. Design your documents to run 
best on the most common configuration. The extensive use of color, speedy animations, and complicated 
transitions slows the average machine. Convert and test your documents frequently during development. 
ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT Both Authorware and MacroMind Director have only mdirnentary text tools and thus 
neither is easy to use for online documents that contain large amounts of text. Moreover, neither gives 
you any con~ol over kerning, hyphenation, or @acking. Authorware does have tab support within a text 
block. While this may not seem like much, it is more than MacroMind Director, which provides no way to 
line up columns or to set indents. Neither program has a Search and Replace function; the absence of 
this basic tool makes editing an online manual a laborious enterprise. For example, the NT team s online 
manuals contain many hidden screens, which the user sees only after he makes a wrong selection in an 
interaction. The only way to make sure that every instance of a change has been made is to go painstakingly 
through each icon or frame. A new version of Authorware, due later this year, incorporates a simple Find 
function that requires the user to change each icon manually. Some code-based authoring tools autnmate 
the creation of hypertext links. That capability is missing in both of these packages. To create a document 
in which ahnc,st every major word is indexed to a link, avoid both Authorware and MacroMind Director. 
Both programs require the user to set StG120C 92 each linkrnanually. Authorware s interaction icort, 
where most interaction options can be specified in a dialog box, makes this task easier than does MacroMind 
Duector. SUMMARY Producing documents in online, interactive, multimedia format enables the NT documentation 
team to illustrate the working of complex telecommtrnic ations features between switches of different 
kinds. Documentation that in the past would have occupied many pages of dense text is now rendered in 
animation and in other graphical forms in minutes. Northern Telecom s customers, a diverse group who 
use small private branch exchanges (PBXS) as well as large inter-exchange camiera are able to use the 
same online documentation; they uniformly praise it. NTs srdes. marketing, and training departments are 
also using it. Online documents impose discipline on writers and compel them to be succinct and concise. 
A screen has space only for descriptions, directions, and questions that are essential to the user. Commercially 
available authoring tools are designed to create either computer-baaed training, simple HyperCard-like 
documents, or flashy presentations. There is no single tool with the full range of features you need 
to create complex interactive documentation. This situation ought to change as more companies catch the 
wave of the future and begin to produce interactive documentation. Before selecting an authoring package 
from the current generation of programs, research the capabilities of each. Compare what the software 
can do with what you must produce. Most commercial softwme will perform adequately if it is matched with 
the right project. Ask for a demonstration copy of an authoring package before you buy it. Both MacroMind 
Director and Authorware supply these. Do not forget that multimedia authoring tools make great demands 
on your development platform. Manipulating sound, color graphics, animation, and peripherals requires 
speed and storage space beyond what you may be willing or able to supply. A manufacturer s recommended 
minimum configuration may be adequate for the occasional small projecq but any serious documentation 
project requires substantial RAM, a large monitor, and a big hard drive to hold the files you create. 
For run-time copies compare tbe license fees you must pay to the manufacturer of the authoring program. 
A substantial fee can consume a thin profit margin. A program may have many useful features, but it is 
worthless if you cannot afford to distribute copies of what you produce. 
			