
 The Employees' Side of IS Panel Session Maung K. Sein, Panel Chair Agder College Service Boks 422 Tordensjolds 
gate 65 Kristiansand, 4604  Norway The IS literature has almost always taken the perspective of the 
organization in addressing research issues. When we as researchers study productivity, benefits and competitive 
advantage, we almost always mean the benefits that accrue to the organization. Even such approaches as 
Socio-Technical systems and quality of work life have a decidedly company leaning. It is to the company's 
benefit that productivity etc. increase. Often, we go up one level and look at societal issues. What 
is left mostly untouched is the employees' side. What benefits do they get? How is an employee's "strategy" 
and productivity that matters to the employee as an individual (as opposed to being a servant of the 
organization) enhanced? There is often an inherent conflict in the viewpoints and interests of the employee 
and the organization. In such instances, the interests of the organization almost always win out. The 
employee is left to suffer the negative consequences of management initiatives such as BPR and downsizing. 
It is appropriate that we should ask ourselves what is the individual getting out of advances in technology? 
Is her quality of life enhanced not as a member of the organization, but as an individual? Is she getting 
the benefit of productivity gains that IT brings? Is she bearing an unequal burden of IT-related negative 
consequences? Or worse, is she paying the price for organizational gain? The panel will try to sort through 
these issues. Obviously, we cannot provide many answers and solutions. But we will share our ideas and 
thoughts on these possibly contentious questions. Since we come from different comers of the globe, we 
will provide an international flavor to the issues. Essentially, we will broach three broad issues: 1. 
What are the particular areas where the interests of the organization collide with those of the individual? 
 2. What are we doing about it? What innovative ideas have emerged? What are we doing particularly well? 
 3. What are we not doing well? What are the possible solutions to these?  Panel conduct Our hope is 
to make the panel an interactive session in two ways. First, the panelists will not be simply "presenting 
papers": rather they will be stating their views, opinions, positions and experiences in response to 
short questions posed by the moderator. Second, we seek active audience participation: while the panelists 
present their ideas, a free flowing dialogue between (and within) the panel and the audience is actively 
encouraged. 129  
			