
 The Role-Based Access Control System of a European Bank: A Case Study and Discussion Andreas Schaad 
Jonathan Moffett Jeremy Jacob Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science Department 
of Computer Science University of York University of York University of York York, YO10 5DD, UK York, 
YO10 5DD, UK York, YO10 5DD, UK andreas@cs.york.ac.uk jdm@cs.york.ac.uk jeremy@cs.york.ac.uk ABSTRACT 
Research in the area of role-based access control has made fast progress over the last few years. However, 
little has been done to identify and describe existing role-based access control systems within large 
organisations. This paper describes the access control system of a major European Bank. An overview of 
the system s structure, its administration and existing control principles constraining the administration 
is given. In addition, we provide an answer to a key question the ratio of the number of roles to the 
system user population which was raised in the recent RBAC2000 Workshop. Having described certain weaknesses 
of the Bank s system, the case study is extended to a comparison between the system and the RBAC96 models. 
In particular the issues of inheritance and grouping are addressed. General Terms Security Keywords 
role-based access control, control principles, separation of duties, dual control, number of roles, role 
administration, inheritance, least privilege. 1. INTRODUCTION Role-based access control is a well-defined 
research area and there is an on-going effort in the definition of a role-based access control standard 
[1]. Broadly accepted models exist [2], [3], [4]. Research and commercial tools and applications have 
been developed to help with the engineering [5], [6] and management of roles [7]. However, often research 
tools work with minimal testing datasets as no real figures for the number of users, roles and permissions 
in commercial systems have been published. Companies that have successfully deployed access control systems 
are often unwilling to provide descriptions and figures for their Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SACMAT 01, May 3-4, 2001, Chantilly, Virginia, 
USA Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-350-2/01/0005 $5.00. role-based systems for security reasons. As a consequence 
researchers use toy examples that fail to reflect the complexity of large industrial organisations. This 
leads to a lack of credibility from the user side. Researchers cannot provide evidence that their tool 
works as well in a real environment as under laboratory conditions. Providing a concrete example and 
realistic figures can help us to mitigate that situation. On the basis of these numbers more realistic 
datasets and examples could be generated that serve as a test bed for tools. In contrast to other descriptions 
of role-based access control implementations such as in [8] or [9], we stress the fact that the system 
we describe in this paper is not specific to a single application or operating system, but provides access 
control services on an enterprise-wide level to a variety of systems and applications. The rest of this 
paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we provide a case study of a real-world access control system 
as it is used in a major European bank. Sections 2.1 2.3 describe the background and structure, and 
give an application example. The number of users, roles and permissions and their relationship is given 
and evaluated in section 2.4. In section 2.5 we describe the administration of the system and how it 
is controlled by constraints such as Separation of Duties, Dual Control and Least Privilege. Goals for 
further development of the system, to address weaknesses in the current system, are discussed in section 
2.6. Section 3 compares and contrasts this system with Sandhu s RBAC96 access control models, addressing 
the issues of inheritance of access rights in section 3.1 and the grouping of users in section 3.2. We 
finish the case study with a summary and conclusion in section 4. 2. THE FUB ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEM 2.1 
Background The particular case study that we present in this paper was carried out in co-operation with 
Dresdner Bank, a major European bank with 50,659 employees and 1,459 branches world-wide. The main business, 
with about 6.5 million private customers and 1,000 branches, is situated in Germany, the rest in Europe 
and overseas. The Bank uses a variety of different computing applications to support its business, many 
of which have their origin in the mainframe world, but also more recently deployed client-server based 
systems. Before 1990, most of the host-based applications used the local access control file administered 
at the relevant host for the determination of access rights. For each employee, the access rights had 
to be administered manually at the individual application level. This caused enormous administrative 
overheads as a result of the growing number of people working with these applications. Additionally the 
maintenance of several application­level security files for each user was an error-prone process and 
could not be justified within the general security policy framework. In order to improve this situation 
a system, called the FUB (= Funktionale Berechtigung), was developed by the Bank as no suitable commercial 
solutions were available at that time. In this system access rights are given to the individual user 
according to a combination of his job function and official position within the organisation. The direct 
assignment of access rights to the individual user at the application level was discontinued. The FUB 
is an example of an enterprise-wide role-based access control system. Applications cannot make access 
control decisions on their own. They grant access to data on the basis of a centrally provided security 
profile. Over 60 applications within the bank make use of this system. These cover a wide area of organisational 
functions such as private customer instruments at the local branch, credit data checks, automated signature 
approval and the administration of Unix accounts. An application is launched by a user who first identifies 
and authenticates himself to it. Initially the application has no knowledge of any relevant access permissions 
the user might possess. It queries the FUB about the security profile of the current user in order to 
obtain this information. Since 1990 (and thus much earlier than most of the published role-based access 
control discussion), the FUB has hosted roles and delivered access rights for usage within other applications 
that run under various environments such as UNIX derivatives (SINIX/AIX) or WINDOWS NT. On average 42,000 
security profiles per day are distributed by the FUB. The time needed by the system to determine one 
individual security profile is approximately 85 ms. The system s availability rate is 99% per year. 
2.2 The Basic System Structure The FUB is a role-based access control system. Roles are defined as a 
combination of the official position and job function Typical official positions could be that of the 
ordinary Clerk, Group Manager or Regional Manager. Functions represent the user s daily duties such as 
being a financial analyst, share technician or internal software engineer. Additionally the organisational 
unit to which a user belongs is used as an access control criterion for certain applications. All these 
data are defined and maintained in the human resources database. A batch job runs between the human resources 
system and the FUB every night. Thus, the access control system has a very accurate image of the current 
organisational status and existing roles. Within the FUB the data delivered by the human resources database 
are linked to applications. Access rights are assigned to applications. When a user starts an application 
the FUB delivers the security profile that tells the application which individual access rights the user 
possesses. Figure 1 shows the basic architecture of the system and its interfaces to the human resources 
database and individual applications. Daily Batch Job delivers HR Data to Access Control System FUB 
HR Data + Application determines Domain + Access Right  Individual application requests Individual 
application obtains Security Profile Security Profile Applications Figure 1 : The basic structure of 
the FUB Employees belong to an organisational unit. Ideally each employee is only assigned to one role. 
However, in special circumstances an employee can be given up to four roles (e.g. in the case of illness 
of a colleague). Several applications can be accessed through a role. Each application has a set of access 
rights assigned to it. A simplified underlying data model is shown in Figure 2. N 1-4 NM Position #User 
ID #Application  Job Function N N 1 M #Organisational Unit #Access Right Figure 2 : The FUB data 
model 2.3 An Application Example To make the above technical description more concrete we provide a 
scenario that reflects the daily business at a high-street branch of Dresdner Bank (Figure 3). An existing 
bank client wishes to discuss his personal savings situation with the branch s financial advisor. The 
advisor and the client go to a meeting room which contains a Personal Computer. The advisor identifies 
and authenticates himself to the machine using a smartcard and his password. He launches an application 
that allows him to enter the records of his client which are stored on a central server. When the application 
is launched it issues a request to the host, querying which rights the advisor has within the application 
A1 A2 A3 A4 An domain. The application request contains the personnel number, which was obtained during 
the identification and authentication process. Also the application identifier is submitted to obtain 
the relevant authorisation profile for the application. Once the FUB has used these data to deliver the 
security profile, the application knows which access rights are assigned to the role of the user and 
allows him to execute his access rights accordingly. In this particular case information about the relevant 
organisational unit to which the advisor belongs (here, the branch) will prohibit him from accessing 
account data outside his branch. His access rights are confined within the organisational domain of the 
branch. However, other applications can be used from access points all over the bank, as the access rights 
which are granted for them do not depend on any local information. Financial Personal Private Customer 
FUB Access Advisor Computer Instruments Application Control System Identify/Authenticate (UserID,Password) 
Authentication_Confirmation() Launch(Application)  Security_Profile_Request (UserID, ApplicationID, 
Org. Unit) Security_Profile_Delivered (SecurityProfile) Access_Granted(ApplicationID, Access Rights) 
 Figure 3 : An access request One weakness of the current FUB system is, as we show in Figure 2, that 
a user can be assigned to more than one role. This could happen when a colleague becomes ill or is on 
holidays, but also in more permanent cases where a clerk works in branch A in the morning and branch 
B in the afternoon. In the RBAC96 model a user must choose which role to activate for a session. However, 
the session concept does not exist in the FUB. So when a user logs onto a system he has all the access 
rights of all the roles to which he is assigned. This creates problems with respect to the principle 
of Least Privilege and Separation of Duties. Careful administration and monitoring of user/role assignment 
is needed to prevent security violations and conflicts. 2.4 The Number of Roles A role in the FUB system 
is defined using the official position within the organisational hierarchy and a description of the job 
function. These data are delivered by the human resources system. From now on we will refer to a role 
using the construct function/Official Position. We will use lower case for functions and title case letters 
for positions. An example of this would be financial analyst/Group Manager indicating that somebody has 
the function of being an analyst and holds the official position of a Group Manager. Theoretically the 
total number of roles would be the product of every official position and every function. However, the 
actual number of roles is a subset of this, as certain possible roles such as secretary/Member of the 
Board do not occur in reality. Within the Bank there are 65 official positions that can range from an 
ordinary Clerk in a branch, through the Branch Manager, to a Member of the Board. This can be represented 
as a partial order. Hierarchies arise with further organisational indicators such as cost centres, departments 
or project groups. These positions are combined with 368 different job functions provided by the human 
resources database. Although there would be a possible set of 23,920 roles, the number of roles that 
are currently in use is about 1300. As the access control system is constantly updated it is subject 
to changes occurring when functions and positions are created, and more importantly, deleted. Each night 
human resources data about employees, their function, rank and organisational unit are transferred into 
the FUB. However, not every single employee can actually be seen as an active user of the FUB system 
(e.g. cleaning staff, catering, internal postal services etc.). Thus, there are only about 40,000 users 
in the FUB. These figures match an oral estimate that was given at the RBAC2000 Workshop [10], suggesting 
that the number of roles in a role-based system is approximately 3-4% of the user population. With 40,000 
FUB users and 1300 Roles, we obtain a role/user ratio of approximately 3.2%. However, this distribution 
is not uniform. It would be interesting to analyse the role/user ratio according to the position hierarchy, 
but we do not have the information that is needed. Another issue in the administration of the system 
is that it has also to provide access control services to users which can not be considered as permanent 
staff. This group of users includes third party consultants, temporary staff and freelancers. They work 
for the Bank during projects with a length varying from several weeks to years. Many of them come for 
the duration of a project, leave, and often come back shortly after the project has finished, working 
for another, sometimes related project. Ideally, this group of users should always get a new account 
when starting work and their accounts should be deleted when leaving the project. However, this creates 
overheads. Thus, information about this group is not held in the Human Resources database, but is locally 
administered by the FUB staff. User accounts are created once and are usually kept (de-activated) when 
a consultant leaves. The overheads occurring with the administration of these users should not be underestimated 
as this user group, containing hundreds of users at a time, is subject to constant changes. However, 
we did not take this issue into consideration when providing above figures. The role/user ratio only 
applies to full­time staff. 2.5 Role Administration and Control Principles The actual definition of 
roles and the assignment of users and access rights to the role occurs at different levels within the 
organisation (Figure 4). Human Resources Department Role Definition and User/Role Assignment.  Application 
Administration Access Right Definition and Application/Access Right Assignment.  FUB Administration 
Role/Application Assignment.  Users and roles are initially created in the human resources department. 
A user is given a unique number that serves as his user identification number. Also the roles are defined 
there, maintaining and combining functions and official positions. A user is then assigned to a role. 
This makes sense and reflects the close relation between role-based access control and other areas such 
as human resources and organisation. The assignment of access rights to an application is done for each 
individual application through the application administrator. This takes the form of assigning a set 
of numbers, representing specific access rights, to an application identifier (e.g. PKI = Private Customer 
Instruments). The semantics of these numbers are only known to the application administrator (e.g. 203 
= Create new account in the Private Customer Instruments Application). The benefit of this is that it 
remains unknown to the FUB administrator responsible for the role/application assignment what access 
right a specific number represents within the application domain (Figure 5). In addition the application 
administration process is subject to the principle of Dual Control. One person can alter data, whereas 
a second person has to confirm these data. Human Resources Department Application Administration Figure 
4 : Access Control Administration The FUB administrator can only do the role/application assignment and 
thus there is a strong level of Separation of Duties in the entire administration process. In addition, 
the generation of evidence by logging any administrative actions is obligatory and has to follow the 
Bank s policy on logging and evidence generation. However, some of these control principles are clearly 
broken when it comes to the administration of freelancers or consultants as outlined in section 2.4 (Not 
shown in Figure 4). This group is locally administered by the FUB staff. No information about this group 
comes from the HR department. The consultants are given an identifier by the FUB staff and applications 
are directly assigned to the identifier when the consultant works on a project. The bank is aware of 
this problem and will address it in the future. Note the distinction between the principles of Separation 
of Duties and Dual Control in this context. Separation of Duties requires a task to be split into separate 
sub-tasks, with different people required to carry out the sub-tasks. On the other hand, the principle 
of Dual Control demands the participation of at least two people in the completion of a single task. 
The task of revocation of role and permission assignments is done very elegantly in the bank's system. 
By coupling the information delivered by the human resources department any user/role assignment ceases 
to exist when the user leaves the company. Also any user/role, role/application assignment becomes invalid 
when the organisational structure changes. This tight coupling bears certain dangers, because deleting 
a user from the human resources database will subsequently delete all his work when he ceases to exist 
in the system. Additional controls and organisational measures are needed to prevent valuable work from 
being lost. Änderungsdienst Funktionale Berechtigung ANZEIGEN PERSONALDATEN PERSÖNLICHE IDENTIFIKATION 
Personalnr./User-Id: 08888888 Ausweis-Kartenfolge-Nr.: 4 Fremdkraftnummer: ________ BERECHTIGUNGS-FUNKTION 
gültig ab: 11.01.1999 gültig bis: __.__.____ Laufende Nummer: 028274 Dienststellung: FACHK  Rank/Function 
Funktion: IT-AD ARBEITSPLATZ Firmennummer: 00 Bereichsnummer: 686 Betriebsstelle:00 Kostenstelle: 1111 
 BERECHTIGUNGEN Sachgebiete: Zugriffsrechte:  PKI 003 203 903 ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ BGS 001 
___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ BIG 010 ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Applications BIK 
 010 ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ DRI 010 ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ FUB 010 011 
012 020 021 030 ___ ___ ___ ___ Figure 5 : A FUB Administration Screenshot 2.6 System Development Goals 
In the above description of the system we already noted certain weaknesses of the system. Dresdner Bank 
is aware of desirable improvements that are addressed in the current development of a new access control 
system. Apart from more general issues, such as interface design and software engineering aspects, suggested 
improvements concern: 2.6.1 Access right allocation In the current system access rights can only be allocated 
to the combination of function/hierarchical position and organisational unit. Further possibilities of 
allocating access rights, especially on a per user basis, do not exist. This would be a feature that 
violates the principle of separation of users from access rights by means of roles. However, in the case 
of certain access rights (e.g. set of access rights representing the power of attorney for an employee) 
it is desirable to assign these directly to the user. 2.6.2 Grouping mechanisms (a) Grouping employees 
 In the current system, employees can only be grouped according to the combination of function/hierarchical 
position and organisational unit. It is not possible to group employees according to other criteria and 
assign group-specific access rights. A grouping mechanism will provide ease of administration as only 
the group needs to be assigned with a role and not each individual. (b) Grouping access rights  The 
current system does not allow for the grouping of access rights which naturally belong together. An example 
is the grouping of access right 101 for create account, and 102 for delete account into a single group 
G1 for account manipulation. These grouped rights will provide an easier assignment of access rights 
to applications. 2.6.3 Covering/Standing-in regulations In the current system regulations for the covering 
of one employee by another (e.g. holidays or illness) do not exist. There are a variety of unresolved 
issues. The ability to only partially delegate application-specific access rights is one of these. Another 
problem considers the ability of one person to stand in for two others at the same time. This might violate 
any Separation of Duties requirements. 2.6.4 Competencies and Constraints The current system does not 
allow the specification of competencies and constraints in the security profile (e.g. authorisation to 
sign contracts up to DM 100,000 only). 2.6.5 Mapping of access control system to organisational structure 
When mapping the access control system to the existing organisational structure we have to bear in mind 
that the Bank has to face a continuous organisational change and needs to provide for a flexible support 
of its business strategies. (a) Continuous organisational change Organisations of the size of Dresdner 
Bank are subject to a constant change process in their structural and functional organisation. This is 
due to a continuous orientation of the Bank's business to the market needs. Also unforeseen acquisitions 
or mergers can cause a major organisational change. The current access control system does not provide 
the flexibility to meet these changes without a major administrative effort. (b) Flexible support of 
business strategies  Certain strategies in the private customer business require that an employee can 
be related to a certain organisational structure. This could be in the form of branches or cost centres 
but also more abstract structures such as enterprise-wide working groups, task forces or projects. The 
access control system must be able to reflect these structures.  3. The FUB System and the RBAC Model 
An obvious question is how far the Bank s access control system can be compared with other models of 
role-based access control. A candidate for comparison is Sandhu s RBAC96 model [2]. It is well-defined, 
easy to use and most importantly it can be configured to support various access control policies, according 
to the specific need. In addition it forms the basis for a proposed NIST standard [1]. We consider two 
issues: Access right inheritance through a role hierarchy;  Groups of users.  3.1 Access Right Inheritance 
through a Role Hierarchy The RBAC96 model has the concept of access right inheritance through a role 
hierarchy. If a partial ordering of roles is defined, then superior roles inherit all the positive access 
rights of their inferiors. When looking at Figure 2 we can immediately see that there is no role inheritance 
structure of this kind. The Bank s access control system does not offer any inheritance features. Why 
is this the case, and should it be changed? In the RBAC96 model Role is an atomic concept, defined as 
..a named job function within the organization . . However, its natural counterpart in the FUB system 
is the FUB Role, which consists of both function and position; see examples in Table 1. The partial ordering 
of the FUB role can therefore be defined upon either or both of function and position. We discuss two 
possible orderings below. Role Function Official Position A financial analyst Clerk B financial analyst 
Group Manager C financial analyst Head of Division D financial analyst Junior E financial analyst Senior 
F financial analyst Specialist G financial analyst Assistant X share technician Clerk Y support e-commerce 
Junior Z office banking Head of Division Table 1 : Functions and Official Positions 3.1.1 Hierarchy 
of Official Positions There is a strict partial order in the organisation of official positions (denoted 
by the > symbol). For example: Head of Division > Group Manager > Clerk This has little meaning by itself, 
but when combined with function it is often reflected by a real hierarchy of actual power. For example, 
the financial analyst/Group Manager role (which we will call Role B) has more power than the financial 
analyst/Clerk role (Role A). Table 2 shows that Role B has as many or more access rights in the Money 
Market Instruments, Derivatives Trading and Interest Instrument applications and access rights to one 
more application (Private Customer Instruments). On the other hand there is, as we might expect, no similar 
hierarchical relationship of power between office banking/Group Manager and financial analyst/Clerk because 
they work in different functional areas. Role Application Access Right A Money Market Instruments 1,2,3,4 
Derivatives Trading 1,2,3,7,10,12 Interest Instruments 1,4,8,12,14,16 B Money Market Instruments 1,2,3,4,7 
Derivatives Trading 1,2,3,7,10,12,14 Interest Instruments 1,4,8,12,14,16 Private Customer Instruments 
1,2,4,7  Table 2 : Roles, Applications and access rights Therefore we could define a role hierarchy 
in which one role is superior to another if its position is superior and their functions are identical. 
More formally, using the "." symbol as a selector: Role(x) > Role(y) . Role(x).Position > Role(y).Position 
. Role(x).Function = Role(y).Function In the example above, given that Group Manager > Clerk, we could 
economise on access right definition and Table 2 could be rewritten as Table 3. Role Application Access 
Right A Money Market Instruments 1,2,3,4 Derivatives Trading 1,2,3,7,10,12 Interest Instruments 1,4,8,12,14,16 
B Money Market Instruments 7 Derivatives Trading 14 Private Customer Instruments 1,2,4,7  Table 3 : 
Rewritten Table 2, assuming that B inherits access rights from A 3.1.2 Hierarchy of Functions There 
could also be a partial ordering of functions. An example for the two functions inspector and finance 
accountant would be: inspector > finance accountant This is an "isa" hierarchy, meaning that in order 
to carry out the functions of an inspector, one has to be a finance accountant and needs all the access 
rights of one. It is always true that an inspector is a finance accountant because otherwise he would 
not be competent to do the function. Regardless of official position it might therefore be a good idea 
to generate a role hierarchy based on functions (without regard to position), so that superior functions 
inherit access rights from their inferiors. This, alternative, role hierarchy would be defined as having 
one role superior to another if its function is superior, regardless of position. More formally: Role(x) 
> Role(y) . Role(x).Function > Role(y).Function 3.1.3 Discussion In discussing the pros and cons of 
using an inheritance structure in the Bank, there are several issues to consider: (a) Choice of role 
hierarchy (b) Compatibility of role hierarchy with other organisational needs  (c) Fine grained access 
control (d) Separation of duties and other control principles  (a) Choice of role hierarchy For practical 
reasons the Bank should only make one choice for the role hierarchy (Although the RBAC96 model allows 
multiple hierarchies). We have noted two candidates above: Position hierarchy with matching function 
(3.1.1)  Function hierarchy (3.1.2)  We do not have sufficient knowledge of the organisation to know 
which would be the best choice. It would be necessary to study the organisation's access control structure 
in detail, paying particular attention to the gained simplification in each case, and to the other issues 
which we discuss immediately below. (b) Compatibility of role hierarchy with other organisational needs 
It has been recognised [2] that it is not possible to simply pick up an existing organisational hierarchy 
and import it into a RBAC system as conflicts might arise. We have given an example above (Section 3.1.1) 
in which the use of the position hierarchy with matching function for our role hierarchy would simplify 
the access rights table for Group Manager. However, we do not know whether this would also be appropriate 
for Head of Division. Perhaps access right inheritance would give him more rights than he needs to carry 
out his job, thus violating the principle of Least Privilege. In order to deal with problems of this 
kind it may be necessary to create a hierarchy which is compatible with, but not identical to the original 
hierarchy using the concept of private roles as suggested in the RBAC96 model. (c) Fine grained access 
control If we institute access right inheritance, and subsequently it turns out that there is an access 
right which is needed for financial analyst/Clerk but not for the financial analyst/Group Manager role, 
then we need to deconstruct, wholly or partially, this portion of the role hierarchy. We cannot, in the 
RBAC model, solve the problem simply by giving a negative right to the superior position, because negative 
rights are inherited downwards. (d) Separation of Duties  Access rights inheritance may cause a breach 
of the Separation of Duties principle. We pointed out in [11] how this can happen. An example is a software 
company as described in [12]. It is not desirable to let the project manager inherit from the senior 
programmer the right to read the repository. The project manager does not necessarily have the technical 
knowledge and might consider shipping bad code if he had access to it before it is released by the senior 
programmer. We can be confident in the example of Table 2 that the Bank has avoided any Separation of 
Duties conflict, because it has strict internal control procedures. If access right inheritance were 
to be introduced, the Bank would have to re-examine the rights table in detail, in order to ensure that 
no conflicts of this kind were introduced. This is likely to restrict severely the extent to which inheritance 
can be introduced. 3.1.4 Advantages and Disadvantages We cannot reach any conclusion about this particular 
case, as we have neither the knowledge nor the authority to do so. In favour of introduction of a role 
hierarchy for the FUB is the economy of access rights that this would bring. We have however pointed 
out a number of factors which would reduce these advantages, and they would need to be examined in detail 
before reaching a decision.  3.2 Grouping As mentioned in section 2.6.2, the Bank is considers introducing 
a mechanism for the grouping of employees. A grouping mechanism will provide ease of administration as 
only the group needs to be assigned to a role and not each individual. The RBAC96 model does not allow 
for the assignment of groups to roles. It explicitly states that the assignment of users to roles is 
a relationship between (individual) users and roles. However, other approaches to RBAC, e.g. [3] have 
recognised the value of using the group as a basis for the definition of roles. The concept of domains 
as described in [13] can also be used to provide a mechanism for grouping users.  4. Conclusion 4.1 
The FUB System We have provided a case study of an access control system in a major European bank that 
makes use of a role-based approach to determine the access rights that a user possesses within an application 
domain. In this system a role is defined by function and position within the organisation. This access 
control system is closely linked to the human resources database, making it flexible towards certain 
organisational changes. Also the system works on an enterprise-wide organisational level and thus it 
provides services to a variety of applications on different platforms. We have given the concrete number 
of roles in a system that has been in use for over a decade now. These figures should give tool developers 
the chance to provide further evidence that their tools work even under real conditions. In addition 
we discussed the issue of inheritance and made a distinction between inheritance as it occurs along official 
positions and inheritance between functions. 4.2 RBAC Models This case study has brought out several 
points about RBAC models. First of all, we have more confidence in the fundamental correctness of the 
role-based access control approach because of the existence of a large and real system, with a high degree 
of compatibility with the RBAC model. However, there are limitations of the RBAC model which should be 
taken into account before it is fixed in stone by standardisation. The potential conflict of the inheritance 
mechanism with control principles, particularly Separation of Duties, creates obstacles to the use of 
role hierarchies. One approach to solving this is the incorporation of constraints into the RBAC model. 
Work has been done on this by [14], [15], [16] among others, but no common agreement has been achieved 
yet.  Another aspect of the RBAC model, which is simple to address, is the need to introduce a mechanism 
for defining groups of users to which roles can be assigned. The use of a general mechanism such as policy 
domains [13] needs investigation.   5. Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the help of Mr. Horlacher, 
Mr. Petersen-Nickelsen and staff at Dresdner Bank Frankfurt, in making this case study possible. The 
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council have provided funding for this work under EPSRC 
Scholarship number 99311141. 6. REFERENCES [1] Sandhu R., D. Ferraiolo, and R. Kuhn, "The NIST Model 
for Role-based Access Control: Towards a Unified Standard.". 5th ACM RBAC, Berlin, Germany, 2000. [2] 
Sandhu R., E. Coyne, H. Feinstein, et al. "Role-based access control models." IEEE Computer, vol. 29, 
pp. 38-47, 1996. [3] Nyanchama M. and S. Osborn, "The role graph model and conflict of interest." Transactions 
on Information Systems Security, vol. 2, pp. Pages 3 - 33, 1999. [4] Lupu E., D. Marriott, M. Sloman, 
and N. Yiaelis, "A policy based role framework for access control.". 1st ACM Workshop on Role-based access 
control, Gaithersburg, USA, 1996. [5] Epstein P., Sandhu, R., "Towards a UML based approach to role engineering.". 
4th ACM ACM Workshop on Role-based access control, Fairfax, VA, USA, 1999. [6] Roeckle H., G. Schimpf, 
and R. Weidinger, "Process-Oriented Approach for Role-Finding to Implement Role-Based Security Administration 
in a Large Industrial Organisation.". 5th ACM Workshop on Role-Based access control, Berlin, Germany, 
2000. [7] Awischus R., "Role based access control with the security administration manager (SAM).". 2nd 
ACM Workshop on Role­based access control, Fairfax, VA, USA 1997. [8] Sandhu R., Bhamidipadi, V., "An 
Oracle Implementation of the PRA97 Model for Permission-Role Assignment.". 3rd ACM Workshop on Role-based 
access control, Fairfax, VA, 1998. [9] Sandhu R., and Epstein, J., "NetWare 4 as an Example of Role-based 
access control.". 1st ACM Workshop on Role-based access control, Gaithersburg, USA, 1996. [10] 5th ACM 
Workshop on Role-based Access Control, Berlin, Germany, 2000. [11] Moffett J.D., "Control Principles 
and Role Hierarchies.". Third ACM Workshop on Role-based access control, Fairfax, VA, USA, 1998. [12] 
Schaad A. and J.D. Moffett, "The Incorporation of Control Principles into Access Control Policies (Extended 
Abstract)." presented at Hewlett Packard Policy Workshop, Bristol, 2001. [13] Sloman M. S. and K. P. 
Twidle, "Domains: A Framework for Structuring Management Policy." in Network and Distributed Systems 
Management, M. S. Sloman, Addison Wesley, 1994, [14] Ahn G. and R. Sandhu, "The RSL99 language for role-based 
separation of duty constraints.". 4th ACM Workshop on Role­based access control, Fairfax, VA, USA, 1999. 
[15] Jaeger T., "On the increasing importance of constraints.". 4th ACM Workshop on Role-based access 
control, Fairfax, VA USA, 1999. [16] Tidswell J. and T. Jaeger, "Integrated constraints and inheritance 
in DTAC." 5th ACM Workshop on Role-based access control, Berlin, Germany, 2000.  
			