
 THE USE OF MICROCOMPUTERS IN AN APPLIED COMPUTER SCIENCE PROGRAM Curt M. White Dept. of Applied Computer 
Science Illinois State University Normal, Ii 61761 ABSTRACT The use of microcomputers in an undergraduate 
computer science program may be handled in several ways. One approach is to first teach the use of a 
microcomputer followed by the design of a microcomputer system, and then to send the students out to 
recommend and install a complete microcomputer system for some organization in the community. In this 
 way, not only do the students learn how to program a microcomputer, but they also learn the internals 
of the microcomputer, the design of a microcomputer system, the assembly language on a microcomputer, 
and a final, total application of all their knowledge to a real life situation. We feel this greatly 
improves upon the common combination of lectures and programming assignments with realistic microcomputer 
 system design and implementation. INTRODUCTION At Illinois State University we feel we have a unique 
integration of microcomputers and applied computer science. The department, now going into its sixth 
year, teaches a level of computer science somewhere between pure computer science theory and pure data 
processing applications. While the department offers the more traditional computer science courses such 
as problem solving using PL/I, COBOL, assembly language programming and system organization, data structures, 
microcomputers, and operating systems, the department also offers application-driven courses such as 
systems analysis, software design, external data structures (which Permission to copy without fee all 
or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. ~) 1983 ACM 0-89791-091-5/83/002/0278 $00.75 
 deals with IBM JCL, external file design, processing direct and indexed files, and IBM utilities), and 
the design, development and implementation of online systems. By offering such courses the department 
pulls away from the common computer science emphasis and leans toward the applied side of computer science. 
The result is a degree in which the students receive the basic computer science fundamentals while applying 
them to real life data processing applications. One phase of our Bachelor's degree program allows the 
student to enroll in our microcomputer sequence which may consist of from one to three one-semester courses. 
Most programming is performed on APPLE II* computers, although Radio Shack TRS-80** Model III and North 
Star Horizon*** microcomputer laboratories do exist on campus. Approximately fifteen APPLEs reside in 
one laboratory, along with individual disk drives, Z-80 cards and monitors, several printers, and numerous 
hardware and software extras. THE COURSES The first course in the sequence, Introduction to Microcomputer 
Design, assumes the student already can program a computer by requiring a two semester course sequence 
in PL/C and PL/I. The course introduces the microcomputer by examining in good detail its internal components: 
the microprocessor, the memory, the clock, the power supply, and the I/O support chips. Next, so that 
the students may jump right into using a microcomputer~ they are taught the fundamental operating procedures 
of the APPLE II and a structured BASIC language, including string handling, graphics, and sequential 
and random access files. Following this the students learn the internal representations of the disk operating 
system and the internals of the BASIC language such as the memory requirements for integers, reals, and 
arrays, so that they may create cleaner and more efficient software.  278 While many microcomputer courses 
end here, ours continues with the coflcepts of microcomputer system design. The students are introduced 
to several of the more familiar microcomputers currently on the market along with their associated software, 
operating systems, and optional peripheral equipment. In this respect we try to keep the student as aware 
as possible of other micros, without becoming too 'APPLE-bound'. A major assignment is given where a 
hypothetical business is considering computerizing some part of its operations. Sufficient facts are 
given such as employee size, computer services desired, and funds available, so that the students may 
recommend what system the business should purchase (if any). In their recommendation they'must include 
the microcomputer they feel would best operate in the environment stated in the assignment, a choice 
of peripheral equipment (e.g. a larger storage, more expensive fixed disk drive v. a less expensive floppy 
disk drive), the selection of software, and the selection of miscellaneous equipment necessary to support 
the entire system including such items as printer ribbons and connecting cables. The projects are evaluated, 
and, if the student can convincingly support why s/he choose what s/he did, a passing grade is assigned. 
Oftentimes groups of students visit neighboring computer stores, posing as prospective buyers, asking 
pertinent questions and receiving information which aids them in recommending a particular system. The 
second course in the sequence deals with several advanced topics. The students first learn how to program 
an assembler language on a microcomputer so that they may interface the computer to various peripheral 
equipment. Since the APPLE computes is again used for this course, the students learn the 6502 assembler 
language. A/D and D/A conversions are next introduced and a project is assigned which requires the student 
to interface the APPLE to an analog device. Moving away from assembler language the students are introduced 
to the basic principles of data communications and networking s6 that they may be able to interface the 
APPLE computer to various other computers and networks. The course is then completed by having the students 
examine some of the more advanced microcomputer languages and operating systems such as Pascal, PL/I, 
FORTH, and CP/M. The students will also be required to create programs which perform advanced file management 
and high level business applications, The third and final course in the sequence is the capstone to 
the applied  computer science degree, the Directed Project. In groups of three or four students, under 
the supervision of a faculty member, a real life project solicted from the surrounding communities, is 
undertaken. In a previous semester, another group of four students in the system analysis and design 
course have spent several hours a week meeting with the involved organization in order to properly analyse 
the problem and design the system requirements. Now, the directed project team picks up where the systems 
analysis and design team has left off, by writing the code, assisting the organization in purchasing 
the necessary computer hardware (if any), implementation of the software onto the hardware, and training 
of the organization's personnel so that they may effectively operate the entire system. It should be 
noted that this is NOT a two hour meeting with the organization followed by a recommendation of brand 
X microcomputer with brand Y canned program. This is a complete systems analysis, design, coding, implementation, 
and training. This service oftentimes can only he found by paying various software consulting houses 
several thousands of dollars. The department currently charges the involved organization nothing; more 
so, the students receive invaluable on-hands training. Examples of some of the projects include design 
and implementation of a farm management system~ an accounts receivable package for a community advertising 
newspaper; and a preplan emergency system for the local fire department which allows the firefighters 
to retrieve immediate information concerning a dwelling which will aid in responding to an emergency. 
 In the past, the systems that were designed primarily used a main frame computer to perform its tasks 
and the programs were written in either COBOL or PL/I. As of late, more and more projects are being designed 
to operate on a minicomputer or microcomputer system. We attribute this partly to the fact of the growing 
popularity of microcomputers in the marketplace and to .the fact that continuously more of our student~ 
are enrolling in our microcomputer sequence. SUMMARY While we realize we by no means cover the entire 
spectrum of microcomputer programming and applications, we do introduce our students to a substantial 
 "" amount of microcomputer programming, a good amount of microcomputer~microprocessor hardware, and 
a chance to pull everything together by actually creating a microcomputer system for someone in the community. 
The 279 difficult task for the instructor in this sequence is creating a harmonious balance of traditional 
compute~ ~cience concepts with the extremely marketable concepts of application-driven information /data 
processing. Further plans include the possibility of moving more into the realm of scientific applications 
of microcomputers~ and the possibility of moving the systems analysis/ design/directed project sequence 
into a more formal setting, much as a professional consulting company would supply its services. In 
this way, an Applied Computer Science faculty member would work full time as a project manager with 
the various student teams through each phase to provide a sense of professional continuity. Syllabi of 
the microcomputer courses will be available at the conference or by writing the author. APPLE is a registered 
trademark of APPLE Computer, Inc. ~ TRS-80 is a Tandy Comporation. registered trademark of ~ Horizon 
is a registered North Star Corporation. trademark of  280 
			