
 The Future Internet and its social return of investment Xabier Larrucea European Software Institute 
 Tecnalia Parque tecnologico de Zamudio 204 48170 Zamudio, Spain +34 944209519  xabier.larrucea@esi.es 
 ABSTRACT The economy evolution provides new opportunities for business. Future Internet technologies 
are overcoming technical barriers and generating new needs perceived as new challenges and as potential 
source of money. The meritocracy of Future Internet s technologies such as Web2.0 is usually based on 
technical arguments. However organization s benefits cannot be limited to technical advances. Future 
Internet evolution should emphasize organization s benefits more from social and economic perspectives 
than from a technological perspective. In this paper we analyze the new future internet path and we envisage 
some guidelines for measuring the return of investment in this context. Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.2.9 [Management]: Cost estimation  General Terms Economics, Experimentation, Human Factors Keywords 
Web2.0, ROI, value-based software engineering 1. INTRODUCTION In the IT domain organizations have been 
investing a huge amount of money for improving their infrastructures. However the Return of Investment 
(ROI) should be clearly expressed in order to evaluate objectively what real benefits are. There are 
some evident factors of improvement but there are other factors contributing to the Return of Investment. 
In fact the perceived value (PV) of an asset by a person is conceptually and distinctly different from 
the market price of that asset. [1]. Future Internet technologies can improve the economy of an organization, 
but how much? In this paper we provide a roadmap in order to evaluate the return of investments (ROI) 
in the context of Future Internet applications. ROI calculation is performed in a systematic way without 
taking into account social benefits and therefore we introduce the social return of investment (SROI) 
financial indicator in this context. This indicator is related to the Net Present Value (NPV) that is 
a financial indicator that compares the value of a euro today with its projected value in a future. NPV 
calculation depends on some cornerstone indicators (beta value) of the market. In this paper we provide 
a systematic way to calculate the beta value and at the end we provide a way to Rebeca Cortazar ESIDE 
Universidad de Deusto Avda. de las Universidades, 24 48014 Bilbao, Spain +34 944139000 rebeca.cortazar@deusto.es 
 calculate the Social Return of Investment in the future internet applications domain. This approach 
is related to the Business Case Analysis one of the key elements of Value Based Software Engineering 
(VBSE)[5] approach. This paper is structured as follows. The first section describes some guidelines 
to calculate this return of investment. And finally we conclude with some future actions. 2. A ROADMAP 
FOR CALCULATING SROI IN FUTURE INTERNET APPLICATIONS Future Internet approach needs a related investment 
project. This project involves organizations benefits and social impacts. The economic impact in both 
worlds is evident. In fact each investment should be analyzed based on projected financial performance 
[2]. SROI as it is shown in equation (1) is defined based on the Net Present Value (NPV) and NPV is calculated 
as it is shown in (2). k (1) k In (2) In n n 1(1 d ) nN ¦(1 d ) SROI ¦ k ' n 1 ¦ In ' n n 1(1 d ) N 
denotes net present value; n denotes the time period, with K indicating the last period an inflow is 
expected; denotes a summation of all n periods. In denotes the net cash inflow in period n and d the 
rate of discount. Discounts rates d and d are calculated based on the capital asset pricing model and 
it results on  d rfr . beta xemrp (3) Being d a discount rate, rfr as risk free rate and emrp as equity 
market risk premium . The beta coefficient calculation is crucial because it describes how the expected 
return of a stock or portfolio is correlated to the return of the financial market as a whole1. Future 
Internet technologies and organizations involved 1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_coefficient 115 
 in this kind of investments need to calculate this beta coefficient for their organizations because 
as we have shown before discount rates depend on the beta coefficient. This value depends on the market 
fluctuation, and on the relationship between our organization and the market. In fact it provides a measure 
for this relationship. In the Future Internet application domain the reuse of internet based applications 
represents a portfolio asset that can be used to measure its return of investment. The most important 
factor for an organization is to identify the elements that influence this beta. Based on SROI principles 
defined in section 2 and the scenario described in section 3, we have identified inflow elements related 
to benefits (In) and inflows elements related to investment (In ): In related to benefits (beta numerator): 
1. Reuse of tools developed in other platforms: Web2.0 platform allows a kind of interoperability based 
on Internet. 2. Saving testing efforts: we can calculate the value of testing a system and a tool 3. 
Community is growing providing support with low cost. We can define a value representing this effort. 
A strong community provides applications 4. New markets: we can access to new markets and we can predict 
a new market objective. 5. New customers: more customers are accessing new technologies and they are 
more comfortable to this new situation. We can estimate an increase of this value 6. New applications 
based on the integration of other applications and tools 7. Usability aspects can be quantified using 
Future Internet technologies. 8. Workers satisfaction reduces the fluctuation of workers. They are more 
productive. 9. Software process improvements benefits 10. Integration of software process definition 
and software  development tools as forges In related to investments (beta denominator): 1. Small investment 
on web2.0 platform if we are software developers 2. Customers and users do not need to invest on a supporting 
platform because applications are accessed through the Internet. 3. Small learning curve to interact 
with Web2.0 technologies.  4. Workers satisfaction reduces the fluctuation of workers.  We reduce 
investment on learning (learning curve). All these elements provide a basis for calculating the beta 
coefficient. Historically most of risky investments provide beta values between 1 and 2 (Greater than 
2-3 are considered as very volatile markets). This means that these organizations are twice as risky 
as their competitors in the market. In the Future Internet applications domain all these inflow elements 
(see above In and In ) are assets that reduce risks and avoid market variations, and volatile products. 
Following the above suggestions we can control the financial risks associated to a Future Internet applications 
investment. Taking into account the beta coefficient calculation we provide the following roadmap in 
order to calculate the Social Return of Investment in the future internet applications domain: 1. Calculate 
In related to benefits taking into account the elements that can influence them. 2. Calculate In related 
to investments 3. Calculate their discount rates: d and d . In this step we calculate an approximate 
Beta coefficient. 4. Calculate NPV based on the results of previous steps. We need to calculate two 
different discount rate: one for the benefits and one for the investments 5. Calculate SROI based on 
these principles.  3. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we propose a way to calculate a return of investment 
(ROI) for an organization (SROI) applying Future Internet technologies. We also provide an example of 
Future Internet scenario and a set of principles for calculating SROI. Software engineering as a social 
engineering has a relevant impact on the ROI and therefore to the VBSE. Future Internet technologies 
as a software engineering discipline have an impact on the ROI for an organization. Basically the SROI 
depends on the maximization of the inflows elements of the benefits and the minimization of inflows elements 
of the investments. All these elements are related to our discount rates and we need to tune these coefficients. 
We have provided a way to calculate the main factors that influence the SROI and the NPV. The Future 
Internet application described allows a reduction of the cost of non quality called QC (Quality Cost). 
From our experience applying software process improvements initiatives we can quantify this QC as described 
in [3] and [4]. In fact we are currently working on the definition of the Organizational Return of Investment 
(OROI) as the addition of SROI and QC as shown in (4). [OROI]=[SROI] + [QC] (4) This OROI is based on 
SROI and QC but it remains some improvements because some social benefits are not permanent, it is difficult 
to calculate the value for intangible elements such as satisfaction and good financial skills adapted 
to the IT reality. However it provides a way to monetizes technical and social factors in the Future 
Internet applications market. 4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been supported by Vulcano project TSI-020301­2009-1 
funded by the Spanish government (Ministerio de Industria, Turismo y Comercio and by COIN: Enterprise 
collaboration and interoperability, EU FP7 Project 216256, http://www.coin-ip.eu/ 5. REFERENCES [1] 
Steven S. Byers, John C. Groth Non Economic Factors And Asset Valuation. http://www.departments.bucknell.edu/management/apfa/Dun 
dee%20Papers/04Groth.pdf Alternative Perspectives on Finance and Accounting 5: University of Dundee. 
July 23­25, 2000. [2] Grudin , J. Return on Investment and Organizational Adoption. ACM Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work. CSCW2004. pages 174-177. 116 [3] http://research.microsoft.com/users/jgrudin/publications/org­use/ROI.pdf 
Huang, L., Boehm, B. How much Software Quality Investment is Enough: a value-based approach. IEEE Software. 
Volume 23, Issue 5, Sept.-Oct. 2006 Page(s): 88 95 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MS.2006.127 [5] 
Boehm, B. Value-Based Software Engineering. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering notes vol28 n2. March 2003. 
http://csse.usc.edu/csse/TECHRPTS/2003/usccse2003­521/usccse2003-521.pdf [4] Jack Campanella. Principles 
of Quality Costs. American Society for Quality Press. ISBN: 0-87389-443.  
			