
 The On-Line Interface of Library Management and Document Retrieval Systems by Susan Artandi Rutgers 
University Introduction Through interactive terminals computing power is available today to an ever increas- 
ing number of people who use the computer for a great variety of purposes. The natural behavior pattern 
of these users, the objec- tives of the on-line systems and the nature of the variables affecting their 
function- ing are important aspects involved in the consideration of the on-line interface. Taking into 
account the properties of the task to be performed by the system, the characteristics of the user, the 
terminal and the computer stored information content has been suggested as a useful waYltO general- ize 
about an interactive facility. The task, the user and the information content are strongly interrelated 
primary components and largely determine such other components as the structure of the data base (as 
distin- guished from its content), and the nature of the terminal. All of these components along with 
the language used at the man/ computer interface significantly affect the quality of the performance 
of the overall system in terms if its ability to satisfy the users' needs. The on-line interface can 
also be analyzed on the basis of the various pro- visions which are intended to permit carrying out one 
or more particular task functions.2 Such primary provisions as input and output hardware channels, interaction 
initiation and termination, interaction language, control of user error, and pacing of user attention 
can be further considered in terms of specific system features and cost effectiveness criteria. In this 
paper interface problems of on-line library management and document retrieval systems will be discussed 
by taking into account some major system characteristics. System com- ponents and requirements which 
distinguish these systems from one another will be emphasized and their implications for the on-line 
interface will be considered. Library Management S~stems Library management systems represent the automation 
of activities that are involved in the effective day-to-day operation of the library. They relate to 
such functions as cir- culation control, book acquisition, cataloging, serial control and fund accounting.3 
The data base of library management systems is predominantly textual and, in contrast with document retrieval 
systems, deals with objective, unambiguous, relatively well structured data that are accessed by the 
user repetitively in a fair~" ly standard fashion. As far as their users are concerned a common characteristic 
of library management systems is that they are staff operated and are generally not intended for the 
public. The same group of people use the systems on a day-to-day basis accessing the data base for specific 
known items. Some library management systems are similar to such successful commercial applications as 
airline reservations hotel reservation and stock quotation systems in the sense that they deal with information 
that primarily relates to changes in the status of a given item over a period of time. 71 In an airline 
reservation system, for ex-ample, the same seats on the same planes are sold over and over and the system 
keeps track of these transactions, Similarly, a library circulation control system is designed to keep 
track of the location and availability of library materials and as a particular item is circulated and 
re-circulated information con-cerning its status changes much in the same way in which information about 
a seat on a partic- ular airplane changes. In a circulation control system the book is uniquely identified 
through such data elements as call,number, author and title and the borrower may be identified through 
his name or an identification number. Additional data in the system relate to the date on which the material 
was borrowed or is due back in the library. Serial control systems monitor and record the arrival of 
new issues of periodicals and alert to the non-arrival of journals so that claiming procedures can be 
initiated. Com-plexities are involved because of the varying publication pattern of some journals but 
these should create problems for the system designer only and not the user. In book acquisition systems 
the records in the file keep changing because once a book is processed its corresponding record is removed. 
Generally two major types of data elements are involved, those which serve to describe and uniquely identify 
the publication and those which relate to its status from the time it is ordered until it is received 
by the library. In an on-line cataloging system the pri- mary information content of the data base is 
cataloging information relating to a given library material. The MARC II machine readable bibliographic 
records available from the Library of Congress are being used predom- inantly with local input added. 
The final output of these systems are catalog cards or printed lists that are generated from the machine 
readable bibliographic records. Significant differences among library management systems relate to the 
purposes "~fqr which the records are accessed on-line. Fo~example, when a book is checked out from the 
library a circulation record is created, mostly automatically through the use of a data collector and 
the record is cancelled when the book is returned. In this case the on- line capability is used primarily 
to in-terrogate the file about the status of a specific item. In contrast with this in several other 
library management systems changing of the record is a major aspect in the user/system interaction process. 
In a book acquisition system the record is updated as the status of the material changes. Data are added 
or changed until the acquisition process is complete and the record is deleted from the file. A cataloging 
file is used in a similar way. It is accessed by the cataloger/user to ex-amine the content of the record 
to make a de- cision whether it is satisfactory for his pur-poses and if not to make the needed changes 
in the data elements of the record. Document Retrieval Systems Document retrieval systems are designed 
to retrieve information contained in such pub- lications as books, journal articles or technical reports. 
With the exception of automatic full text searching the information content of the documents is represented 
in the form of a surrogate such as a set of index terms, an ab- stract or an extract. The information 
in the documents is accessed via the surrogates and the output of the system is a reference to a document 
rather than the information itself. The major assumption that underlies these systems is that it is possible 
to describe the content of documents by assigning descriptive tags to them or by condensing their content 
into the form of an abstract or an extract. It is also assumed that subsequent access to the documents 
through the surrogates can serve as a satisfactory substitute for scanning every document in the collection 
in response to a query.4 While a retrieval file can usually be searched for specific known items the 
major purpose of the system is to enable the user to retrieve references to documents whose identity 
is not known beforehand and that should satisfy with a reasonable degree of certainty the infor- mation 
request defined by the query. Access to information is sought by specifying the content of the desired 
documents through a statement of a combination of prop- erties in a form that is compatible with system 
parameters. To maximize the effectiveness of this process the user must bring to the terminal a knowledge 
of the language of the surrogates and the intellectual processes by which they were created as well as 
familiarity with the subject content of the data base. Document retrieval systems are usually intended 
for public rather than staff use. In-deed an argument in favor of an on-line capa- bility has been its 
potential value for im-proving the performance of the system by eliminating the middleman between the 
user and the system and allowing the user to interface with the data base directly. Given this argument 
it is rather interesting to observe the recent counter trend toward the use of some of these systems 
via staff searchers. Implications of System Characteristics The emergence of on-line systems in the type 
of applications just described have some interesting implications for interface design. / 72 Implicit 
in the concept of an on-line system is the need and the opportunity for direct communication between 
the computer stored data base and users of various back- ground, skills and motivation. The ability to 
use natural language or its approximation in the man/machine dialog has been generally considered a desirable 
objective. It is believed that it would be useful to develop a method by which the computer could interpret 
human natural language rather than some artificial language. This would help to simplify the act of communication 
and would require little formal training of the user. The finding, for example, that in a document retrieval 
environment English command words are the most useful and that users have trouble learning invented non-English 
words or jargon words tends to support this belief. 5 Meadow, however, represents a somewhat different 
point-of-view when he raises the very appropriate question whether natural language is indeed the best 
way to communicate with the machine and suggests that perhaps an activity such as telling the computer 
how to perform an intricate task may be best done by using a precisely defined vocabulary and syntax 
that is suitable for the task. ° Clearly, there are many applications that can tolerate highly restrictive 
interaction languages because of the relatively few commands used repetitively by a small and well-defined 
group of users. Library management systems are examples of these kinds of systems. Since they are staff 
operated and their use is highly routine they should be able to tolerate a some- what rigid and formalized 
interaction language that perhaps takes longer to learn but is easily retained because of the day-to-day 
use of the system. Fast access to the information in this case may be more important than freedom from 
restrictions and a concise language should also reduce delays and, through this, the cost of both staff 
and computer time. Document retrieval systems imply somewhat different language requirements. While communi- 
cation at the on-line interface is primarily controlled by the command language, the user is also involved 
with the language of the in- structions on how to use the system and with the language of the data base. 
Man/system communication in document retrieval may occur when the system displays to the user a record 
or part of a record. For this reason and also because it is involved in query formulation the language 
of the data base is an important part of both the system-to-user and user-to-system communication language 
and, as such, affects user behavior at the terminal. The Intrex interface studies found, for example, 
that data elements stored in natural language were preferred by users over codes and abbre- viations.5 
System-to-user communication indicates how the system understands the user's re-quest, provides feedback 
through intermediate results, suggests courses of action to the user and gives him results. It also provides 
di- agnostics when it fails to recognize command language words or detects errors of syntax or spelling. 
Through on-line instructions it helps the user learn how to use the system. The be- ginner or the infrequent 
user is given help through the system's built-in teaching capability and at the same time it is often 
possible for the experienced user to bypass the teaching steps to avoid unnecessary delay. The on-line 
instructions are in natural language. The language of the data base is usually a combination of natural 
language and artificial language. Natural language in its entirety is used in abstracts, extracts and 
in certain types of indexing. In other cases, while the index terms describing the content of the document 
are natural language words, the index language itself may be artificial because the rules of the language 
are "de jure" and the developmen~ of the language is controlled and reg ulated.~ Characteristics other 
than those relating to content can also be given in the index record in natural or artificial language. 
The use pattern of document retrieval systems is highly variable both from the point of view of the problem 
and the skills of the user. The fact that these systems are primarily public rather than staff oriented 
puts a premium on ease of use since most likely users are not available for lengthy indoctrination, their 
background will vary considerably, and they will use the system irregularly. Since each query is different 
and requires varying degrees of sophistication for its solution different users will come to the terminal 
with more or less complex problems. In document retrieval the on-line capa- bility is not only used to 
get immediate access to the data base but is intended in a very integral way to improve the output and, 
through this, the overall performance of the system. The on-line capability provides the opportunity 
for on-line question negotiation in response to immediate feedback from the system and should ideally 
increase the probability of success in the retrieval of documents of specified infor-mation content. 
To perform satisfactorily the query language of the system should allow the searcher to express highly 
sophisticated ideas and should be flexible enough to accommodate a variety of approaches. To use the 
system successfully the user must understand system parameters and be able to communicate his query in 
terms of them. The characteristic that the search is for specified information content rather than for 
specific known items makes search procedures inherently more difficult in document retrieval than in 
library management systems. 73 Because of the complexities involved in query formulation in particular, 
users of document retrieval systems need to bring a considerable amount of background knowledge to the 
terminal. There are several ways in re-trieval systems in which a query can be made more effective other 
than just to achieve mere language compatibility with the data base. For example, the query terms can 
be replaced with a set of alternative terms, information in the index records of some initial output 
can be analyzed and the result of the analysis can be used in the formulation of the next query, or search 
strategy may be changed on the basis of the number of records expected to be retrieved in response to 
the initial query. The scope of the search can be broadened if the expected number of records in the 
output is too few or it can be narrowed if the expected output is too much. In the first case there are 
few documents in the data base on the subject of the query, in the second there are too many that can 
satisfy the query. Conclusions Library management and document retrieval systems differ considerably 
in terms of their data base, the way they are used and the characteristics of their users. These dif- 
ferences have important implications for the design of the on-line interface in general and for the characCeristics 
of an effective command language in particular. Library management systems are intended primarily for 
staff users, they deal with ob-jective, unambiguous data that are accessed repetitively in a routine 
fashion. Since the same group of individuals use the systems on a day-to-day basis searching the data 
base for known items, a relatively rigid and formalized interaction language can be tolerated. The use 
of document retrieval systems is highly variable from the point of view of the identity of their users, 
their use pattern and the nature of the problems that are brouqhtto the on-line interface. For this reason, 
ease of use is important and freedom from re- stricted command languages is highly de- sirable. References 
I. Bennett, John L. The user interface in interactive systems. In Annual Review of Information Science 
anB-Technology, Vol. 7, Carlos C. Cuadra, ed., American Society for Information Science, 1972. 2. Katter, 
Robert V. and Donald A. Blankenship. On-line interfaces for document information systems; considerations 
for the Biomedical Comunication Network. Systems Development Corporation TH-(L)-4320, 1969. 3. Markuson, 
Barbara E. Application of automation in American libraries, an analysis of the LARC survey returns. The 
LARC Reports 3:1-12, April 1970. 4. Artandi, Susan. An introduction to com-puters in information science. 
2nd ed., Metuchen, N.J., Scarecrow Press, 1972. 5. Marcus, Richard S., Alan R. Benenfeld and Peter Kugel. 
The user interface for the Intrex retrieval system. Electronics Systems Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, 1971. 6. Meadow, Charles. Man-machine communication. Wiley-Interscience, 1970. 7. Artandi, 
Susan. Information concepts and their utility. Journal of the American Soceity for Information Science, 
24:242-245, July-  August, 1973. 74
			