
 THE EFFECT OF LEARNING STYLE AND METHOD OF INSTRUCTION ON THE ACHIEVEMENT, EFFICIENCY AND SATISFACTION 
OF END-USERS LEARNING COMPUTER SOFTWARE George A. Bohlen School of Business Administration, University 
of Dayton, Dayton OH 45469 Thomas W, Ferratt School of Business Administration, University of Dayton, 
Dayton, OH 45469 ABSTRACT This research examines the effect of end user learning style (as measured 
by the Kolb Learning Style Inventory) and method of instruction (lecture based and computer based) on 
end user learning outcomes, i.e., achievement, efficiency, and satisfaction. The end users were college 
students learning to use a word processing package. The results suggest that computer based training 
is more effective than the lecture method except for Assimilators, who appear to learn equally well under 
either method. Limitations of the study require these results to be replicated before being widely accepted. 
INTRODUCTION One of the major issues facing MIS management today is the effective and efficient training 
of end-users. Bostrom, Olfman and Sein (1990) proposed a research framework for future research and summarized 
the relevant previous research in this area. They conclude that individual differences are an important 
factor in the effective and efficient conduct of end-user Permission to copy without fee all or part 
of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed fcr direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is give!n that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, requires a fee and/cr specific permission. CPR1419311vf0, USA @ 1993 ACM 0-89791 -573-9/93/0004/0273 
. ..$1.50 training. Their studies used the end user s learning style (Kolb, 1984) as a major area of 
individual difference. Their research indicates not only that learning style is an important predictor 
of learning performance but also that learning style interacts with training methods. PURPOSE AND RATIONALE 
FOR THIS RESEARCH The research by Bostrom et al. (1990) as well as other recently reported research 
indicate an increasing recognition that individuals have a preferred learning style and that end-user 
out­comes (e.g., performance, efficiency and satisfaction) may be affected by the end-user s learning 
style and the method of instruction. Very little experimental research, however, has been done to verify 
that end-user performance, efficiency, and satisfaction in learning are related to learning style and 
method of instruction. The purpose of the research reported here is to provide experimental evidence 
regarding the effects of learning style and method of instruction on outcomes associated with learning 
to use end-user software. If learners outcomes are affected by learning style and method of instruction, 
then these factors should be consid­ered when determining the method of instruction for end-users. Included 
in the category of end-users are college students. The use of two common kinds of end-user software --word 
processing and spreadsheets --is widespread among university students. It has become a virtual necessity 
to be able to use the computer effectively to accomplish the required out-of-class work in an effective 
and timely manner. While some students come to the university with some computer experience, many do 
not possess the skills to be truly effective end-users. I o &#38;WW!% EXPERIMENTATK)N 7-? I Universities 
have to determine what, if any, instruction in end-user computing they will provide to their students. 
This research should provide some insight as to the effectiveness of two methods of providing this instruction 
for students in each of Kolb s (1984) four learning styles. To the extent that the results of this research 
are generalizable to the entire end-user population, it should also increase the body of knowledge concerning 
the effect of learning style and method of instruction on the learning outcomes of end-users in general. 
KOLB S LEARNING STYLE INVENTORY 1985 This research uses the end-user s learning style, determined by 
the Kolb Learning Style Inventory (LSI) (Kolb, 1985a and 1985b), as the primary measure of the characteristics 
of the trainee. Kolb s Learning Style Inventory is based on the conception that learning is a four-stage 
cycle involving four adaptive learning modes -­concrete experience, reflective observation, abstract 
conceptualization and active experimentation. A learner has some concrete experience which is followed 
by some reflective observation on the experience. Based on the experience and the reflective observation, 
the learner forms some abstract concepts (or theory), The theory is then tested through active experimentation. 
The cycle is shown in Figure 1. Kolb states that concrete experience and abstract conceptualization form 
the opposite ends of a continuum of learning and that active experimentation and reflective observation 
form another continuum. These two continua can be drawn as two axes creating four quadrants. I @ Figure 
1 LEARNING STYLES  Kolb s Learning Style Inventory -1985 is designed to measure a learner s preference 
for learning on each of these two continua. When a learner s preference has been determined on each of 
these two continua, he or she falls into one of four quadrants as shown in Figure 1. Each quadrant reflects 
a particular learning style. Kolb has given the four learning styles names that tend to reflect the learning 
preferences of learners with each of the four styles. A description of some of the features of each of 
the four styles follows (Kolb, 1984). The convergent learning style (converges) reflects those learners 
that prefer abstract conceptualization and active experimentation. The strengths of these learners is 
in problem solving, decision making and the practical application of ideas. These learners prefer dealing 
with technical tasks and problems rather than social and interpersonal issues. The divergent learning 
style (divergers) reflects those learners that have strengths opposite to the converges. They prefer 
concrete experience and reflective observation. The greatest strength of these learners is their imaginative 
ability and the awareness of meaning and values. These learners tend to perform better in situations 
that call for the generation of alternative ideas such as in brainstorming. The assimilation learning 
style (assimilators) reflect those who prefer abstract conceptualization and reflective observation. 
 Their strengths lie in inductive reasoning and the ability to create theoretical models. They are more 
concerned with ideas and abstract concepts. It is more important for them that the theory be logically 
sound and precise than for it to have practical application. Those with the accommodative learning style 
(accommodators) have the opposite strengths of assimilators. They emphasize concrete experi­ence and 
active experimentation. Their strengths lie in doing things, in carrying out plans and tasks and getting 
involved in ]new experiences. Accommodators tend to solve problems in an intuitive trial-and-error manner 
relying heavily on other people for information rather than on their own analytic ability. LITERATURE 
REVIEW Recently there has been an increasing interest in the investigation of the effect of individual 
learning style and method of instruction on the resulting achievement, efficiency and satisfaction of 
the student (Bostrom, et al., 1990; Burger, 1985; Larsen, 1992; Billings and Cobb, 1992; Davis, et al., 
1988). The educational literature today often contains the term learning stvle along with the recommendation 
that learning style be matched with teaching style so as to augment achievement (Hyman and Rosoff, 1984). 
Hyman and Rosoff (1984) examine several learning style models and describe a four-step paradigm that 
learning style advocates believe should be followed: 1) examine the student s individual learning style, 
2) understand and classify the student s learning style, 3) match student with a teacher whose teaching 
method is appropriate for the student s learning style, and 4) educate teachers to perform the previous 
three steps. Keefe (1979) describes learning styles as characteristic cognitive, affective, and physiological 
behaviors that serve as relatively stable indicators of how learners perceive, interact with, and respond 
to the learning environment. One must be careful not to confuse cognitive style and learning style. Learning 
style is a broad term that includes cognitive, as well as affective and physiological styles. Reichmann-Hruska 
(1989) believes that subject matter content is important since the effort to learn will be exerted more 
easily if a direct payback exists from learning the skill or concept. She also believes that the environment, 
total quiet or some noise, as well as day of week and time of day (structure of learning) affects how 
one learns. Each individual has preferences for each category. Della-Dora and Blanchard (1979) also believe 
that learning style can be defined as a personally preferred way of dealing with information and experience 
that crosses content areas. Many researchers have grasped the importance of the preference factor (Kruzich, 
Friesen, and Van Soest, 1986). Kolb and Fry (1975) found that although a direct correspondence between 
the preferred learning styles of teachers and the teaching methods they employ has not been established... 
students LSI scores are systematically related to their preferences for teaching methods. A recent study 
by Davis et al. (1988) investigated the student outcomes of 196 first year English students under 7 instructors 
where the learning style of the students was either matched, unmatched or partially matched to that of 
the instructor. They found no significant differences in student outcomes among the groups. The principal 
argument of the aptitude-training interaction paradigm of education psychology is that the effectiveness 
of any instructional method results from the interaction between the characteristics of the trainee and 
the characteristics of the training method. (Cronbach and Snow, 1977) The only reported research relating 
end-user learning style and method of instruction appears to be that reported by Bostrom et al. (1990). 
That research contained a mix of significant and non-significant findings. Larsen (1992) reported the 
results of students with different learning styles using interactive video instruction to learn the concepts 
of data communications. He found no significant difference in student outcomes as a result of different 
learning styles. Conclusions from the literature review. End­users have individual differences in learning 
style that may interact with the method of instruction to determine the learning outcomes that occur 
when they engage in learning to use end-user software. Prior research has identified different learning 
styles. However, little experimental evidence has been accumulated regarding the relationship of learning 
style and method of instruction to learning outcomes, particularly for the subject matter content encompassing 
end-user software. RESEARCH QUESTIONS This research focuses on three questions: 1. Are end-user learning 
outcomes (i.e., achievement, efficiency and satisfaction) affected by the method of instruction when 
learning end­user software? 2. Are end-user learning outcomes (i.e., achievement, efficiency and satisfaction) 
affected by the user s leamin ~ style when learning end­user software? 3. Are end-user learning outcomes 
(i.e., achievement, efficiency and satisfaction) affected by the combination of the method of instruction 
and the user s learning style when learning end­user software?  METHODOLOGY The research design is a 
two factor experimental design. Learning style is one factor, while method of teaching is the other. 
All subjects are classified into one of four learning styles based on their responses to Kolb s (1985a 
and 1985b) learning style inventory. The subjects in each of the learning styles are randomly assigned 
to one of two methods of teaching, described below. Participants One hundred and twenty students in a 
l-credit­hour university introductory computer course having an enrollment of 173 students participated 
in the study. The participants were those students of the total enrollment who reported having little 
or no previous experience with word processing software. Students were not identified as participating 
or not participating in an experi­ment. Rather, students in the second method of teaching were told to 
report to a different location when the class sessions devoted to the study began, as explained below. 
The course is required of all business students but may be waived upon successful completion of a proficiency 
exam. The topics covered include DOS, word processing, Windows, spreadsheets, and basic computer literacy. 
The experiment was conducted during the seven class sessions devoted to teaching end-user word processing 
software, specifically WordPerfect 5.1. These sessions began October 6, 1992, 5 weeks after the course 
began and ended October 31, 1992, 6 weeks before the course ended. LeaminE Style Prior to the start of 
instruction, all enrolled students were administered the Kolb Learning Style Inventory -1985 (Kolb, 1985a 
and Kolb, 1985b) to determine their learning style. Each student was classified into one of the four 
learning styles: (1) diverger, (2) assimilator, (3) converger, or (4) accommodator. Method of Instruction 
Participants within each of the four learning styles were randomly assigned to one o~f two teaching methods: 
(1) lecture method (i.e., the control group) and (2) computer-based training (CBT) method (i.e., the 
experimental group). All course requirements (e.g., reading assignments, homework assignments, and tests) 
for both groups were the same. The only difference was how @e class sessions devoted to the word processing 
software were taught. Lecture Method. This method consisted of lecture by an instructor in a large auditorium. 
The instructor supported the lecture method with the chalkboard, overhead transparencies and a computer 
projection device to teach WordPwfect 5.1. A teaching assistant did the keyboarding on a computer to 
project on the screen the actions Seven that the instructor was explaining. consecutive fifty minute 
class sessions were devoted to this topic. The sixty participants plus all non-participating students 
(because of higher experience) remained in the lecture method, which was the normal method of instruction 
for the course, when the class sessions on word processing began. Computer Based Training Method, The 
sixty students assigned to the second method were told to go to another classroom for the beginning of 
the first class session devoted to word processing, where the computer based training method was briefly 
explained. They were then told to go to the computer laboratory durin,g the assigned class time until 
the end of the class sessions on word processing. They learned WordPerfect 5.1 using the computer based 
training (CBT) package, FastStart Plus, which was developed by CornTrain, Inc. (1990). Sixty students 
used the package simultaneously over a local area network in the university computer laboratories. FastStart 
Plus is a training program that simulates exactly the actual software, WordPerfect 5.1. The program consists 
of two workshops, Basic and Advanced Skills. In each workshop, the user is first given a menu of lessons 
from which to choose. Each lesson consists of a set of instructions superimposed on the WordPerfect document 
screen. The user is instructed what to do and, for the first few times, how to do it. The user must accomplish 
the task correctly or he or she cannot progress to the next task. Help screens are available with one 
keystroke. The user can also move quickly through the lesson using the * key. Lessons can be discontinued 
at any time. They can be repeated at any time, and the lessons do not have to be completed in any specified 
order although the lessons may use skills learned in a previous lesson. The normal course completion 
time for all lessons is seven to ten hours. The students were given seven consecutive fifty minute course 
class sessions to complete both workshops. Since some topics were not required, the time for the lecture 
and the time to cover the required material in the CBT package were determined to be approx­imately the 
same. Both Methods. The instructor for the course closely coordinated the material covered in lecture 
to be consistent with the material covered in the CBT package to insure that both groups of students 
were being taught the same material. All students used the text Working With WordPerfect 5.1 by Electronic 
Learning Facilitators, Inc. (1991) for outside of class study and for doing the out-of-class assignments. 
 End-User Learning Outcomes Three measures of @ormance (i.e., achievement) were obtained: (1) test scores, 
(2) practicum scores, and (3) assignment scores. Test scores. All students were required to take a thirty-five 
question multiple choice test to determine their knowledge of the required actions to accomplish certain 
tasks in WordPerfect 5.1. This test was developed by the instructors of the course. Test scores have 
a potential range from o-35. Practicum scores. Shortly after the seven class sessions and after the 
assignments were completed, all students were required to take a fifty-minute computer based test to 
determine their ability to actually use WordPerfect 5.1 correctly. The test used was the Judd test which 
was developed by Mentrix Corporation. It is a computer based test that uses the actual application program 
(WordPerfect 5.1 ). The user is instructed to perform a task and is permitted to perform the task in 
any way that he or she deems best. Since the user is using the actual WordPerfect 5.1 application program, 
he or she can accomplish the task in any manner possible. As the user completes each task, the program 
records a score for accuracy. The accuracy score is based on whether the task was done correctly. The 
test/retest reliability of the Judd test was previously determined to be 0.87 (Mentrix, 1991). The Judd 
test also meets the federal guidelines concerning validity of the test to measure software skills (Mentrix, 
1992). The accuracy score is used to measure achievement and was configured to have a potential range 
from O -120. Assignments. Each student recorded the time required to do the assignments out of class. 
The last outcome measured is satisfaction. Satisfaction. A ten-item questionnaire was given to each student 
after the completion of all assignments, test and practicum. The questionnaire used 5-point Likert type 
scales (where 1 is scored as high and 5 as low satisfaction and three items original responses are reverse 
scored) and asked the student to respond as to how well he or she liked the teaching method and whether 
or not he or she thought the teaching method was effective in teaching him or her to do the assignments, 
the test and the practicum. The first item measured overall satisfaction with the teaching method. ANALYSIS 
Table 1 displays the originally assigned number of subjects by learning style and method of instruction. 
 Assignment scores. All students were required to complete and turn in five out-of-class assignments 
demonstrating their ability to use WordPerfect 5.1. These assignments were developed by the instructors 
of the course. Scores on each assignment have a potential range from O-100. Three measures of efficiency 
are reported: (1) the number of keystrokes to complete the practicum, (2) a composite minimum of time 
or keystrokes for the practicum, and (3) time to complete assignments, Practicum. The number of keystrokes 
required to accomplish each task was recorded by the Judd test for each student. In addition, a composite 
efficiency score based on keystrokes or time was computed by the Judd test. IIMETHOD ILS1 ILS2 ILS3 ILS4 
II LECTURE 9 22 15 14 CBT 9 221s 14 TABLE 1 NUMBER OF ASSIGNED PARTICIPANTS Two way analysis of variance 
was used to answer the three research questions. The independent variables are: 1. learning style (LS) 
(where LS 1 = divergers, LS 2 = assimilators, LS 3 = converges, and LS 4 = accommodators) and 2. method 
of instruction (where 1 = lecture  and 2 = CBT). The dependent variables are: 1, achievement as measured 
by a. test score b. practicum score (Judd test) c. assignment grade (average of 5 assignments)  
2. efficiency as measured by a. keystrokes required in practicum (Judd test) b. efficiency taking practicum 
(Judd test) c. time spent doing assignments (average hours on 5 assignments)  3. satisfaction as measured 
by a. overall satisfaction with method (single item) b. satisfaction with method with regard to preparation 
to take the test, take the practicum, ancl do the assignments (average of ten items)  Results for each 
of the three dependent variables are reported separately. Effectiveness The practicum score results are 
shown in Table 2. Scores range from 44 to 120, the maximum possible score. These scores show users performance 
(accuracy) on the practicum as measured by the Judd test (a hands on test using the actual software). 
The difference in scores is significant for the method of instruction (p=.012) but not for learning style 
(p=.67). The interaction (i.e., combination) of method of instruction and learning style is significant 
at the .1 level (p=.094). Other measures of effectiveness, i.e., test score and assignment grade, show 
no significant main nor interaction effects (i.e., all p>. 10). METHOD LS 1 LS 2 LS3 LS 4 LECTURE 80.89 
90.50 79.40 78.73) (N) (9) (20) (15) (11) CBT 94.s0 88.29 93.71 90.oa, m) (8) (21) (14) 1 (13) TABLE 
2 PRACTICUM SCORES  Although the users learning the software by the computer based training ( hands 
on ) method clearly performed better on the Practicum than those learning the software in the classroom, 
the performance of the two groups on the written test of concepts showed no significant difference between 
the two groups. In other words, the students learning the software using the computer based method did 
significantly better on the practicum and did equally well on the written test even though they did not 
attend the lecture sessions. Although there was no significant difference due to learning style, the 
average of the Assimilators in the lecture method is approximately ten points higher than the averages 
of the other three learning styles. Indeed, the results indicate that the divergers, converges and accommodators 
did better using the computer based training method whereas the assimilators using the lecture method 
did approximately the same as those learning the software by the computer based training method. It s 
interesting to note that assimilators are found in information and science careers (Stice, 1987). They 
tend to excel in understanding a wide range of information and putting it into logical form. They approach 
things systematically and tend to learn well from their mistakes. The results may indicate that these 
individuals learn the material equally well, regardless of the training method. This research did, however, 
use a relatively small sample size and further research is needed to reach any definitive conclusions 
of this nature. Efficiency The practicum efficiency results are shown in Table 3. Scores range from 14 
to 88 (where higher scores indicate higher efficiency). The difference in scores is significant for the 
method of instruction (p=.029) but not for learning style (P=.Z92). The interaction (i.e., combination) 
of method of instruction and learning style is not significant (p=.329). Other measures of efficiency, 
i.e., keystrokes and time spent doing assignments, show no significant main nor interaction effects (i.e., 
all p>. 10). METHOD LS 1 LS 2 - LECTURE 54.78 66.s0 (N) (9) (20)  -=1.-=l CBT 66.00 6.5.90 (w (8) 
(21) TABLE 3 PRACTICUM EFFICIENCY The results indicate that (as a single group) users learning the 
software using the computer based training method did significantly better in terms of efficiency of 
performance on the Practicum than those learning the software using the lecture method. This means that 
the group learning the software by the computer based training method accomplished the tasks on the practicum 
with less keystrokes and/or less time than those learning by the lecture method. Although there is no 
difference in efficiency due to learning style, the results indicate that assimilators had approximately 
the same efficiency score, regardless of teaching method, whereas the efficiency scores for the other 
three groups range from nine to twelve points higher for the users learning by the computer based training 
method. This may indicate that assimilators do equally well, regardless of training method. Satisfaction 
The results for the single-item measure of overall satisfaction with method of instruction are shown 
in Table 4. Scores cover the whole possible range from 1 to 5 (where lower scores indicate higher satisfaction). 
Twelve participants did not respond to the satisfaction instrument. The difference in satisfaction is 
significant for the method of instruction (p=.000) but not for learning style (p=.576). The interaction 
(i.e., combination) of method of instruction and learning style is not significant (p=.537). The ten-item 
measure of satisfaction shows similar results, i.e., a significant effect for method of instruction (p=.002) 
in the same direction as the single-item measure) and no significant effect for learning style (p=.967) 
nor interaction (p=.946). METHOD LSl LS2 LS3 LS4 TABLE 4 OVERALL SATISFACTION The results indicate that 
(as a single group) users learning the software using the computer based training method were significantly 
more satisfied with the method of instruction than those learning the software using the lecture method. 
This may be due to the fact that the students were actively involved in the learning process when using 
the computer based package as opposed to being more passively involved when attending a lecture and having 
the instructor demonstrate the concepts and techniques involved in learning the software. Although there 
is no difference in level of satisfaction due to learning style or interactions, the difference in mean 
satisfaction for converges is greatest. They are the most satisfied with CBT and the least satisfied 
with lecture as a method of instruction. CONCLUSION This research experimentally investigated whether 
end-user learning outcomes (i.e., achievement, efficiency, and satisfaction) are affected by the method 
of instruction, the user s learning style, or the combination of these two factors as users learn software. 
The results indicate that the method of instruction alone and in combination with learning style makes 
a difference in some but not all measures of achievement, efficiency, and satisfaction. In particular, 
the end users, who were college students learning a word processing package, had higher achievement, 
efficiency, and satisfaction when CBT rather than lecture was the method of instruction. However, assimilators 
had equally high achievement under the lecture method. Because the number of participants in each group 
is relatively small (ranging from 6 to 21), the results were obtained with some but not all measures, 
and the experiment was conducted with a single instructor and a single CBT package, the results need 
to be replicated. These results suggest that CBT is more effective than the lecture method except for 
assimilators, who appear to learn equally well under either method. Managers may use that knowledge in 
conjunction with cost of the method of instruction in their organizations to help select a method for 
end-user training. Of course, managers should be careful in generalizing to their setting the results 
of our study with end-users who are students taking a university course offering for credit. A situation 
that may make generalization of these findings more appropriate is one in which end users, who have little 
or no knowledge of the specific software, are learning the software (specifically word processing) to 
use on the job. This would include end users being required to learn the software by some organizational 
authority. Another setting where these findings may be most useful is in other universities, where faculty 
and administrators (i.e., the instructional managers for students) are seeking to select effective methods 
of instruction. REFERENCES Beutell, N.J. and Kressel, S.S. An Investigation of Kolb s Learning Styles 
Inventory: Social Desirability and Normative Scoring, Psychological Reports (55), 1984, pp. 89-90. Billings, 
D.M. and Cobb, K.L. Effects of Learning Style Preferences, Attitude and GPA on Learner Achievement Using 
Computer Assisted Interactive Videodisc Instruction, Journal of Comuuter-Based Instruction (19: 1), 1992, 
pp. 12.-16. Bodi, S. Teaching Effectiveness and Bibliographic Instruction: The Relevance of Learning 
Styles, College &#38; Research Libraries, (51:2), 1990, pp. 113-119. Bonham, L.A. Learning Style Instruments: 
Let the Buyer Beware, Lifelong Learning, (11 :6), 1988, pp. 12-16. Bostrom, R. P., Olfman, L. and Sein, 
M.K. The Importance of Learning Style in End-User Training, MIS Ouarterlv, March 1990, pp. 100­ 119. 
 Burger, K., Computer Assisted Instruction: Learning Style and Academic Achievement, Journal of Computer-Based 
Instruction, (12: 1), 1985, pp. 21-22. Carland, J.W. and Carland, J.C. An Investigation into the Distinctions 
between Cognitive Styles of Business and Nonbusiness Students, Journal of Education for Business, (63:2), 
1987, pp. 68-71. CornTrain, Inc., FastStart Plus WordPerfect 5.1 Basic and Advanced Skills Workshop, 
CornTrain, Inc., Nevada City, CA, 1990. Cronbach, L.J. and Snow, R.E. Aptitude and Instructional Methods: 
A Handbook for Research on Interaction, Irvington, New York, NY, 1977. Davis, J.F,, Murrell, P,H. and 
Davis, T.M. On Matching Teaching Approach With Student Learning Style: Are We Asking the Right Question? 
Annual Meeting of Mid South Educational Research Association, Louisville, KY, ERIC Document 303859, 1988. 
Della-Dora, D. and Blanchard, L. Moving Toward Self-Directed Learning: HiEhliRhts of Relevant Research 
and l?romisin~ Practice, Association for Supervision and Curricular Development, Alexandria, VA, 1979, 
Diamond, R.M. Individualizing Student Learning, The Future In The Making: Current Issues In Higher Education, 
D.W. Vermilye (cd.), Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 1973, pp. 142-146. Electronic Learning Facilitators, 
Working With WordPerfect 5.1, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, San Diego, CA, 1991. Freedman, R.D. and Stumpf, 
S.A. What Can One Learn From the Learning Style Inventory? Academy of Mana~ement Journal (21:2), 1978, 
pp. 275-282. Freedman, R.D. and Stumpf, S.A. The Learning Style Inventory: Less Than Meets the Eye, Academv 
of Mana~ement Review (5:3), 1980, pp. 445-447. Gattiker, U.E. and Paulson, D. The Quest for Effective 
Teaching Methods: Achieving Computer Literacy for End-Users, INFOR (25:3), August 1987, pp. 256-272. 
Gomex, L. M., Egan, D.E. and Bowers, C. Learning to Use a Text Editor: Some Learner Characteristics That 
Predict Success, Human-Commter Interaction (2:1), 1986, pp. 1-23. Hyman, R. and Rosoff, B. Matching Learning 
and Teaching Styles: The Jug and What s In It, Theory Into Practice (23: 1), 1984, pp. 35-43. Keefe, 
J.W. Learning Style: An Overview, in Student Learning Styles: Diagnosing and Prescribing ProErams, National 
Association of Secondary School Principals, Reston, VA, 1979, pp. 1-17. Kolb, D.A. Ex~eriential Learning: 
Experience as the Source of Learning and Development, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J,, 1984. Kolb, 
D.A. Learning Style Inventory, Self Scoring Inventory and Interpretation Booklet, McBer and Company, 
Boston, MA, 1985a. Kolb, D.A. Learning Style Inventory 1985: Technical Specifications, McBer and Company, 
Boston, MA, 1985b. Kolb, D.A. and Fry, R. Toward an Applied Theory of Experiential Learning, in Theories 
of Group Processes, G.L. Cooper (cd.), John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York, NY, 1975, pp. 33-54. Kruzich, 
J.M., Friesen, B.J. and Van Soest, D. Assessment of Student and Faculty Learning Styles: Research and 
Application, Journal of Social Work Education (22:3), 1986, pp. 22-30. Larsen, R. E., Relationship of 
Learning Style to the Effectiveness and Acceptance of Interactive Video Instruction, Journal of Computer-Based 
Instmction (19:1), 1992, pp. 17-21. Melone, N.P. A Theoretical Assessment of the User-Satisfaction Construct 
in Information Systems Research, Management Science (36: 1), 1990, pp. 76-91. Mentrix Corporation, The 
Judd Test For WordPerfect 5.1 Skills, Version 1.02 Administrators Manual and User Guide, Mentrix Corporation, 
Nevada City, CA, 1991. Mentrix Corporation, Judd Test Validity, Mentrix Corporation, Nevada City, CA, 
1992, Murrell, P. and Claxton, C. Experiential Learning Theory as a Guide For Effective Teaching, Counselor 
Education and Supervision (27:1), 1987, pp. 4-15. Reichmann-Hruska, S., Learning Styles and Individual 
Differences in Learning, Eciuitv and Excellence (24:3), 1989, pp. 25-27. Rivard, S. and Huff, S.L. 
Factors of Success for End-User Computing, Communications of-ACM (31:5), May 1988, pp. 552-561. Sein, 
M.K. and Bostrom, R.P. Individual Differences and the Training of Novice Users, Human-Computer Interaction, 
(4:3), 1989, pp.197-229. Sein, M. K., Bostrom, R.P. and Offman, L. Training End Users to Compute: Cognitive, 
Motivational Social Issues, INFOR (25:3), August 1987, pp. 236-255. Sewall, T.J. The Measurement of Learning 
Style: A Critique of Four Assessment Tools, Assessment Center, Wisconsin University, Gmeen Bay, ERIC 
Document 267247, 1986. Snow, R.E. Individual Differences in the Design of Educational Programs, American 
Psvcholo~ (41:10), pp. 1029-1039. Stice, J.E., Using Kolb s Learning Cycle to Improve Student Learning, 
En~ineering Education, February, 1987, pp. 291-296. Stumpf, S.A. and Freedman, R.D. The Learning Style 
Inventory: Still Less Than Meets the Eye, Academy of Management Review (6:2), april 1981, pp. 298-299. 
Svinicki, M.D. and Dixon, N. M., The Kolb Model Modified for Classroom Activities, College Teaching (35:4), 
1987, pp. 141-146. Wesley, B. E., Krockover, G.H. and Hicks, CR., Locus of Control and the Acquisition 
of Computer Literacy, Journal of ComPuter-Ba@ Instruction, (12:1), 1985, pp. 12-16. 
			