
 THE VARIETY OF TICCIT SYSTEMS --AN OVERVIEW Richard P. Morton The MITRE Corporation The TICClT Model 
MITRE's TlCClT program began in 1968 with the hypothesis that coupling television displays to a time-sharing 
computer system would result in a computer-based instruction system low enough in cost to permit schools 
to provide a significant quantity of individualized instruction to a large number of students. The subsequent 
TICCIT effort has demonstrated this hypothesis to be correct, and has led to the development of a model 
for this technology (See Figure I) that has been shown by the ten TICCIT systems in operation and under 
construction to have a wide range of options which match a wide range of instructional and general purpose 
environments. The TICCIT Systems Three TlCClT systems have been built for the community college project 
sponsored by the National Science Foundation. As Shown in Figure 2, these systems are designed to deliver 
individualized computer-assisted instruction to up to 128 students simultaneously. At the heart of the 
system is a dual processor minicomputer system with a disc based storage capable of storing 75 million 
bytes of programs and instruc- tional data plus student records for 3000 students, I0,000 graphic displays 
and 2 I/2 hours of digitized audio. Color TV J J Keyboard i Main Processor 9isplay System , ,I i 1 i 
Main Processor Display Display System System I I I I i I I I oil11 I 1 F-I [--7 F--] Figure l The TICCIT 
Model 144 f ! ~o ~ ? m ! -s~-r i I# .i I ! o~ E 5--m-- r'-, .=~ Q o o'~E ~=. U [ L .... -oi -&#38;#169; 
~45 The output of the computer system passes through the MITRE designed refresh system to the student 
terminal. A single character generator converts computer character strings to raster scan bits and color 
control bits, which are stored in the refresh memory of the appropriate terminal. The character generator 
is programable, providing a very large set of characters, sizes, and fonts. Arbitrary bit patterns can 
be defined to create graphics. The standard character size provides 43 characters per line and 17 lines. 
Seven colors are available, and color is stored for top and bottom halves of each character position. 
The student terminal consists of a modified color television set and a keyboard. In addition to the computer 
generated video and audio, the terminal can be used to present videotaped materials to the student. Two 
systems developed for the Navy, one operational at North Island Naval Air Station, California, and one 
under construction for Cecil Field, Florida, are identical to the community college systems except that 
they have only 32 terminals and no audio. Similarly, a small eight terminal TICClT Laboratory is operational 
at MITRE without audio or video tapes. The TICCIT Laboratory system also serves as the main processor 
in support of a remote TICCIT system that supports four terminals. The remote system contains a terminal 
processor with a cartridge disk for graphics, a character generator and a four terminal refresh system. 
It is housed in a ruggedized cabinet so that it can be easily shipped from one site to another. Currently, 
it is at the Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama. The connection between the 
MITRE computer and the remote computer is via a 2400 baud telephone link. A system designed for the New 
York State Education Department Office for Education of Children with Handicapping Conditions is currently 
operating in Amherst, New York, delivering instructional materials, games, and other computer services 
to homebound children and their families via the local commercial cable television system. As shown in 
Figure 3, a TICCIT terminal processor and refresh system are used to interface a Hewlett-Packard 2000F 
Time-Shared Basic System to the cable. A terminal in Amherst con- sists of the viewer's own home unmodified 
T.V. set and a keyboard, which is acoustically coupled to the users telephone. The character generator 
has been modified to permit variable width characters required due to reduced bandwidth of the cable 
system and the home T.V. sets. In order to modulate the refresh memory output onto the cable using standard 
modulations, it was necessary to engineer a colorizer which combines luminance and chroma signals into 
a single NTSC compatible signal. . TICClT COMPUTER SYSTEM REFRESH SYSTEM I I r !i!! aN LUMINANCE ........ 
CHROMA MEMORY =1 , LUMINANCE =2 CHROMA~ LUMINANCE =) :ZT T TTY CHROMA -~1 i o E o ~MAG TAPE ~ s CONSOLE 
w T ~LINEPRINTER LUMINANCE =1o ~ROMA =10 VIDEO TAPe TELEPHONE INPUT SYSTEM  7 TELEPHONE L(NES CABLEVISION 
(10 NUMBERS) ~ CATV CABLE ~ ro HOMES Figure 3 Amherst TICCIT Interactive TV System 146 A system under 
construction for the Model Secondary School for the Deaf (MSSD), Washington, D.C., is also cable television 
based. The system at MSSD is built around a cable plant made up of five par-allel cables, four downstream 
and one return, each with a 36 channel capacity. One cable contains off-air television channels, locally 
originated programs from the studio at MSSD, channels from the Gallaudet College cable system and video 
tapes. Two of the cables are used to implement a video phone capability. The remaining two cables carry 
computer generated signals. Three types of terminals may be connected to the cable system at MSSD. A 
T.V. set equipped with a set top converter may be connected to the cable that has the one-way mass distribution 
signals. Inter-active terminals will consist of a T.V. set, a keyboard, and a terminal controller. The 
controller will allow the computer to select cable and channel automatically to give the user the program 
he has asked for using his keyboard. Some interactive terminals will also have a video phone accessory 
consisting of a T.V. camera, a modulator and a microphone. The computer system for MSSD includes all 
the components of the community college system (Terminal Processor, Main Processor, Disc Drives, etc.) 
plus many new features. A second main processor will be the Gallaudet College Computer Center's PDP-IO. 
There will be no need for the video tape switch, but the video tape players will be computer controllable. 
A standard communication interface will connect to telephone lines and printers located remotely around 
the MSSD building. The terminals in the MSSD TICClT system can be used for watching commercial television 
and other scheduled programs, for dial access video tape viewing, for communicating with others inside 
and outside the MSSD campus, for computer assisted instruction and for student and administrative general 
purpose computing. The communications functions include terminal-to-terminal keyboard interactions with 
other terminals at MSSD or with any teletype on the teletype-for-the-deaf network, video phone service 
between MSSD terminals so equipped, and a mailbox service for personal message and junk mail distribution. 
The CAI data base will include all of the community college TICCIT materials, some math drill materials 
now operating on the PDP-IO and a variety of MSSD produced multimedia materials to be developed. The 
general purpose computing uses of the system will initially consist primarily of administrative functions 
now running and under development on the PDP-IO. A BASIC interpreter will be added to the TlCClT system 
which will be used to support some CAI activities, as well as student computing. The tenth TICCIT system, 
called MITS, serves as a front end processor for MITRE's IBM 370/145. This system is essentially a terminal 
processor configuration supporting 16 color TlCClT terminals, plus 20 other hard wired and dial-up terminals 
and three real-time computers used in other MITRE laboratories. TICCIT Courseware TlCClT is more than 
just hardware systems. On the community college project alone, more than $1.5 million has been spent 
on the definition, design and development of course structures, authoring methods, and instructional 
materials for pre-calculus mathematics and English composition and grammar. English and mathematics have 
the first and second greatest enrollment in community colleges, with most students needing work in high 
school-level algebra and English composition and grammar. The courses developed are quite standard, although 
the English course required some novel approaches to adopt the subject to computer presentation. The 
TICCIT courses are mainline courses. That is, most students receive all of their instruction from the 
TICCIT system. The role of the teacher is changed to that of a tutor, advisor, diagnostician and problem 
solver for individualstudents whenever the need arises. The structure of the TICCIT courseware is based 
on the assumption that in complex cognitive learning (which includes mathematics and English grammar 
and composition) the way subjects are taught is independent of what is taught. TICCIT courses are organized 
into a heirarchy with four levels: oourses are divided into ueits, units into lessons, and lessons into 
segments. Each segment consists of a single generality or rule explained in four styles, plus a file 
of instances of the student either as examples or practice problems which test the students understanding 
of the concept. Additional components which round out the course strutture include introductions to units 
and lessons; statements of objectives; lists of prerequisites; feedbacks to questions; help in understanding 
the relation of an example or practice problem to the rule; heirarchy diagrams called maps, which show 
the student the structure of the materials, where he is in those materials, and how well he is doing; 
and tests. 147 Each of these components is available to the student if and when he wants to look at it. 
Special keys on the keyboard gives the student direct access to each of the segment components under 
learner control. He may see as many examples or practice problems as he chooses, review the rule as often 
as he likes and take the test whenever he wants to. The system keeps track of what the student is doing, 
and an advisor program makes suggestions from time to time. There is also an ADVICE key on the keyboard 
to allow the student to solicit comments on strategy and progress. Courses being designed by the Navy 
and the Air University follow the same structure. The Navy courses have a somewhat different flavor, 
however, since the TICCIT system is used heavily for computer-managed instruction (CMI) as well as CAl. 
Four courses are being developed at North Island for crew training on the S3A aircraft. Part of the training 
program includes operation of a flight simulator, as well as actual aircraft operation. Additionally, 
a large body of training materials exist in the form of workbooks. Consequently, some of the lessons 
being written for TICClT include instructions to the student to use other off-line media. The Air University 
is currently developing two training courses, one in food service and one in supply processing. The instructional 
materials in use on the Amherst, New York, system were not produced as part of any TICCIT related effort. 
There, courseware is written in BASIC and comes from the standard libraries available from Hewlett-Packard 
and elsewhere. TICCIT Users As of this writing (October, 1975) there are over I000 students taking courses 
on six TICClT systems around the country. Nine hundred of these are at the two community colleges, and 
another 150 at Brigham Young University. Much smaller numbers of students are using the systems at North 
Island NAS, Amherst and MITRE. At North Island the students are flight crews learning a new aircraft. 
At Amherst, they are children with handicaps severe enough to keep them out of school. The students at 
MITRE are taking one of the community college math courses. In addition to students, authoring personnel 
are using TlCClT systems to write new materials and to revise existing courseware. Originally, a team 
of about 40 people at Brigham Young University developed most of the community college materials. Currently, 
there are about I0 part-time people at each of the colleges who are working on revisions and new material. 
The Navy has a team of about 20 people developing their four courses; about six people at the Air University 
are involved with the development of their two courses. The users of MITS at MITRE are, of course, not 
students, but rather engineers and other users of the 370. The TICClT terminals provide them with color, 
graphic and overlay capabilities not found in most other remote terminal systems. 148 
			