
 THE IMPORTANCE OF INTEROPERABILITY IN A SIMULATION PROTOTYPE FOR SPARES INVENTORY PLANNING Isaiah J. 
Bier James P. Tjelle The Boeing Company P.O. BOX 24346, M/S 7L-20 Seattle, Washington 98124-0346 U.S.A. 
 ABSTRACT Spare parts control and inventory planning for Boeing commercial aircraft is a large, complex, 
and mostly automated process. Management inventory policies are exercised through a set of control parameters 
that are programmed to generate inventory plans for a significant percentage of stocked parts. These 
control parameters directly impact customer service performance and inventory investment. Effects of 
parameter changes are difficult to predict due to the nature and number of control parameters, This paper 
describes the situation and presents a simulation prototype as a tool to determine how control parameters 
affect inventory, performance, and time needed until effects are realized. The simulation predicts the 
effects of decisions (implemented through parameter changes) on performance, including service to airlines, 
inventory levels, and operating costs. Essential to achieving our objective was the interoperability 
of several unique software programs. 1 BACKGROUND The Boeing Spares Department manages over 120,000 stocked 
part numbers for Boeing s worldwide fleet. Boeing has five international spare parts warehouses to increase 
customer service. The primary warehouse is in the Seattle area (Auburn), with four regional warehouses 
in Atlanta, Brussels, Singapore, and London. Regional warehouses stock between 19,000 and 25,000 part 
numbers, Computerized inventory planning calculates monthly demand forecasts, reorder points (ROP), and 
reorder quantities (ROQ) for approximately 70,000 part numbers. Another program determines inventory 
allocation to the five warehouses when inventories fall below predetermined levels. The following terms 
are defined for subsequent discussion. ROLT: Re-Order Lead Time is the time between the date an inventory 
replenishment order is triggered and the arrival date of this replenishment quantity. ROP: Reorder point 
is the inventory level that triggers an inventory replenishment order. ROQ: Reorder quantity is the amount 
of inventory ordered when an inventory replenishment order is triggered. Customer order class: Each customer 
order contains an attribute called customer order class that indicates a desired level of service for 
that order. The four customer order classes are: routine (RTN), expedite (EXP), critical (CRT), or airplane 
on ground (AOG). These are listed in ascending order of criticality, with greater attention to service 
given to more critical orders. Release: A replenishment order, originating from the main warehouse, is 
called a release. Releases of size ROQ are generated when the inventory level for a part reaches its 
ROP. There are two classes for a release, routine and expedite. (These are different from customer order 
classes.) Routine releases arrive at the main warehouse once the ROLT has elapsed. Expedite releases 
have a reduced ROLT and are triggered under stock out conditions or when other special handling is necessary. 
Stock status: A spare part can be in one of three mutually exclusive states called stock status. These 
states are stock ( S ), no-stock ( T), or recommend for stock ( R). Stock status S items are expected 
to be delivered to the customer within a 10 day period. No-stock or stock status T items typically have 
low sales activity and do not have the same service guarantees as stock status S parts. Stock status 
R items are in transition from stock status T to S ; as the first inventory has not yet arrived. Stock 
status R could represent a new part for a new airplane model or a no-stock item recommended for stock 
due to increase in the part s sales activity. 913 2 INTRODUCTION A significant percentage of Boeing s 
spare parts inventory is managed through a set of control parameters that affect customer service and 
inventory investment. The Control Parameter file is complex, with the possibility of an enormous number 
of options and combinations. There are approximately 20 groups of control parameters. Within each of 
these groups, parameters are usually classified into a number of classes, The exact effects of many of 
these control parameters are not well understood by management and are, therefore, seldom intuitively 
and sometimes arbitrarily. One class of control parameters is performance level, a theoretical value 
that represents a desired level of service to customers. For example, a value of 90% for the performance 
level control parameter theoretically implies that 90% of the time a customer s order will be fully satisfied 
from stock in inventory within 10 days from the order date, Use of this control parameter for comparative 
analysis is detailed in section 5.0, Results. Two key questions arise regarding inventory management 
decisions: 1. What affect will changing a control parameter have on service to customers and on inventory 
management costs? 2. When a change to a control parameter is made, how long will it take before that 
change is fully realized?  Many parameters interact with each other so that simultaneous change to any 
of these parameters may result in unpredictable effects. 3 STATISTICAL ISSUES The simulation s statistical 
issues were addressed as an integral part of this project. Primary issues included: 1. Selecting an appropriate 
representation of parts from some population of interest. 2. Determining a sampling strategy that allows 
drawing valid inferences about the whole part population. 3. Creating an experimental design that analyzes 
the effects and interactions caused by control parameter changes.  3.1 Sample Selection and Size Due 
to the diversity of the part population, stratified random sampling was selected as the appropriate method. 
The part population is divided into sub­populations, that historically demonstrated relatively homogeneous 
behavior patterns, and random samples are drawn from each one. The stratified random sampling approach 
has two main advantages: 1. Statistical inferences can be drawn from each sub­population or stratum, 
independent of the other strata. 2. Stratified sampling may result in more precise estimates of the 
characteristics of the entire population.  Estimating precision for the whole population depends on 
the sample size and on selecting strata that include parts within each stratum that are homogeneous with 
respect to the characteristic of interest. For example, if performance was a characteristic of interest, 
then the population could be stratified by unit cost and average monthly usage, since these classifications 
are used for setting performance level parameters in the Inventory Planning program. The results of the 
simulation prototype presented in section 5.0, Results, are based on a random sample of parts (with no 
stratification) selected from a target population of items with high sales. A sample size of 301 parts 
was randomly selected from a target population of just under 10,000 items. The entire sales history for 
each part in the sample was extracted from actual sales history archives to generate the Sales History 
file for input into the simulation. 3.2 Experimental Design A statistical experimental design methodology 
was developed to accurately determine the effects of the control parameters on the measures of performance 
with a minimum number of simulation runs. Three experimental design methodologies were investigated and 
documented (Bier, Tjelle, 1994) for this project: 1. Box-Behnken. 2. Central composite. 3. Optimal. 
 The Box-Behnken design was not chosen due to automation difficulties. The other two designs are potential 
candidates. Implementation of these procedures will enforce statistical rigor in evaluating the interaction 
occurring between control parameters. Statistical details for these designs are beyond the scope of this 
paper. The results of these simulation prototype experiments do not include the benefits of implementing 
these statistical techniques, 4 THE MODEL A prototype simulation model of the inventory planning process 
was developed. Critical operational requirements include: 1, The simulation language must dynamically 
interface with existing production software. Spares Inventory Planning 915 2. The simulation language 
must interface with statistical analysis software. 3. The simulation language must handle the size and 
complexity of this problem. 4. The simulation must execute in a mainframe computing environment. 5. 
Portability to the PC environment is important to future developments.  To successfully analyze the 
influence of various control parameters on inventory, satisfying the interoperability requirement described 
in 1. and 2. above is mandatory. GPSS/H simulation language (Henriksen, Crain, 1989) was selected because 
it satisfied all requirements.  4.1 General Architecture Figure 1 is a simplified architecture of the 
simulation program s environment. The simulation model communicates via data files with the Inventory 
Planning program, coded in FORTRAN and the Allocation program, coded in COBOL. The Control Parameter 
file contains the input data directly affecting inventory levels and customer service. The Sales History 
file contains actual sales records for the spare parts sample being simulated. It varies in size depending 
on the parts selected for the sample. For example, when a sample of 300 parts was chosen from a population 
of high sales, over 60,000 sales were found during 25 years of sales history. The Initial Conditions 
file contains part data and the end date for the simulation warm up phase. As the simulation executes 
beyond the warm up phase, the performance is computed and recorded in a Results file, discussed in section 
5.0, Results. + QPss/n h -p InvmtoryPlanning Simulation p~ram mm FORTRAN Allocntbnetfofrnanca pr~ram 
(p MeaWrea COSOL Figure 1: General Model Architecture 4.2 Components of the Simulation Model The simulation 
process consists of three modules. 1, The simulation, which drives the whole process. 2. The Inventory 
Planning program, which is responsible for . Analyzing sales patterns on an item by item basis. . Determining 
if a forecast can be made. . Adjusting forecasts, . Computing ROP and ROQ. . Making recommendations regarding 
changes in part status from stock to no-stock and from no-stock to stock. Writing any changes to a file 
that is read by the simulation. 3. The stock Allocation program, which distributes inventory to the 
sub-stores. 4.3 Simulation Warm Up  To reduce statistical bias in the simulation, initial conditions 
are established by a preprocessing program and a simulation warm up phase is run without keeping track 
of performance. The initial conditions for inventory plans and bin levels are created prior to the execution 
of the warm up phase. Parts recommended for stock by the planning program within the first six months 
of recorded sales history are given the stock status S , an inventory plan, and a bin level as initial 
conditions for the simulation. Initial bin levels for these items are based on a random selection of 
stock around an expected stock of ROQ/2+ safety stock. For other parts recommended for stock during the 
warm up period, stocking dates and ROP/ROQ plans are determined. The inventory planning program is not 
called during execution of the warm up phase, 4.4 The Simulation The simulation is executed on the sales 
history of a random sample representative of a parts population targeted for analysis. Inferences are 
made abcmt this population based on the simulation results. The primary function of the simulation is 
to measure elements of inventory performance (service level to customers, investment, inventory turns, 
etc.). This is achieved by modeling critical aspects of inventory management, including rules that govern 
daily operations and by integrating inventory management programs directly into the simulation. It interfaces 
with inventory management programs and accurately measures various aspects of inventory performance over 
years of actual sales histories. In its current form, the simulation model, being deterministic, is atypical 
for modeling an inventory system (Law, Kelton, 1991). Currently there are no stochastic events generated 
within the simulation. The current method available for generating replicates is to randomly select another 
sample of parts from the same part population. Stochastic elements can easily be introduced into the 
simulation when the need arises. Such elements are planned for future evolution of the program, when 
it will be used to evaluate decisions for future scenarios, This is discussed further in section 6.0, 
Future Direction. The simulation program encompasses the processes involved in running an inventory 
system, including the processing of airline orders, the process for replenishing depleted inventory, 
the weekly process of reallocating stock to sub stores, and the monthly process of updating and implementing 
new inventory plans. Incorporated into the simulation are currently used decision rules that govern the 
processes and define their interrelationships. These rules were captured during extensive interviews 
with personnel from the Spares Department. Historical sales data are the driver of the simulation. Each 
sale order is characterized by several attributes, such as customer order class (RTN, EXP, etc.), order 
quantity, and the preferred store from which it should be dispatched. The simulation processes each order 
chronologically according to the sale transaction date and attempts to fill the order initially from 
the preferred store. If the preferred store cannot satisfy the order, then secondary stores are queried 
for available stock for shipment. Depending on the customer order class, the search criteria can become 
more complex. For example, an AOG order is the highest priority with no location restrictions for filling 
the order. An RTN order only picks from the inventory of the store identified on the customer order as 
the primary source, and from the main store as a secondary source. A search sequence of the warehouses 
determines which store(s) can meet the order s requirement. Split shipments (part from preferred and 
part from secondary stores) are included in the simulation logic. As sales occur, inventory levels decline. 
When a sale causes inventory to fall to or below ROP, the inventory replenishment process is triggered, 
a replenishment quantity for ROQ is ordered, and the arrival time for that release is computed based 
upon the ROLT assigned to the part. An order release is classified as either routine or expedite, depending 
on various rules built into the simulation that consider the state of inventory, namely existence of 
a stock-out or potential stock-out, Incorporating the inventory planning and allocation processes into 
the simulation was a relatively straight forward accomplishment, The simulation interacts with production 
programs through files, by writing files of system state variables for each part. These files serve as 
input to the Inventory Planning and Allocation programs. The simulation subsequently modifies any system 
variables, such as ROP, ROQ, and stock status, as directed by output from the Inventory Planning program, 
and continues with the execution. The simulation similarly communicates with the Allocation program. 
State information (such as bin levels at each store, stock due in, stock due out, safety stock, ROP, 
and ROQ) is written on a file for input to the Allocation program. and Tjelle The Allocation program 
processes the data and returns the part quantities to be shipped from the main warehouse to each regional 
sub-store. This again illustrates the importance of programs dynamically communicating and interoperating 
with one another. Performance information is computed and recorded during the execution of the simulation. 
The types of data currently captured are: 1. Dollar value of inventory, globally and by store. 2. Dollar 
value of plans (ROP + ROQ), expected inventory, and simulated inventory. 3. Dollar value of actual sales 
and of forecasts by month. 4. Time distributions of order date to ship date by store and by order class 
code. 5. Fill rates (customer service performance) by store and by order class code. 6. Counts of trans-shipment 
and other events.  4.5 Validation Simulation validation is difficult for the following reasons: 1. 
The historical system data has not been recorded to enable comparison to the simulation s results. 2. 
The Inventory Planning program was not part of the inventory management process in earlier years. 3. 
The Inventory Planning program has periodically been enhanced, and it is not possible to determine the 
impact the changes had on the simulation, 4. Planners often override the Inventory Planning program 
recommendations but changes were not documented.  Regardless, preliminary subjective validation was 
performed using the sales history data. The part sample selected for prototype analysis was used. Sales 
history data for the part sample, including the purchase and ship dates for each order, were extracted 
from the sales history archives. Graphical comparisons were made between actual and simulated data, and 
summary statistics were computed. Comparisons of trends and values indicate a reasonable similarity between 
the actual and simulated data. 5 RESULTS Two prototype simulation runs were performed that adjusted only 
the performance level control parameters. This class of parameters is a theoretical value for the desired 
level of performance that represents the relative frequency customers have their orders fully satisfied 
on the day that they placed the order. A low performance test was made for an inventory performance setting 
of 90%, while a high performance comparison run was made with performance set to 99.5 ZO. The following 
outputs and charts compare results fc these experiments. Tables 1 and 2 provide output for lot and high 
inventory performance settings, respectively. I Table 1: Low Performance (90% Theoretical Fill Rate) 
I I Average I Maximum I Average I Percentage Stock V;lue Stock Value Holdi;g of TIR­($) ($) Time Parts 
had (Days) Stock I Table 2: High Performance (99.5% Theoretical Fill Rate) 1 I Average I Maximum I Average 
I Percentage Stock V;lue Stock Value Holdi&#38; of Tim; ($) ($) Time Parts had (Days) Stock warm S( Auburn 
1815934.94 3515890.00 289.0 80.1% Atlanta 54865.70 187484.00 116.8 46.390 Brussels 36146.13 120842.00 
124.8 4f),5~o Singapore 12333.79 32601,00 199.8 23.1% London 20570.24 86858.00 179.9 32.3% I Global 
1wwm w 3902597 nn ?60 2 NIA The outputs of Tables 1 and 2 are the average dollar values of stock, the 
maximum observed dollar values, the average holding times (days), and the percentages of time parts were 
stocked (stock status S ). The values in these figures are calculated using the following formulas. Average 
stock value is defined as n (f, -ti_,) xxi (1) x tn to i=l where n = number of periods when inventory 
is stationary. Xi = value of inventory during the ith period of stationary inventory. ti. 1 and ti = 
beginning and end times of the iti period of stationary inventory. to = simulated clock time at the end 
of the warm up period. tn = clock time at the end of the simulation. As expected, large increases are 
observed in average and maximum stock values between the low and high cases. It is especially noticeable 
at the main Auburn store where a significant percentage of the inventory is kept. This suggests that 
to achieve a theoretical increase in fill rate of 9.5Y0, approximately an 8070 increase in inventory 
dollars is necessary. The maximum stock value is reported in dollars for each store and globally. This 
is the highest single day dollar value of inventory and is rounded to the nearest dollar. Average holding 
time, reported in days, is calculated as $ (t,-ti_,)xKi i=] . (2) where n, ti, and ti. 1= defined in 
Equation (1) above. Ki = number of units of all art types in % inventory during the it period of stationary 
inventory. Also, as expected, the average holding time increases significantly in the main Auburn warehouse 
at the higher performance and increases slightly at each sub-store. This clearly indicates that to achieve 
a higher fill rate, a very significant increase in inventory is required, which also results in a large 
increase of the average inventory holding time. The last column of output, the percentage of time that 
all parts had stock status S , is defined as 1OOX$ Di i=l (3) mxT where Di = number of days that part 
i had stock status S . = number of part types. ; = simulation duration since statistical reset. Figure 
2 is a histogram comparison of time between sale date and ship date for items with stock status S for 
low (90%) and high (99.5%) performance. Frequency classes are in 10 day increments, with the first frequency 
class representing O days, or equivalently, the order is immediately satisfied from stock in bin. The 
time between sale and ship dates is recorded only when the order becomes fully satisfied, i.e., split 
shipments are counted only when the last part that completes the order is shipped. Each plot is subdivided 
into the four order classes (RTN, EXP, CRT, AOG). In the low performance case, RTN and EXP orders are 
immediately satisfied from bin approximately 7370 of the time, while the high priority orders, CRT and 
AOG, are higher at approximate] y 82Y0. In the high performance case, a significant increase in fill 
rate is observed. For RTN and EXP orders, an increase of approximately 139i0,to 86$70,is achieved, and 
for CRT and AOG orders the increase is approximately 8%, to 90%. Note that the theoretical performance 
levels are not attained. One major factor is the conservative nature of the forecast evident in the time 
series plot in Figure 3, where the forecast is below actual sales most of the time. RTN ordem EXP orders 
100 80 60 40 20 I . . ..-. . I --------­ 0 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 Numberof Davs CRT orders 
AOG orders 100 100 80 80 60 60 40 40 20 20 I I...-. 0= 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 LOW: 90% RTN 
orders EXP orders 100 , I 80 60 40 20 I -. 0 o 50 100 150 200 050 100 150 200 Numberof Davs CRT orders 
AOG orders 100 100 80 80 60 60 40 40 20 20 I I 0 o­0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 HIGH: 99.5% Figure 
2: Inventory 1+11Rate -Low vs. High Performance Figure 3 plots actual dollar value sales, recorded monthly, 
against the value of the monthly forecast for the part sample. This chart shows the forecast lagging 
actual sales. Reasons for this phenomenon include: 1) Certain airline orders are excluded from the forecasts. 
2) Unusually high orders are partly excluded from the forecast. 3) Conservative parameters are used for 
the exponential smoothing forecast method. 4) When trends are observed, a damping procedure is used, 
under the assumption that trends do not last forever. Mu s ON1-awo?#JEs n a s 30. -30 27 27 24 24 21 
21 s ~ 18--18 ~ 0 g 15 -15 x, ~ 3 z 12 12$ < w 99 6- -6 3 3 OL I Jo 1982198319641985198619671968 19891990199119921993 
1994 Figure 3: Actual Sales vs. Forecast 6 FUTURE DIRECTION The following are recommendations resulting 
from the conclusion of the prototype phase of this project: 1, Train the customer in the use of the ~imulation 
in its current form. 2. Simplify the process of setting up an experimental run, executing the simulation, 
and displaying the results. 3. Program the statistical procedures for sample selection and experimental 
design. 4. Program statistical methods that generate future sales patterns based upon past sales. 5. 
Enhance the simulation by incorporating decision processes of inventory planners and by adding variation 
to the re-order lead times.  The first three recommendations are for immediate follow on work. Implementing 
recommendation 4 would enable determination of the effects of management decisions on various aspects 
of performance for future sales scenarios, prior to implementation of those decisions. The rationale 
for recommendation 5 follows: Inventory planners make (necessary) daily decisions that affect inventory. 
These decisions often override the inventory plans and recommendations made by the Inventory Planning 
program. For example, customer demand for a part may increase unexpectedly, and planners may be privy 
to the reasons for this increase, whereas the Inventory Planning program cannot absorb and process this 
specific part information. The simulation currently does not account for these manual Spares Inventory 
planning processes. The model accepts all inventory plan recommendations from the Inventory Planning 
program without exception. If the manual decision processes of inventory planners can be defined and 
quantified, it is desirable to include them in the model. ROLTS are currently modeled deterministically, 
but they do vary. Data on delivery times for inventory replenishment must be analyzed so that statistical 
distributions can be developed to represent this variability and be programmed into the simulation. 7 
CONCLUSION The simulation prototype has provided a powerful platform for gaining insight into operation 
and control of inventory managed by the Spares Department. This was demonstrated by changing a control 
parameter and comparing the effects of the change on inventory. Future experiments and analysis will, 
hopefully, allow greater understanding of the other control parameters and their effects on inventory, 
thus achieving our ultimate objective. This project has shown that the interoperability of simulation 
with existing production software does provide a powerful decision analysis environment. Without this 
interoperability, the analysis would not be economically feasible. When other design elements (e.g., 
the statistical analysis programs) are implemented and integrated, Spares Department management will 
have a formidable analysis tool for managing the spares parts inventory of the Boeing Company. A lessons 
learned from this project is the need to carefully consider the intra-language architectures in a legacy 
system environment. Calling COBOL and FORTRAN programs from GPSS/H in a mainframe environment, though 
feasible, was found to be much easier in a PC environment. Planning 919 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Essential contributors 
to this project were Stephen Jones and Rodney Tjoelker for their statistical work and Spares department 
personnel for their assistance in describing the inventory management processes and related decision 
logic, REFERENCES Bier, I. J. and J. P. Tjelle. 1994. Simulation of the Spares Inventory Planning Process. 
BCSTECH-94-005. Bellevue, Washington, Boeing Computer Services. Henriksen, J. O. and R. C. Crain. 1989. 
GPSS/H Reference Manual. 3rd ed. Annandale, Virginia, Wolverine Software Corporation. Law, Averill M. 
and D. W. Kelton. 1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis. 2nd ed, New York, McGraw-Hill. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
ISAIAH J. BIER is a Senior Operations Research Analyst with Boeing Computer Services, in the Research 
and Technology Department. His interests include inventory planning and control, and other industrial 
O.R. applications. He is a member of TIMS. JAMES P. TJELLE is a Simulation Analyst with Boeing Computer 
Services, in the Research and Technology Department. His interests include simulation and design of experiment. 
 
			