
 THE EVOLVING SUPPORT TOOLBOX OR REDISTRIBUTED SUPPORT John Hawkins all of our support layers/groups 
in redistributed Dartmouth Cone e configurations, to cope m th the new demands. Too F Hanover, NH 0355 
often we read about distributed versus centraliud Internet: ]ohn.F.Hwokins@mac.dartmoufh.edu user supporf, 
fhis pzper argues for continually evolving supporf based on a redistribution of ABSTRACT existing support 
assets, be they centralized or distributed. At Dartmouth College, for twenty-five years a leader in integrating 
computing into higher HISTORY education, we have evolved a unique conceptual model of user support to 
cope wi fh new demands. In 1940, George Stibitz demonstrated the first Viewed from a traditwnal support 
perspective, remote access to a computer over a phone line, every user (faculty, studenf, or sfaff) has 
af leusf dialing into his machine at Bell Laboratories from fhree layers of increasingly sophisticated 
support the Dartmouth campus. In the early and mid 1960 s, available at all times, For example, studen 
ts have Dartmouth professors John Kemeny and Thomas access to Sfudenf Peer Consul fanfs in fheir Kurtz 
developed the Dartmouth Time Sharing residential clusters, Sfudenf Assistants and Student System and 
the BASIC programming language, Consultants in the Computation Center, and if need making computing accessible 
to all members of the be, FTE Consultants and System Specialists in fhe Dartmouth community. By 1966, 
the Dartmouth Computation Center. Rapid communication Time Sharing System was capable of supporting befween 
support layers and an awaren~s of when a 200 simultaneous users. At its height in the early user should 
be passed to the next support group 1970 s, the Dartmouth Time Sharing System was in assure that most 
of our traditional support goals are use by more than 40 U.S. and Canadian colleges, 20 reef. During 
this normal supporf procew, we are secondary schools, and dozens of research continually monitoring 
our efforts to see where we institutions. fail or succeed and to adjust our florts accordingly. If our 
environment and the demands made on our In 1984, Dartmouth joined Apple Computer s support staff were 
sfatic, we might be contenf with University Consortium and started to recommend our efforts -it isn t 
and we aren t. that incoming freshman purchase personal computers; at the same time an ambitious program 
This paper looks at three nezmupport demands we was started to wire every building on campus for have 
identified in fhe pasf year (English as a second network access. Today, over 90% of the incoming language 
sfudents, the introducfwn of Apple s freshman purchase personal computers, there are System 7.0 software, 
and the proliferation of hard 6S00 network ports in 70 buildings across campus, disks in our computing 
environment) and explains and roughly 6000 Apple Macintosh computers in how we have evolved a foolbox 
paradigm, involving use. On a single campus wide network there are six DEC machin~s ru~ng UNIX, 4 DEC 
machines ruining VMS, a Honeywell Bull mainframe running DCl% (Dartmouth College Timesharing Permission 
to copy without fee all or part t~ fhis matertil is granfed provided that the cop-es are not made or 
distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of thepublicatwn 
and ifs dafe appear, and notice is given thaf copying is by permission of fhe Associatwn of Computing 
Machinery. To copy ofherwise, or fo republish, requires a fee and~or specific permission. Copyright 1991 
ACM 0-89791-454-6/91 /0010/0105...$1 .5(? Looking for Answers ***o** **. e*oooo ACM SIG UCCS XIX 1991 
 105 Faculty x Humanities Computing S~l%enceCornputing \ Consultants Office I Computer Resource Center 
I Large Systehs Consultants (User Education/User Communication/MOST) Figure 1. Faculty Support Path Peer 
Consultants I Student Assistants i Student Consultants 1 Consul/ants Office I Lar%e Svstems Consultants 
(User Education/User Communication) Figure 2. Student Support Path 106 ACM SICUCCS XfX 1991 * s 0 
* *    w Looking for Answers  EEiEiEl 1 Consull;akts Office I Computer Resource Center 1 MOST 
(Microcomputer Office Support Team) (User Education, LJser Communication) Figure 3. Staff/Administration 
Support Path System), an IBM mainframe running VM/CMS, and 150+ UNIX workstations. Additionally, the 
Dartmouth network supports 90+ file servers, dozens of networked printers, and a KeyServer which controls 
access, through the use of software keys, to the 50+ site licensed Macintosh applications that are available 
to the Dartmouth community. 4000 individuals use our locally developed electronic mail system every week, 
sending over 10,000 messages a day. Given our history of innovation and our level of computing saturation, 
support is both a moving target and a sine qua non. THE TRADITIONAL PERSPECTIVE Viewed from a traditional 
support perspective, every user (faculty, student, or staff) has at least three layers of increasingly 
sophisticated support available at all times. Students with computing questions have nearly round the 
clock access to Student Peer Consultants in their residential clusters. Should a Student Peer Consultant 
be unavailable or unable to help, Student Assistants are on duty in the computer center 18 hours a day; 
if need be, both Student Consultants and FTE Consultants are available as backup for the Student Assistants 
from 8 to 5 Monday through Friday. Backing up our Student Consultants and FTE Consultants, who are able 
to answer 99% of the questions they get, are the three ITE Large System Consultants who specialize in 
the four mainframe operating systems in use at Dartmouth. Typical paths through our user services support 
for the three groups of users are shown below. It is important to note that User Education, User Communication, 
and the Microcomputer Office Support Team are shown as underlying all three support paths. At any point 
in the support process we may identify recurring problems and use the services of User Communication 
to notify our computing community, User Education to set up a minicourse in one of our instructional 
centers, or the Microcomputer Office Support Team to go on housecalls to faculty or administrative offices. 
 THE STARTING POINT A rough organizational chart of Dartmouth College s Computing Services appears below; 
while simplified, and thus not entirely accurate, it serves as an adequate reference point in explaining 
how we rearrange and redeploy our available human resources while attempting to meet the demands made 
by the nontraditional aspects of our user support. [A few words of explanation on the less obvious elements 
in the chart are helpful. The Microcomputer Office Support Team or MOST is an ad-hoc group with members 
from the Consultants Office and User Education that specializes in office automation support, LANS, and 
file servers; much of MOST s effort is Looking for Answers .* . . ..S .ee.e..ee e ACM SIGUCCS XZX 1991 
. 107 Director of Computing I 1 i ! 11II f Acadq-nic Computing MIS Technical Services User Communications 
Network/Repair Shop Software Development Consulting User Education Systems Management II Operations 
Consultants Office I Large Systems Consultants Decentralized Computing Services Computer Resource Center 
 DCIS (Dartmouth College Information System) Student Assistants Student Consultants Math and Computer 
Science Computing Peer Consultants Humanities Computing Social Science Computing I MOST (Microcomputer 
Office Support Team) Figure 4. Organizational Chart Director of Computing II 1 f ) Academic Computing 
User Communications Network/Repair I Shop Consulting User Education Consultants Office 1 + Hard Disk 
Clinic I4 t Student Consultants 1 MOST (Microcomputer Office Support Team)  Figure 5. Hard Disk Clinic 
 108e ACM SICllCCSXlX1991* . * * *****..*. . . . Looking for Answers educational and proactive. Humanities 
CoImputing and Social Sciences Computing are semi­ autonomous and physically separate centers that work 
with Computing Services but report to academic deans. Project Northstar is an IBM sponsored scientific 
and engineering project involving 100+ UNIX workstations. DCIS or the Dartmouth College Information System 
is a joint project of the Dartmouth College Libra~ System and Computing Services which is supported, 
in part, by Apple Computer. It provides immediate access to dozens of different information resources 
through an easy to use, intuitive, and consistent windowed interface.] As with many other academic institutions, 
our support for computing is partially centralized and partially distributed. We have satellite computing 
centers, public clusters spread around campus, groups such as MOST whose work is performed off site, 
and a residential based Peer Consulting Program. On the other hand, almost all our FIEs are based in 
a central computing facility and some of our forays into decentralization have resulted in our having 
to relearn the importance of speaking with one unambiguous voice in response to technical and policy 
questions. Since the mid 1980 s, when microcomputers were introduced to our campus, we have seen a dramatic 
increase in the number of demands that don t fit easily into a traditional centralized or distributed 
support model. The remainder of this paper will look at three such demands and explain how we have evolved 
a toolbox paradigm wherein we see our support staff as resources which can be redistributed on an ad-hoc, 
and usually voluntary, basis to cope with the new nonconforming support demands.  NEW SUPPORT DEMANDS 
Hard Disks In the last six years, our users have become responsible for the own storage media. Prior 
to the introduction of microcomputers, all of the computing at Dartmouth was done on terminals connected 
to mainframes and files were automatically backed up for our users. Today, 100% of the machines we sell 
are purchased with hard disks; our users are no longer innocents about head crashes, accidental reformatting, 
lost backups, corrupted directories, viruses, and the hundreds of other potential computing nightmares. 
Two years Looking for Answers *..... eeeeeeeee ago it became obvious that our Repair Shop could no longer 
keep up with the number of hard disks that were coming in for repair. Instead of an acceptable day or 
two, users were having to wait two weeks or more to have a drive repaired. In conversations between the 
Repair Shop and the Consultants Office, we learned that a significant number of the drives that were 
being seen in the Repair Shop had only software problems. In fact, consultants were being sent down 
regularly to fix such things as improperly installed drivers, mismatched or out of date system files, 
and virus infections. As we already offered a free floppy disk file recovery service and users were 
being seriously inconvenienced by the unavoidable delays in the Repair Shop, it seemed reasonable that 
the Consultants Office should start a hard disk clinic as a first line of defense for the Repair Shop 
and deal with those users who had drives that didn t work but had no obvious hardware problems. In a 
series of meetings, and with subsequent policy adjustments, the Consultants Office and the Repair Shop 
settled on a method of checking disks in for repair, exchanging information, tracking the history of 
all hard disks brought in, and charging the proper accounts when charges were appropriate. In a given 
week, the hard disk clinic receives 20 to 25 hard disks and completely repairs 65-70% of the disks sending 
the remaining 7 or 8 disks down to the Repair Shop for hardware repair or replacement. Of the disks that 
we are able to spin up in the hard disk clinic, we recover close to 100 %o of the data even when the 
disk needs to be sent to the Repair Shop so that under almost any conditions, if a disk will start spinning, 
we can save the data for the user. Assuming that the hard disk clinic sees 80% of the hard disks that 
come to the computer center for repair, this rather simple reallocation of workload has resulted in a 
reduction of more than 50 %0in the number of hard disks that the Repair Shop technicians see, a dramatically 
reduced waiting period for all users with hard disk problems, a happier Repair Shop, and a group of data 
recovery experts in the Consultants Office. Much of the data recove~ and disk repair is done by Student 
Consultants under the direction of professionals and it is all done with a suite of commercially available 
file recovery software. In the process of setting up the hard disk clinic, we realized that we needed 
to work closely with both our User Education and User Communication people if we were to be successful. 
Through the bimonthly computing services publication, e ACM SIGUCCS XIX 1991 109 Director of Computing 
 1 Network/Repair Shop  cad mQnica s::::re::=: c Consulting User Education Consultants Office Ll+, 
-Computer Resource Center ~ uden cOnsultan~ Peer Consultants MOST (Microcomputer Office Support Team) 
 Figure 6. System 7.0 Interface, and a key contacts electronic mailing list, Apple s System 7.0 User 
Communications was able to alert users to the Apple s introduction of their System 7.0 existence of the 
hard disk clinic and publicize what softw~~e this past spring offers a more complicated it could do for 
them. Through our User Education example of the sort of workload and resource group, we began to teach 
a course in hard disk reallocation cited above. Initially, a group from the management and through the 
Microcomputer Consultants Office, User Education, User Office Support Team we were able to spread the 
Communication, and Technical Services met to word to offices and file server administrators. A discuss 
the introduction, its implications for final and unanticipated result of the hard disk computing at Dartmouth, 
and who should be asked clinic, was the institution of a virus clinic by one of to join a System 7.0 
working group. We ended up our more active Student Consultants. He correctly with representation from 
our software developers reasoned, after seeing lots of infected hard disks, (who had been using beta 
versions of the new that it was better to get information and protection system software for some time), 
User Education, out to the users rather than waiting for them to the Consultants Office, the Computer 
Store, the bring their problems to us. We saw an almost Repair Shop, the Computer Resource Center, the 
immediate decline in the number of infected hard Microcomputer Office Support Team, and the Peer disks 
brought into the clinic and a drop off in the Consultant Program. number of virus related problems that 
the Consultants Office was called onto fix. The Questions raised by the introduction of System reallocation 
of resources can be seen below when 7.0 and of concern to the group included: changes compared to our 
organizational chart. necessary to make our locally developed mail and terminal emulation programs System 
7.0 compliant, training offices and users on the advisability and affordability of switching to e* **e** 
 0 110 ACM SICZ.ICCSXlX2991 . * . e . . Looking for Answers System 7.0, the development of minicourses 
on System 7.0 and on the available software that takes advantage of its advanced features, developing 
frequently asked question lists and solutions for common problems, the advisability of putting System 
7.0 on the pre-formatted hard disks that the incoming freshmen receive, what our Computer Store and Computer 
Resource Center need to know about the hardware requirements for using various System 7.0 features, what 
were the minimum hardware requirements if you wanted to take advantage of virtual memory, what did the 
technicians in the Repair Shop need to kno w about System 7.0, how would System 7.0 printer drivers affect 
our public LaserWriters, and should we have next fall s Computer Peer Consultants use System 7.0 over 
the summer. The task list went on for pages and we knew we were missing some of the important questions. 
Subgroups were formed, solved some problem or answered a question, dissolved and were reformed along 
new lines with new tasks. In the eight week period just before and just after the introduction of System 
7.0, we answered most of our questions, came up with new ones to answer, changed our minds about the 
inclusion of System 7.0 in the freshman distribution, found some bugs, and were forced to acknowledge 
that there were some questicms that would only be answered with time. English as a Second Language Students 
The first example cited, the hard disk clinic, has been successfully operating for almost twc) years. 
The integration of System 7.0 started several months ago and will continue for several more months. The 
third case I d like to examine is still in the planning stages and won t be fully implemented for at 
least a year; it will take even longer to determine whether it is successful. At Dartmouth, we are seeing 
increasing numbers of students for whom English is a second language. Typically, they are exchange students 
who will be with us for a single year or graduate students in nontechnical degree programs and thus not 
part of the normal undergraduate population whose needs and problems are carefully monitored by several 
institutional offices. We have always had a foreign student population, but until recently these students 
were either regular undergraduates who were staying for a fuIl four years or graduate students in technical 
fields whose interests and needs were narrowly defined and met by the departments or professional schools 
in which they were studying. In conversations between college librarians and computing services consultants, 
we realized we were facing a similar problem our traditional introductions to these services were of 
little use to this growing class of student. To make effective use of our introductions to computing 
and library use at Dartmouth required a level of English literacy that this new class of student didn 
t possess. We were, against our best efforts and intentions, teaching over the heads of many of the students 
and ignoring cultural bans against admitting ignorance in certain situations. To get a sense of what 
many of these students faced, one only need to look in an English dictionary for the meaning of words 
such as boot , catalog , holdings , and machine . Simply put, no matter how slowly we taught and carefully 
we explained, no matter how aware we were of cultural differences and standards, we failed; the students 
had nothing to fall back on after we stopped talking. Having outlined the problem we face-how can we 
help these students? -what does our paradigm of a user support toolbox and redistributing resources get 
us? For a start, we don t feel constrained to imagine using only those resources which we control. We 
need to try to get academic departments involved; Asian Studies, anthropology, psychology, and specific 
language departments may have contributions to the solution of our problem. Ideas may also come from 
the International Students Organization, the professional schools, and community members. We don t ask 
for commitments, just interest and suggestions. I don t doubt that we ll get help, but it will be voluntary 
help. Within our own organizations, consultants, User Education people, and foreign language catalogers 
will have suggestions, anecdotes, and help to offer. We will begin to interview, through the Intematioml 
Students Office, ESL students each term to find out what is confusing about library and computer instruction 
at Dartmouth and what they perceive as needed changes. With the cooperation of our User Education group, 
we will begin to teach language specific minicourses each term. Each course will be cooperatively run 
by a trained professional and a native speaker. User Education will help us with this course; we teach 
courses for them every term and they, in fact, view the whole of computing services as a toolbox from 
which they can borrow experienced teachers and use to develop new l.ookingfor Answers -.~*e* 9.W*..**. 
. ACM SIGUCCS XZX 1991 111 courses. Working through our Software Development group (for whom we beta 
test and run surveys), we will develop a series of language specific HyperCard stacks which will explain, 
in the users native language, terms and concepts that our interviews, minicourses, and experience have 
show to be problematic. We also hope to involve the DCIS (Dartmouth College Information System) project 
in a similar effort to provide on-line, language specific help databases. Involvement of the ESL students 
themselves will come through a scaled down version of our Computer Peer Consultant program. We will train 
a few ESL students each year to be language specific peer consultants for the library and computing services. 
Finally, both the library and computing services will have an ESL student contact person who manages 
the Peer Consultants and is aware of the resources we develop and uncover. WHY There is no question that 
the toolbox approach works for us. It gives us unusual flexibility in recognizing and responding to emerging 
problems. It builds a cross-departmental cohesiveness within our organization. Trust is developed between 
employees who would otherwise never have occasion to speak. The redistributed toolbox approach even has 
a fiscal benefit-it doesn t cost anything. None of this is done at the expense of traditional user support. 
By putting in a little extra work and bringing lots of people into the process when we see a problem 
emerging, we actually gain time latter. Many institutions set up special offices to deal with Apple s 
System 7.0 introduction; by spreading the work around, involving anyone who was interested, and leveraging 
off what our software developers already knew, we were able to prepare for the introduction without the 
expense of a special office and with the maximum spread of knowledge throughout our organization. We 
want the maximum number of User Services people to feel that they own part of the solution to a problem 
that we have faced. There are many reasons why the evolving toolbox works for us. Historically, Dartmouth 
College s Computing Services, which served 40 colleges at the height of its timesharing stage and now 
has a network of 6000+ microcomputers, has had to maintain flexibility and evolve with changing conditions 
-so you could say we are culturally predisposed to this approach. We have also been fortunate in having 
leadership that thoroughly embraces the goal of user service without trying to set rules on how we get 
to the goaL The current fiscal crunch that all academic institutions are feeling and the cliche about 
increasing rates of technological change that we all must cope with mean that we, as user services people, 
are expectd to do more with less; the redistribution of resources on an ad-hoc basis under the paradigm 
of an evolving user support toolbox is particularly suited to these conditions. Finally, flexibility 
of our mid level management and a realization that we are all working toward the same end, means that 
we can try approaches that wouldn t be possible if we stuck strictly to job descriptions and areas of 
responsibility. Looking for Answers 112 * ACM SICUCCSXIX1991 e  e* o e 
			