
 THE USE OF ELECTRONIC MAIL FOR USER SERVICES by Gerald R. Lathrop Consultant Stanford Center for Information 
Processing Stanford University Stanford, California 94305 (415) 497-4352 Abstract One of the most 
effective means of providing remote user services in a network is through the use of electronic mail. 
The advantages of such systems should not be overlooked, however, for user services at the local level. 
This paper examines the advantages and disadvantages of electronic mail in both a network and local environment, 
and makes some suggestions as to how these systems can be used more effectively for user services. Introduction 
 While many computer centers have primitive "mailbox" facilities on their systems which enable programmers 
and users to send messages back and forth to one another, electronic mail and teleconferencing systems 
are relatively new. Basically, a computerized mail or conference system is a specialized data management 
system which allows people to communicate with o~e another through computer terminals. Running in a time 
sharing mode, the system acts as both a moderator and electronic postman. It not only informs participants 
of mail waiting for them, it also accepts, sorts, dispatches, and files other messages as they are entered 
to be sent to one or more conference participants. The obvious advantage of such systems is that they 
permit communication among persons who are both geographically and temporally separated. Individuals 
can choose their own appropriate times for checking their messages and replying to them, with very little 
concern about recipients' schedules or the time of day (or night) it happens to be here or elsewhere. 
 During the past year and a half many programmers, consultants, and computer center managers have participated 
in a networking experiment known as Edunet. Sponsored by Educom, the experimental network involves several 
major colleges and universities nationwide. In the network the predominant method of communicating questions 
and answers among participants at the various schools is through the use of electronic mail. In the course 
of initial network activities, leading to actual remote use of computer facilities located throughout 
the United States, participants in the experiment have used several teleconferencing and electronic mail 
systems. Initially, a small number of network participants used CONFERENCE, a teleconferencing system 
on the MACC computer at the University of Wisconsin. This system was originally developed for the teleconferencing 
needs of the U.S. Office of Emergency Preparedness. Later, because the network was committed to using 
resources available on Telenet, users began communicating via HERMES, a sophisticated electronic mail 
system developed and marketed by Bolt, Beranek and Newman. More recently, Edunet participants have begun 
using TELEMAIL on Wisconsin's MACC computer now that the Madison Computer Center at Wisconsin is on Telenet. 
During the entire time network liaisons have also used the SPIRES mailbox facility at Stanford. The 
use of these various mail systems has given participants a chance to experience a variety of electronic 
mail techniques. As might be expected, different users reached different conclusions. Some preferred 
HERMES and TELEMAIL while others thought SPIRES was more desirable. This is not to suggest that the SPIRES 
"mailbox" can compete with HERMES or TELEMAIL as a true electronic mail system. The mailbox feature of 
SPIRES is only a very basic device for sending and receiving short messages, and is only incidental to 
the complete SPIRES system. HERMES and TELEMAIL, on the other hand, are elaborate mail systems developed 
specifically for that purpose. -90- Some Sample Sessions The following are samples of HERMES, TELEMAIL 
and SPIRES mail sessions. These examples contain the essentials of what takes place after users have 
connected to the systems and typed a few words to identify themselves. HERMES User: LOGIN GLATHROP 
 Computer: JOB 50 25-JUN-77 16:12 PREVIOUS LOGIN: 15-JUN-77 [YOU HAVE NEW MAIL] User: <AIRPLANES>HERMES 
 Computer: BBN HERMES(TM) MESSAGE SYSTEM . 25-JUN-77 + 12 22 JUN 77 RSMITH AT BBN  - SPIRES QUESTION 
 + 13 24 .JUN 77 GLATHROP AT  BBN -REPLY TO SPSS PROBLEM User: PRINT 12 Computer: MESSAGE 12 DATE: 
22 JUN 1977 1031 -EST FROM: RSMITH AT BBN-TENEX TO: GLATHROP SUBJECT: SPIRES QUESTION TEXT: I was trying 
to search a SPIRES data file today and could not figure out how to use the FIND command Can you help? 
 R Smith, Univ of Illinois User: COMPOSE Computer &#38; User: Prompted Message Composition To: RSMITH 
Cc: GLATHROP SUBJECT: Your Spires Question TEXT: The following should help you use the FIND command: 
 (I) First, SELECT the SPIRES file you wish to search.  (2) Next, issue the command SHOW SEARCH TERMS 
to find out which record elements have indexes.  (3) Then issue commands like 'FIND index value', where 
'index' is some searchable element, and 'value' is a string you want to find.  (4) You can also use 
the 'HELP' command in SPIRES to get information on the use of the files. Let me know if you need any 
further assistance. G Lathrop, Stanford Univ <end of message> Computer: MESSAGE BBN-TENEX 25-JUN-77 
 16:20:17 GLATHROP. SENT. A couple of minor points about the HERMES session as shown above deserve clarification. 
Note that in the series of entries the user makes in response to the 'Prompted Message Composition' there 
is a request for copies (Cc:). This is for copies of the message to be sent to any number of HERMES users, 
including the sender. Message 13, listed right after getting into the HERMES processor, is such a copy 
for the author's own file of messages sent. This aspect of HERMES and other mail systems make them like 
an automated secretarial service, in that they can forward copies to a group of people and also keep 
a complete history of all current and previous messages. No attempt is made here to demonstrate file 
retrieval or text editing. TELEMAIL User: @MAIL Computer: MACC MAILBOX 08/08/77 PRIVATE INCOMING MESSAGES 
AS OF 08/08/77 00:18:01 REF ORIGINATOR SUBJECT 1 ENETLN=UWIS EDUNET ACCT 2 ENETLN=MIT MACSYMA ? -+3 
POST=MASTER @MAIL TIP -+4 ENETLN=YALE SPIRES User: PRINT 3 Computer: MESSAGE FROM POST=MASTER Edunet 
Liaisons: Remember, if you only want to check for messages you can type @CHECKMAIL. This will give you 
a list of incoming and outgoing messages. You only need @MAIL if you need to send a message. @CHECKMAIL 
can minimize costs. User: PRINT 4 Computer: MESSAGE FROM ENETLN=YALE Stanford Liaison: When we tried 
to enter a Yale record in the EDUNET RESOURCES file we received an 'UPDATE ABORT. CODE S402' message. 
Where can we find out about Error S402? Yale Liaison User: TO ENETLN=YALE Computer &#38; User:TO 
:ENETLN=YALE FROM :ENETLN=STANFORD SUBJECT :SPIRES ENTER THE MESSAGE PLEASE Yale Liaison: When you are 
in Spires you can always get an explanation of an error message by typing 'EXPLAIN <error number>', such 
as 'EXPLAIN S402' in this case. An $402 error normally means a required record element is missing, or 
failed to get entered. Stanford Liaison User: MAIL Computer: MESSAGE POSTMARKED 08/04/77 00:20:08 
 User: QUIT Computer: GOOD BYE The summary of current messages in the TELEMAIL system which~prints 
after the user first gets into the mail processor tells something about the status of each message. The 
"-" sign next to the message number indicates that the message has not yet been read. The "+" tells that 
is has arrived since the last time the user checked the "Status of Incoming Messages." These indicators 
are helpful in quickly scanning the messages for new ones which require attention. SPIRES User: CALL 
SPIRES Computer: -WELCOME TO SPIRES . -MAIL WAITING. 'SHOW MAIL' OR 'IN ACTIVE SHOW MAIL' Computer: 
06/25/77 13:49:52 XY.123 To Statistical Consultants: I was trying to run the SPSS DISCRIMINANT procedure 
and got an error message 'NO REMAINING CASES IN GROUPS'. I checked my grouping variable and it looks 
OK. Any suggestions? Confused SPSS User User: COLLECT Computer &#38; User: i? To Confused SPSS User: 
2? Try looking at your 3? 'MISSING VALUES' in your 4? dependent variables. It 5? might be that the SPSS 
6? casewise deletion option 7? is deleting all the cases. 8? Let us know if that's not 9? the problem. 
 i0? Stat Consultants ii? *** User: SEND MAIL TO XY.123 Computer: -i0 LINES SENT User: EXIT It should 
be noted that SPIRES has only a limited facility for sending short messages (25 lines) back and forth 
among users. Also, to clarify a couple of points, after issuing the 'SHOW MAIL' command, the user receives 
a short summary of the origin of the message, which is similar to those of HERMES and TELEMAIL. Note 
that the 'COLLECT' command is what the user issues to begin collecting a message, and the line numbers 
and question mark are typed by the computer. Also, the asterisks are typed by the computer when the user 
presses the 'attention' or 'break' key which terminates the collection of the message. Again, no editing 
or saving of the message is shown, but these facilities do exist for all three message systems shown. 
 The reason Edunet has switched to using TELEMAIL on the University of Wisconsin computer is that it 
is tailored more to the specific needs of the network. As a result, it is easier to use and less expensive 
than HERMES. The network is also committed to encouraging the sharing of unique computing resources among 
participating network schools. SPIRES mail will also continue to be used periodically since the Stanford 
computer is the data base center for the network. User: SHOW MAIL  Electronic Mail in a Network Environment 
 The need for high quality user services as a required element for the growth of resource-sharing networks 
has recently been recognized by network planners. 2 However, the high labor costs associated with person-to-person 
services have caused network organizers to look to automated ways of dealing with the numerous low-level 
requests for help by users. While automated services such as CAI training packages, HELP commands, and 
on-line documents will continue to grow as computerized user services, there will always be a need for 
some personalized consulting, especially for the sophisticated user. For such situations electronic mail 
offers a very promising approach to the delivery of person-to-person services. In a network environment, 
or any computing environment, many of the most common errors occur in Job Control Language type statements. 
Since the exact form of these statements is generally unknown to new remote users, a means of getting 
help with such problems is necessary. Electronic mail serves this need very well. For one thing, users 
can type in or transfer a replica of their program for the consultant's review. On the other hand, the 
difficulty of communicating this information over the telephone presents many obvious drawbacks. Telephone 
conversations in which a user attempts to communicate character-by-character long job control type statements 
to a consultant leave much to be desired. The process is tedious at both ends of the conversation and, 
frequently, noise and other distractions make it difficult for the consultant to hear each character 
as it is being stated. Also, experienced consultants can quickly spot syntax or punctuation errors when 
they can see a copy of a program, whereas the same information communicated orally requires a visualization 
which clutters the process. The obvious problem of dealing with upper and lower case characters should 
serve to emphasize the difficulty of telephone consultations. Another problem posed by telephone inquiries 
is that of not knowing who to call and at what time. Consequently, in a remote computing environment 
the use of the telephone to get consulting help often means a second or third call (usually long-distance) 
by either the user or consulting staff before the right people are put in touch with one another. Time 
differences around the country further complicate matters. Missed connections and personnel out of 
 the office or at meetings complete the picture. The result i's usually a message left for someone and 
perhaps another missed connection when the telephone inquiry is answered. The lack of time-dependence 
and other advantages of electronic mail can help to remedy this situation. There is no need for the consultants 
to be either in their office or at their telephone for the electronic mail request to be received. Nor 
does it matter what time of day it is or where the request is comming from. When the consultant logs 
on to the mail system the inquiry will be there waiting to be received. The answer need not be communicated 
back immediately either. Consultants can take the time to research the problem, if necessary, and then 
respond after the correct solution has been determined. Electronic Mail in the Local Environment At 
any large university computer center today much of the computing is actually done remotely. As such, 
the advantages gained by the timeliness and convenience of sending messages over the computer are almost 
as beneficial as in a network. Users are typically logged on and using the system during hours when consultants 
are not normally at work. The users need to be able to ask for assistance on problems as they arise in 
the course of their computing activities. Electronic mail files can be used to supplement the normal 
consulting schedule by providing a means for users to input questions at any time, as long as they are 
willing to wait for an answer. Consultants will receive the messages as soon as they log on or check 
the consultant mail file. In addition, consultants with terminals at home could provide this kind of 
assistance at their own convenience. Another advantage to the use of mail systems in the local environment 
is the availability of programs and data sets stored on the local system. In many cases, these can be 
transferred into the mail file for a consultant's review or they can be retrieved if access is permitted. 
The same holds true for printed program output being held in storage for examination prior to being printed. 
All of these reviewing and access techniques are currently being used at computer centers around the 
country, and need only be coupled with mail systems to provide a complete computer-assisted consulting 
service.  One approach to using electronic mail for automated consulting services is to establish one 
or more consultant mail files. Instead of sending a request via electronic mail to a specific person, 
users would send their requests to a mail file which is used for all requests for consulting. User inquiries 
can then be reviewed by consulting coordinators and brought to the attention of the right consultants 
for problems which happen to be in their area of expertise and responsibility. A further extension of 
this idea is to establish different mail files to handle different categories of questions. Users could 
direct their requests to the 'Plotting Consultants,' for example, or to the 'Statistical Consultants.' 
Through such an approach areas of consulting coverage can be expanded and user services provided in a 
wider variety of applications. Issues and Considerations  To be effective, an electronic mail system 
must be easy to learn and convenient to use. It must also have good text editing capabilities to allow 
users and consultants to type in sample programs and messages in upper and lower case character sets 
and formats common to most computers. Current findings indicate that while most electronic mail systems 
can be quickly learned to an extent that allows novice users to send and receive messages, in order to 
use editing and file retrieval mechanisms users cannot avoid learning more than they may really like 
to know. It soon becomes necessary to learn about such things as the computer operating system, file 
structure and data set naming 3.  conventions, and disk space allocation. Added to these considerations 
is the cost of using electronic mail systems currently available. Conservative estimates based on actual 
Edunet usage of HERMES indicate that the cost of using electronic mail systems currently available commercially 
averages around $15.00 per connect hou~ including communication charges. ~ While this is probably comparable 
to most time-sharing activities of a text editing nature, it may be more than university computer centers 
are willing to pay for such service. The arrival of mail systems available on university and educational 
network computers will, hopefully, reduce this cost. From a user services staffing point of view, there 
is the potential problem that the availability of consultant mail files might create a situation where 
user inquiries became so numerous it would be impossible to answer all of them without additional consulting 
personnel. These issues and possible problems will have to be examined and dealt with in the months to 
come if electronic mail is to become a useful and cost-effective part of the user services function. 
 Human and Social Considerations Beyond the user services and economic issues there are also human and 
social implications to communication through the use of computers. 5 The very nature of human communications 
facilitated by computerized conference and mail systems alters the way in which communication is carried 
out as compared with traditional modes. This alteration will have a significant impact on future methods 
of communication and, it is assumed, on user services as a result. For some situations and personalities 
electronic communication may be very well-suited, while for others it may not. The remote amd impersonal 
character of computerized communication is obviously less intimate than verbal modes. This may irritate 
some types of people while appealing to others. Along another line of thought, the traditional methods 
of providing user services (person-to-person consulting, short courses, etc.) do not serve the needs 
of physically handicapped and deaf computer users very well, whereas the convenience and remote nature 
of mail by computer could very easily. For the majority Of people, the flexibility electronic mail offers 
in terms of self determined participation times and style is another obvious advantage. It is apparent, 
based on the technical and social considerations outlined above, that the future of computerized mail 
and teleconferencing offers many possibilities for improving methods of communicating and, as a result, 
methods of providing user services~ The benefits to be realized from these systems, however, extend beyond 
just the provision of user services. User services conferences such as this one can be made more accessible 
through the use of computerized mail and conferencing systems. Agenda items and planning considerations 
can be communicated among organizers as well as attendees. Persons who cannot attend in person because 
of scheduling and other limitations can still participate to a certain extent at their convenience. All 
or part of the proceedings could be retrieved on-line in addition to being published° Finally, computerized 
mail and conferencing can be used to facilitate a continued dialogue between participants and attendees. 
 Conclusions In conclusion, electronic mail and conference systems have much to offer in terms of improved 
communication and flexibility. Such systems will be important in the future and will no doubt have an 
impact on methods of communication in years to come. Interactive terminals and computers, as well as 
networking technology, are becoming available at costs which enable most industry professionals to have 
easy access to such systems, even to the extent of having access from their homes.  While electronic 
mail is futuristic, however, it should not be thought of as being in the realm of a "blue sky" idealization. 
Recently, in a report to the President and Congress, the U.S. Postal Service was cautioned by a commision 
studying its service that its future hinged on electronic mail. The report recommended that the Post 
Office "join at once with private industry" to start using e~ectronic communications for the mail.V Such 
a recommendation for an activity as vital to our national economy and mode of life as the Postal Service 
makes it clear that electronic mail is today a realistic and viable method of communication. 3. David 
Brown, "Teleconferencing and Electronic Mail," EDUCOM Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 4 (Winter, 1976), pp. 14-19. 
 4. Brown, "Teleconferencing and Electronic Mail," pp. 16-17.  5. For a more detailed discussion of 
the human and social aspects to computerized communication see Murray Turoff, "Computerized Conferencing 
and Real Time Delphis: Unique Communication Forms," Second International Conference of Computers and 
Communications, August, 1974, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 135-142; also,  S. R. Hiltz, "A Social Scientist 
Looks at Computer Conferencing," Proceedings of the Third Conference on Computers and Communication, 
August, 1976, Toronto, Canada, pp. 203-207.  6. Computerworld, April 25, 1977, 1,6.  Re ferences 
 i. The terms computer conference and electronic mail are not synonymous. They are related but are really 
two different applications of the use of computers to facilitate communication among people. The literature 
on such systems is already extensive, but the following article provides a good introduction to their 
operation. Peter Gordon Anderson, "A Structured Approach to Computerized Conferencing," Proceedinqs of 
the 1975 Symposium COMPUTER NETWORKS: Trends and Applications, IEEE &#38; NBS, June, 1975, Gaithersburg, 
MD, pp. 61-68. 2. Thomas D. Truitt and James C. Emery, "Provision of User Services in a Network Environment," 
SIGUCC Newsletter, Vol. VII, No. l-~-pp. 5-7.  
			