
 Proceedings of the 1983 Winter Simulation Conference S. Roberts, J. Banks, B. Schmeiser (eds.) THE GROWTH 
PROCESS OF TROPICAL TREES: A SIMULATION WITH GRAPHIC OUTPUT Carol Lewis Weeks John Craig Comfort Florida 
International University Florida International University Department of Mathematical Sciences Department 
of Mathematical Sciences Miami, Florida 33199 Miami, Florida 33199 Abstract. Simulation is becoming 
an important tool of researchers studying the structure and adaptability of various botanical species. 
One goal of scien- tists is this field is the creation of models to explain global tree attributes, such 
as canopy shape, in terms of local growth behavior (the branching pattern). The validation and "tuning" 
of the~e ~lodels would be quite difficult without performing simulations based on the models constructed 
and then displaying the results of the simulation graphically. Models describing the structure and branching 
pattern of a species have incorporated both genetic factors and environmental influences on the species 
being analyzed. Simulation programs implementing models for three species of architecturally similar 
trop- ical canopy trees (Terminalia, Camerarla, and Tahernaemontana) have been created. These programs 
produce graphic output, as well as tabular information on the status of the tree at fixed time intervals. 
Examples are presented of a preliminary study of the effect of limiting branching density on tree struc- 
 ture. Scale I" = 3.37' Figure i. Simulated representative specimens of Tabernaemontana, Terminalia, 
and Cameraria latifolia after two years of growth i. INTRODUCTION The use of computer graphics to facilitate 
the communication of computer output to the user, and specifically the use of graphics to accom- pany 
simulation, is not a new idea. However, despite its long history, it has been slow, for a number of 
reasons, in gaining prominence among the variety of users who might benefit from its use. In particular, 
there has been an interest among botanists, in recent years, to simulate the growth of certain species 
of plants in order to answer a wide range of questions concerning their growth and environment. Simulations 
have been written to describe the growth of cotton plants (McKinion, et. al., [19]), rhizomes (Bell, 
[1,2]), conifer tree crowns (Smith and Scoullar, [24]), soybeans (Curry, et. al., [5]), and tropical 
canopy trees (Honda and Fisher, [6,9, 13-17]). Some of these researchers have employed simplistic graphics 
to illustrate their simulations. A computer produced picture of a species is much more easily compared 
with its natural counterpart, for validating a simulation or studying a species, than are reams of 
printed data. A computer simulation of plant growth is based on a structural model of the species. 
To formu- late this model the botanist must first define a small number of parameters which, considered 
together, describe the architecture of the species. These parameters may he thought of as CH1953-9/83/0000-0649 
$01.00 o 1983 IEEE 650 Carol Lewis Weeks, John Craig Comfort a combination of genetically determined 
attri- butes and environmental influences. Secondly, algorithms must be formulated using those para- 
meters which describe the growth and branching patterns of the species. The validity of the model, obviously, 
lies in the closeness of the relationship between the output of the simula- tion and the form of the 
actual species. According to Bell [3], the system may be approached in an empirical manner in which the 
parameters are based on actual measurements of the species taken in the field. The simulation may then 
provide a prediction of the range of architecture possible for the given species. Other systems may be 
approached intuitively, adjusting conjectured parameters until a graph- ical representation of the simulation 
output closely resembles for fomn of an actual plant. By either approach, simulation is a powerful tool 
by which to measure the essential elements that govern the form and shape of any species. It can be used 
to demonstrate architectural response to an alteration of the physical or genetic factors which are inherent 
to the species ([3]). Simulated architectural changes which result from varying a parameter value have 
been found to parallel those changes exhibited by an actual tree. 2. THE FISHER HONDA MODEL One of 
the most extensive studies of architec- ture and branching patterns of botanical species has been made 
by Hisao Honda, a bio-physicist with the Kanebo Institute for Cancer Research, Kobe, Japan, and Jack 
B. Fisher, a botanist with Fairchild Tropical Garden, Miami, Florida [6-9, 13-17]. They have constructed 
models and limited simulations which depict the growth of three architecturally related species of tropi- 
cal trees. These mathematical models form the basis of the current simulation. Honda and Fisher began 
their work with Terminalia, an erect tree whose branch pattern consists of regularly repeating, discrete 
units, making the species ideal for simulation. The species grows by bifurcation, a process in which 
each branch endpoint produces two daughter branches. The tree grows exclusively from the branch end- 
points; existing branch units do not themselves continue to grow. More recently, Honda and Fisher have 
expanded their research to include two structurally similar species, Cameraria latifolia and Tabernaemontana. 
These are also discrete, bifurcating trees. Therefore, the original mathematical model could be expanded 
to encompass all three species by effecting elemen- tary changes in parameter values and the growth equations. 
 The Fisher Honda model incorporates not only the genetically determined parameters (the essential branch 
angles and growth lengths of the bifurca- tion process) but also environmental factors which describe 
variances in nutrient flow, shading, and possible physical obstruction. Figure 2. Simulated Terminalia 
s_j !. crown compared with an actual branch Tree Growth Simulation 3. THE GROWTH PROCESS Bell [3] describes 
the growth of any botanical species as the growth of one apical meristem (the trunk) which bears further 
meristems which themselves may or may not grow. A meristem's growth may be governed by one of three cases: 
 i. it may grow into a branch; 2. it may abort; or  3. it may become dormant and may or may not grow 
at some stage in the future.  For the three species in question, each year's growth cycle consists 
of a new tier of branches being produced (containing from three to five main branches), a spike being 
formed above the tier (which will become the next section of trunk), and each branch endpoint in the 
tree bifurcating or not as the conditions indicate In the first case, as mentioned above, as a branch 
node bifurcates, it produces exactly two daughter branches. One of these is considered to be the dominant 
branch, and will in general, grow to a greater length than its sister. The angles of bifurcation and 
the daughter-to-mother length ratio are determined by the user at the initiation of the simulation. In 
the species studied, the signs of the respective bifurcation angles alternate, so that the dominant branches 
on a main axis form a regular zig-zag pattern. Terminalis bifurcation oc~irs in a single plane which 
lies horizontal with angle of the main branch as it emerges from the trunk. In con- trast, both C. latifolia 
and Tabernaemontana exhibit branching in alternating horizontal and vertical planes. There are basically 
two reasons for which a branch node might not bifurcate. First of these is lack of available space. If 
a spherically shaped volume around each branch endpoint con- tain any other branch endpoints, the subdom~nant 
branches will cease to bifurcate (case 2 above). The radius of these spheres, called the radius o~ ITlteraction, 
is determined by the user. Abortion of the branching process in this manner closely approximates the 
natural phenom- ena of shading, where branches in close proximity are in competition for sunlight, and 
of bud damage caused by physical contact. A branch endpoint which passes the test for available space 
must also have sufficient accumulated flow in order to bifurcate. If the accumulated flow is low (in 
the simuIation, less than a species determined value), then the branch becomes dormant (case 3 above). 
A branch may remain dormant for any length of time and will resume bifurcation once its accumulated flow 
increases to a sufficient level. The increase in accumulated flow is modeled by an equation which is 
species dependent. If the accumulated flow is sufficient, the branch bifurcates, and new daughter branches 
are created. For Terminalia and C. latifolia the flow rate and accumulated fl~w are constant; thus, there 
may he aborted branches caused by close proximity, hut there are no dormant branches. Tabernaemontana 
has two growth phases. Phase two is initiated when the branch angle, measured from a horizontal plane 
upward to a branch, becomes greater than the threshold angle, an input parameter specifically for this 
species. During phase one growth, flow rate and accumulated flow are constant as in the other species. 
During phase two, the parameter means for branch lengths and angles of bifurcation are changed and flow 
rate and accumulated flow become decreasing functions. This allows the formation of dormant branches. 
During the dormant period, however, accumulated flow again increases, so that the bifurcation process 
may resume at some iterations, the montana begin to future branches droop. time. of the After tree several 
Tabernae- 4. THE PROGRAM This simulation has been written using a hier- archical structure [28]. This 
type of design was chosen not only to facilitate the implemen- tation and maintenance of the program 
but primarily to allow its expansion at some time in the future as the research of botanical models 
 progresses. The top level modules in the design are described below. INPUT--The mean and standard 
deviation of each of the exogenous parameters is entered by the user within the framework of an interactive 
user interface. Each para- meter is described briefly, including a format description of its values, 
and the user is prompted to enter its mean and standard deviation. It is recognized that some species 
require special input parameters to describe chracteristics which are peculiar to that species; such 
is the case with Tahernaemontana. In such instances those values are entered by the user in a separate 
but similar user interface which remains [,~isible when simulating the other species. It was felt that 
the interactive input approach would provide the user with great flexibility to test the architec- tural 
response to variations in particular parmeters. I~IT[ALIZATION--The simulation requires the initialization 
of certain arrays and markers to handle dormant branches and the conversion of all angles from degrees 
(which is convenient for the user) to radians (which is necessary for the simulation equations). The 
graphic display requires the establishment of the R = 0. observed value~ \ , erXvthevalue Figure 
3. Response of Terminalia tree shape to varying values of the radius of interaction, R axes scales as 
well as the location and orientation of the viewer with respect to the axis system. TRUNK--This component 
produces the coordinate output as well as the graphic construc- tion of a slender, cylindrical trunk 
from the ground to the first tier of branches. BRANCH TIER--A new tier of branches is produced with 
a new section o~ trunk above it. BIFURCATION--All existing branch endpolnts are tested for growth factors, 
accumulated flow and inhibition by more vigorous branches in close proximity. Each branch may bifurcate 
Lnto two daughter branches according to the particular algorithm of its species; it may remain dormant 
for possible bifurcation at some time in the future; or it may discontinue bifurca- tion. Because the 
separation of species occurs at this level in the hierarchical structure, the addition of other species 
to the simulation should be a relatively uncomplicated procedure. UPDATE--During each cycle of simulated 
growth the colors of the graphic image are altered to reflect the aging of the tree, and the diameter 
of each trunk segment is increased dependent upon the effective leaf area supported by the segment. 
GRAPHIC MANIPULATION--Once the image of the completed tree has been simulated and graphed, the user may 
wish to alter his perspective in order to study one partic- ular aspect of the tree. A second interactive 
user interface gives the user the option of rotating the tree on its vertical axis, moving the viewpoint 
in an arc from eye level upwards toward the tree crown, or zooming in on the image. The options may he 
implemented either individually or cumulatively. At any time the user may return to the original image 
and resume the perspective studies. 5. STORAGE AND DATA STRUCTURES The formulation of data structures 
to support botanical simulation presents a considerable problem in that an extensive amount of storage 
is required. With each growth cycle of the tree the number of branch nodes and therefore the required 
storage approxiamtely doubles. Several status variables describing both growth factors and architectural 
attributes must be kept for each branch endpoint in the system. In addition to these growth parameters, 
it is necessary to store the X, Y, and Z coordinates of each branch endpoint as well as the mother o 
each daughter branch. Furthermore, during certain stages of tree growth, a number of branches may be 
in a dormant phase, and the simulation must be able Tree Growth Simulation to locate and access these 
branches and their associated parameter values. The tiers of branches, for this simulation, are numbered 
from I to MXTIER (an input parameter), and within each tier the branch nodes are numbered from I, designating 
the trunk section of that tier, consecutively for each daughter ranch produced. The growth parameters, 
the three coordinates, and the mother node for all branch nodes in a tree are each stored in separate 
two-dlmensional arrays. Three of the growth parameters have been consolidated into the size of a single 
array by using the (UNIVAC) Fortran BITS function. This function allows the reduction of storage space 
while retaining the mode of access used for the other parameter arrays. All values associated with a 
particular branch can then be accessed from the arrays by the tier number and node number of the branch. 
Two markers, STRT and FIN, are necessary for each tier to distinguish the endpoint nodes which are about 
to bifurcate from nodes which have previously bifurcated. A separate linked list stores the tier and 
node numbers of all dormant branches so that their parameters values and coordinates can be accessed 
when they are ready to bifurcate. 6. GRAPHICS The graphics routines which accompany the simulation 
are written in GCS, Graphic Compati- bility Sytem [26,27], a Fortran-based graphics package developed 
by West Point Military Academy and be the U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experi- ment Station. The routines 
are machine independent; this simulation has been used to produce four-color images on the Hewett Packard 
plotter or green on black images on the Imlac screen. The simulation produces a series of graphic images 
showing the increasing age and growth of the tree. The first image is of a slender trunk with one tier 
of main and daughter branches in colors which designate new growth. Each succes- sive loop of the simulation 
produces a new graphic image with updated colors to reflect tree age, an increased trunk diameter, and 
new main and daughter branches. ~laln and daughter branches are represented graphically as lines. The 
tree trunk, however, is roughly cylindrical, with the radius of the cylinder at each branch tier being 
a function of the effective leaf area supported by the branches above that point. The sequential design 
of the graphic output is facilitated by the use of graphic segmenta- tion. Each of the components of 
the simulation, as described in the hierarchical structure, produces a named graphic segment. The segments 
can be accessed separately, updated, and redraw to parallel growth and aging of a,l a:~t,al Figure 4. 
Tree crowns of Terminalia Catappa showing the wide range of architecture found within the species. These 
simulations were made using all variable means and standard deviations as observed in nature and varying 
only the seed to the random number generator. together, comprises the whole tree which also may be 
accessed for graphic manipulation. Once the simulation and graphic representation of the species is 
complete, the rotational and scaling facilities of G.C.S. are utilized allow- ing the user to view the 
tree from a variety of viewpoints and perspectives. The user may rotate the tree any number of degrees 
around its vertical axis and he may change his viewpoint to any point from ground level upward toward 
the tree crown. A combination of these two options should allow the user any perspective he desires. 
Once the desired perspective is obtained, the user may choose to enlarge the image, allowing closer scrutiny 
of any portion of the tree. At any time during these mainpula- tions, the user may return to the original 
image; otherwise the manipulations are cumula- tive in their effect. 7. PRELIMINARY RESULTS While the 
validation of any simulation is diffi- cult, special problems occur with a biological system because 
of the possibilities of extreme individual variation and environmental influences. Preliminary results 
in the valida- tion process have been encouraging. For example, figure 2 shows an actual Terminalia branch, 
and a view of a (simulated) tree crown, with a highlighted branch. Figure 1 shows representative simulated 
Tahernaemontana, Terminalia, and Cameraria specimens, at approximately the same age (two years). While 
no photographs of equivalent age are immediately available, J. B. Fisher, of Fairchild Tropical Garden, 
has testified to the botanical reason- ableness of the simulated structures. To simulate the effects 
of a decrease in branch density (as might be caused by excessive shade), runs were made with successively 
increasing values for the radius of interaction. These are shown in figure 3, and show the expected modifi- 
cations in tree structure. To illustrate some of the graphics functions of the simulator, figures 5 
and 6 show the effect of rotating the user's viewpoint horizontally and vertically. Note that the original 
graphs were drawn using colo~s to illustrate the age of branch segments; the monochrome reductions used 
here at least convey the feeling of the originals. 8. CONCLUSIONS There are three basic purposes for 
simulating the morphology of a tree. Initially, the simulation provides a means by which a researcher 
can formulate, refine, and validate conjectures about explanations for those attributes of interest to 
the investigator. Once the model has been established and validated, the simulation may be used as a 
measure of the essential elements governing the form and shape of an individual tree. Simula- tion may 
be used to predict the range of architectures possible within a species by varying parameter values within 
their extreme ranges. Simulation may also be used to demon- strate the ~r,:hitectual response of a species 
to an alteration of its genetic or environmental factors, as indicated above. In almost all living systems, 
from molecular to macroscopic scale, there is a strong relation between the (three dimensional) shape 
of the object being studied to its function in tis enviornment. A major goal for the simulation has been 
the generation of spatially accurate models; this goal has largely been fealized. The use of simulation 
programs, especially with interactive graphics display, seems to be the only feasible means of investigating 
such models, especially the complex plant morphologi- cal models which are becoming increasingly important 
in the botanical sciences. 9. FUTURE RESEARCH The most obvious area for future expansion is the addition 
of other species of trees to the simulation. Holle [ii] categorized tree architectures into twenty three 
distinct models; the present species studies represent two of these; research will be initiated shortly 
to investigate a third. Since the project was speci6[cally designed for ease of modification, it is believed 
that these additions can be made easily within the existing program structure. It is also likely that 
as research of tree architecture continues, additional exogenous parameters and growth factors may be 
incorpo- rated into the simulation. Other consideration for future work include: the simulation and graphic 
representation of leaves and effective leaf area, dying branches and their removal from the data structure 
and from the graphic display, and the gradual dronping of the lower branches of the tree with age. The 
simulation presently displays only the trunk with thickness; the branches are represented by lines. This 
will also be remedied in a future avatar of the simulator. The perplexing problem of storage to handle 
the enormous amount of data required for growth parameters and coordinates and the optimization of data 
structures still exists. It is believed that improvements will be found which will allow the simulation 
of "larger" trees. Although simulation output has been graphed on a plotter and the Imlac vector graphics 
terminal, it has not been graphed on a raster type device. This would allow a much faster and smoother 
transition between cycles of tree growth, but it would also require the reworking of the data structures 
used for graphics pro- cessing. These changes are planned for the near future, so that the program output 
can be dis- played on a Ramtec 9135 color terminal. Tree Growth Simulation One final change that is 
contemplated is the production of line images in red/blue stereo. This would not be difficult, given 
the viewpoint modification capabilities already present in the graphics interface; its usefulness remains 
to be evaluated. i0. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to think Dr. J. B. Fisher, of Fairchild Tropical 
Garden, Miami, Florida, for his invaluable assistance in the initiations and development of this research; 
to Hisao Handa, of the Kanebo Institute for Cancer Research, Kobe, Japan, for providing us with a version 
of his program for tree simulation. This program was used both to clarify ideas associated with the botanical 
details of the simulation, and to provide test cases to verify portions of the program here described; 
and to Barry Branch, Manager of the Minicomputer Laboratory, F.I.U., for his assistance in causing the 
computers used for the simulation to co-operate. ii. REFERENCES  I. Bell, A. (1976). Computerized vegetative 
mobility in rhizomatous plants, in Automata, Languages, Development, (A. Lindenmayer and E. G. Rozenberg, 
eds). Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, pp 3-14.  2. Bell, A. D. (1979). The hexogonal branch- 
ing pattern of rhizomes of Alpinia speciosa L. (Zingiberaeeae), Ann. Bot. 43, pp 209-223.  3. Bell, 
A. D., Roberts, D. and Smith, A. (1979). Branching patterns: the simu- lation of plant architecture, 
J. Theor. Biol, 81, pp 351-375.  4. Cohen, D. (1967). Computer simulation of biological pattern generation 
proces- ses, Nature, 216, pp. 246-248.  5. Curry, R. B., Baker, C, H., Streeter, J.  G. (1975). A dynamic 
simulation of soybean growth and development~ Trans- actions o~ the ASAE, pp 963-968.  6. Fisher, J. 
B. and Honda, H. (1977). Computer simulation of branching pat- tern and geometry in Terminalia (Combretaceae), 
a tropical tree, Bot. Gaz., 138, pp. 377-384.  7. Fisher, J. B. (1978). A quantitative study of Temrinalia-branching, 
in Tropical Trees as Living Systems, (P.  B. Tomlinson and M. H. Zimmerman, eds). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 285-320.  8. Fisher, J. B. and 11onda, If. (1979a). Branch geometry and effective 
leaf  area: a study of Termlnalia-branehing pattern i. Theoretical trees, Am. J. Bot., 66, pp 633-644. 
 9. Fisher, J. B. and Honda, H. (1979b). Branch geometry and effective leaf area: a study of Terminalia-branchlng 
pattern 2. Survey of real trees, Am. J. Bot., 66, pp 645-655. i0. Foley, J. D. and Van Dam, A. (1981). 
Fundamentals of Interactive Computer Graphics. city: Addison Wesley. ii. Hale, F., Oldeman, R. A. A. 
and Tomlinson, P. B. (1978). Tropical Trees and Forests: an Architectural Analysis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
 12. Hoffman, D. B. and Carlson, C. M. (1981). Using computer graphics to interpret simualtion output, 
Simula- tion, 37(2), pp 59-64.  13. Honda, H. (1971). Description of the form of trees by the parameters 
of the tree-like body: effects of the branching angle and the branch length on the shape of the tree-llke 
body, J. Theor. Biol, 31, pp 331-338.  14. Honda, H. and Fisher, J. (1978). Tree branch angle: maximizing 
effective leaf area, Science, 199, pp 888-890.  15. Honda, H. and Fisher, J. (1979). Ratio of tree branch 
lengths: The equitable distribution of leaf clusters on branches, Proc. Natl. Acad, Sci. U.S.A., 76, 
pp 3875-3879.  16. Honda, H., Tomllnson, P. B. and Fisher,  J. (1981). Computer simulation of branch 
interaction and regulation by unequal flow rates in botanical trees, Am. J. Bot., 68, pp 569-585.  17. 
Honda, H., Tomlinson, P. B. and Fisher,  J. (1982). Two geometrical models of branching of botanical 
trees, Ann. Bot., 49, pp I-Ii.  18. Kaufman, A. and Hanani, M. (1981). Connecting a batch simulation 
program to an interactive program with graphics, Simulation, 36(4), pp 125-  131.  19. McKinion, J. 
M., Jones, J. W. and Hesketh, J. D. (1975). A system of growth equations for the continuous simulation 
of plant growth, Trans, Amer. Soc. Agr. Eng., 18, pp 975-979,  984.  20. Naylor, T. H., et. el, (1966). 
Computer Simulation Techniques. New York: John  Carol Lewis Weeks, John Craig Comfort Figure 5. Rotation 
of the user's vertical viewpoint by 30, then 60 degrees Figure 6. Rotation of the user's horizontal 
viewpoint in 90 degree increments Tree Growth Simulation 21. Newman, W. M. and Sproull, R. F. (1979). 
Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics. New York: McGraw Hill.  22. Rogers, D. F. and Admans, J. 
A. (1976). ~thematieal Elements for Computer Graphics. New York: McGraw Hill.  23. Schruben, L. W. (1980). 
Establishing the credibility of simualtlons, Simualtlon, 34 (3), pp 101-105.  24. Smith, S. and Scoullar, 
K. (1975). A  data structure analogue for modelling tree crowns, Can. J. Foest Res., 5, pp. 574-579. 
 25. Takeuchi, H. and Schmidt, A. H. (1980). New promise of computer graphics, Harvard Business Review, 
58 (i), pp 122-131.  26. West Point Military Academy and Waterways Experiment Station (ADPC). (1978). 
GCS Programmer's Reference Manual.  27. West Point Military Academy and Waterways Experiment Station 
(ADPC). (1978). Primer on Computer Graphics Program- ming.  28. Yourdin, E. and Constantine, L. (1979). 
Structured Design. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.  
			