
 THE SATELLITE TRANSMISSION PROTOCOL OF THE UNIVERSE PROJECT A. Gillian Waters and Christopher d. Adams 
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxfordshire, UK Abstract The Universe network uses a broadcast satellite 
channel to connect local area networks into a high speed wide area network. The satellite channel is 
scheduled using a packet TDMA scheme. Time allocation is controlled by one site acting as master, but 
is based on indications received from each participating site about its own requirements. The TDMA scheduling 
is thus based not on circuits or the requirements of individual packets, but on a picture of the distributed 
requirements of the network as a whole. The paper describes the protocol currently implemented on the 
Universe network and looks forward to a more general way of applying this technique. I. Introduction 
 The UNIVERSE network [I] makes use of a broadcast satellite channel to connect local area networks at 
a number of sites in the UK. The satellite channel provides an overall bandwidth of 2Mbits/sec, which 
is reduced to IMbits/sec by forward error correction giving an error rate of about I in IOE9. The Cambridge 
rings used as LANs provide a comparable speed and low error rate. A basic aim of the project has been 
to extend the capabilities of local area networks into the wide area. The high speed allows such applications 
as voice and slow-scan TV as well as distributed computing techniques and the more traditional computer 
communications applications. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or 
specific permission. It is therefore necessary to schedule the use of the satellite channel in such a 
way that these diverse applications can be carried. The needs of any one transmitting site are not restricted 
to any one sort of application. Consequently there is a mix of requirements, both in the size and the 
quantity of packets to be sent. All information is sent in packet form, virtual circuits being defined 
by their logical paths through the network. The satellite channel shares a transponder on OTS with various 
other activities, using frequency division. The needs of the Universe network are met within its satellite 
channel by a TDMA (Time Division Multiple access) scheme. Several schemes for use of packet TDMA have 
already been proposed and implemented [9] [2], but these either provide a fixed time allocation for virtual 
circuits between two points or request capacity for each packet transmitted. The scheme employed in Universe 
provides time allocation for an individual site depending on its own view of its total needs at any time. 
The bandwidth requirements of all the traffic is summed at the site concerned on a regular basis, and 
a request for time allocation is sent to the master site reflecting this total requirement. The total 
requirement for time although seen and acted upon by one master site is therefore a picture provided 
in a distributed manner from all the sites. A site may transmit packets to any number of other sites 
during a transmission burst; packets are received by a site only if they are addressed to itself or are 
broadcast packets. The requirement for such a distributed scheme was discussed in [2] which also suggested 
ways of implementing it. The TDMA scheme currently used in Universe is a variation of the FPODA scheme 
(fixed priority-oriented demand assignment). A time frame is defined by a master reference station. Within 
every time frame each site is allocated a small window in which it may transmit requests for more time, 
other indications relating to the satellite protocol or packets containing up to 100 bytes of user data. 
The remaining part of each time frame is allocated between sites which have outstanding requests and 
those sites with more information .to send will be allocated proportionally more time. &#38;#169; 1984 
ACM 0-89791-136-9/84/006/0018 $00.75 18 These allocations are changed not on a per packet basis hut 
in a slowly changing manner which reflects the overall needs of each site. Consequently, while time is 
allocated there is no need to make a request or for the master to respond which saves the delay of two 
satellite hops. Occasional short blocks, for example in acknowledgement to bulk data, will not be delayed 
because they can be transmitted in the fixed small window. This paper describes the protocol which is 
in use on the Universe network. It includes a general discussion on how the protocol evolved, the limitations 
imposed by the current hardware, the elements of the protocol and comments on experience of the protocol 
in practice. This is followed by a brief discussion of a new hardware system designed under the auspices 
of the Universe project, and the opportunities that this hardware would offer for future developments 
of the protocol. 2. The Universe Satellite Transmission Protocol 2.1 Evolution and requirements The 
requirement was for a protocol to provide a packet access scheme using TDMA for the six Universe sites 
with access to the satellite. (The seventh participant in Universe, Logica UK Ltd, is connected using 
a comparable speed terrestrial link to a Cambridge ring at University College, London. The term site 
is used in this paper to refer to a satellite access point.) Each site should be allowed to transmit 
to any other or to all sites whenever it was granted time and had data to send. The packets to be sent 
across the network would reflect the size of basic blocks on the ring [4], which can he any size between 
2 bytes and 20~8 8-bit bytes. One of the participants in the Universe Project, the Rutherford Appleton 
Laboratory had already taken part in the European STELLA experiment (Satellite Transmission Experiment 
Linking Laboratories) which originally had the goal of providing bulk data transfer between large Physics 
Laboratories [3]. This experiment had been based on a very simple time frame providing bulk transfer 
from one site and acknowledgments from another. The expertise gained from the STELLA project was of great 
value to Universe and this collaboration has also been of use in refining the satellite transmission 
protocol which is in turn being employed in the second phase of STELLA. The computing equipment installed 
at each of the Universe sites consists of a GEC 4065 link driving computer (LDC) which works together 
with a Communications Interface Module (CIM) built at CERN, Geneva based on the Motorola 6800. Buffer 
storage is provided within the GEC 4065 which has 512K bytes of memory within which about 100 buffers 
each long enough to accommodate a maximum size basic block are allocated. All transfers initiated either 
to the ring or via the CIM to the ground station are done by direct memory transfer from the GEC's memory. 
The CIM is an enhanced version of the original design used for Stella. The CIM interfaces to the ground 
station provided by Marconi and consisting of half-rate Viterbi enooder/decoder, modulator and demodulator 
and the rest of the RF equipment. The CIM and LDC together are known as the satellite bridge. The division 
of labour between the two intelligent systems can best be described by the fact that the CIM knows when 
to send packets and the GEC computer knows what is being sent. The equipment is not ideal, but it was 
the quickest way to provide hardware for satellite access in the short timescale of the Universe project 
if real experimental work was to be done within the lifetime of OTS. An improved satellite bridge, see 
section 3, is being built for future work, incorporating many of the lessons learnt from the earlier 
design. The Universe architecture described in [4] does not require error recovery or retransmission 
by the network, but leaves such activities to the end users. This is principally because of the low error 
rate involved. The satellite transmission protocol therefore does not require the LDCs to store blocks 
of information for possible retransmission. The LDCs are not aware whether each packet has been received 
at a remote site. The protocol provides a facility for each site to monitor the status of the other sites, 
so that blocks destined for a non-active site can be discarded rather than wasting satellite transmission 
time. Faulty blocks arriving on the ring are still transmitted but are marked to be in error. These may 
still be of use in some applications, for example images.  2.2 The Satellite Network Protocol The time 
frame used in the Universe network is 130msec and is defined by the master sending reference bursts at 
that period. The round trip delay time from the UK to the satellite and back is approximately 260msec. 
The time frame was chosen to be a fraction of that value because the receive and transmit timings in 
the CIM are interdependent, and this choice therefore meant that this interdependency would not cause 
any loss of usable time. This size of frame also provided sufficient time for an equitable allocation 
as described below. 2.2.1 Format of a complete transmission time frame Figure I shows the general format 
of the time frame. The reference burst normally contains allocation information but is also used by the 
master station to indicate problems, such as one site not being available any longer. A small burst is 
permanently allocated to each site, in which the Station may transmit control information, as described 
later, or may transmit data. The burst will allow at least 100 bytes of user data. Larger bursts are 
allocated in response to requests made from individual sites.   J\ I , <-- small. ,>/ < assigned burst 
--sffe A > \ <-- assigned burst >[ ~J ' bursts I \ \ -site B f / \ reference / \ burst \ search I \ 
window  I \ I \ / \ SATELLITE / \ PROTOCOL \ /  HEADER \ / \  / \ / \ \ C USER DATA S USER DATA 
R n.AOS C ~gure I. Genera/time frame format Each burst in the time frame consists of a number of HDLC 
frames. The reference burst and each small burst consist of Just one HDLC frame. Each large data burst 
is used by a single site, but the site may transmit to several destinations in a single burst. Control 
information may also be sent within the data burst. The expanded diagram in Figure I shows that each 
packet is preceded by HDLC flags which are used for re-synchronisation and tuning as each burst is received. 
The satellite protocol follows and, if this is a data block, the block is preceded by a descriptor which 
carries the information corresponding to that known about the basic block as it is transmitted across 
the ring [4]. Guard times of at least I msec. must be allowed between bursts to ensure the CIM has adequate 
time to perform its functions. In the current implementation each large burst allocated will always 
be big enough to accommodate a maximum size basic block. This requires 20msec. A maximum block is 2048 
8-bit bytes and 20% overhead must be allowed for the bit stuffing performed by HDLC. Allowing for this 
maximum size has the advantage that no movement of data is necessary within the LDC, since blocks never 
have to be split and re-constltuted. In practice most packets are not the maximum size, and as many as 
possible are squeezed into a single transmission window. When allocations have been changed each site 
must wait for one time frame before implementing the new allocation to ensure that they are all updated 
simultaneously. Sites are still allowed to transmit under the previous allocation so the time is not 
lost, If requests become too great to fit in the maximum available slot, several time frames could be 
used as a superframe to share the bandwidth fairly between all users. 2.2,2 Satellite Protocol Format 
 Only the information inside the HDLC frame is  seen by the LDC. All transmissions to the satellite 
start with the following four 8-bit bytes: I DESTINATION SOURCE CONTROL I PROTOCOL  The destination 
field is used by the tIM to detect packets which are either destined for its own site or are broadcast. 
All information other than user data between two sites is broadcast by setting the destination field 
to all '1's. The CIM does not see the remaining bytes in the packet but relies on the LDC to interpret 
each packet, including the reference bursts. The source field is normally set to be the site from which 
the packet originates. It is set to a special value by the master station when transmitting in the reference 
burst so that this burst can be distinguished from all other bursts. The protocol byte is used to distinguish 
between different possible protocols contained in the data field . This is set to a constant value for 
the Universe protocols described in [4]. 2.2.3 Control Byte Format The first semi-byte of the control 
byte has a setting which describes it~ position in the time frame as follows: 0 ffi null information 
(can occur in any type of burst) I ffi reference burst 2 = small burst 3 ffi long burst (allocated burst) 
 The same functions may appear in either the small burst or the long burst. The length of each satellite 
control packet is determined by the function which it performs. 2.2.4 Individual Control Bytes O0 Null 
information (See below) 11 12 13 14 15 Ix Allocation list Master station closing Slave timed out Invalid 
request New time frame length Available for future definition x=4 to F } } } } } ] } ref burst erence 
 20 or 30 Data } 21 or 31 Assignment request } 22 or 32 Relinquish request } small 23 or 33 Throughput 
indication } or 24 or 34 Slave closing down } large 25 or 35 Hello message } burst 26 or 36 Broadcast 
channel request } 27 or 37 Broadcast channel allocation } 28 or 38 Broadcast channel timed out } 2x or 
3x Available for future } definition x=9 to F ] The null information byte is needed when changing the 
contents of the reference burst. Since the CIM extracts the contents of the reference burst from GEC 
store every 130msec, it would be possible to transmit a reference burst which was in the process of being 
changed. To overcome this problem the control byte is set to 00 while the contents of the burst are changed, 
and is reset when the change is completed. If the control byte arriving in a received reference burst 
is not hex'11', the allocation is assumed to be unchanged. All control packets except those containing 
user data between two sites are broadcast. Since all sites receive the information required by the master, 
any site can act as master. The other sites (slave sites) receive but ignore information which only the 
master requires. Any site can act as master. In normal operation a site which is ready to take part in 
the Universe network "listens" for a few seconds for received reference bursts. The first site to start 
up will detect the absence of reference bursts and automatically starts up as master. The others fall 
into the slave state as soon as they detect the master's reference bursts. The task of scheduling activity 
on the satellite is greatly simplified by this procedure.  2.2.5 Control Functions Indicating Site Status 
 Four control functions indicate site status. These are "Hello" messages, "Slave site closing", "master 
site closing" and "slave site timed out". A "Hello" message is sent by every site once every minute. 
On receipt of a "Hello" message or a "Slave Closing down" message all sites immediately reset their site 
state tables to indicate the corresponding status of the sending site. The master station also monitors 
receipt of "Hello" messages. If none has been received from any one site for three minutes, the site 
is deemed to have become inactive and the "slave site timed out" message is broadcast so that the slaves 
can update their site state tables. The master then removes all requests from that site from its lists. 
The "master station closing" message is intended for use in automatically rescheduling so thatanother 
site can act as master. The "Hello" messages have been invaluable in establishing confidence in the 
network, and sporadic reception of these messages is usually the first indication that a site has ground 
station problems.  2.2.6 Control Functions Governin~ Time Allocation Each site may make requests for 
time allocation, specify that the request is no longer required, or send an indication showing the level 
of throughput required for a request. The master site must send all these indications via the satellite 
so that its indications take as long as the slaves' indications to arrive and it does not receive preferential 
treatment. Assignment Request The assignment request takes the following form:   io sT i s00 c i 
cTL I PRo i sLo Iol 0 AL iMIN I RE01 The SLOTID is a number provided by the requesting site which identifies 
the request. Numbers are assigned from I to 127 in rotation. The QUAL field defines the quality of service 
requested. Three qualities are defined; these are for bulk data, data governed by throughput indications 
(the normal option specified in Universe) and priority data. The quality of service is used by the master 
when scheduling the allocations in a time frame, as described in section 2.2.8. The MIN field specifies 
the minimum length of time acceptable for the request. The master will not  allocate less than this 
time. MIN is normally set to 20msec. The REQ field indicates the time required per time frame; it is 
normally set to the maximum time obtainable in one frame. If the master cannot allocate a burst of the 
minimum length in any time frame, no allocation will be given. The master will allocate the requested 
length or more whenever possible if there is no contention from other users. A request may be made on 
an existing SLOTID and this will have the following results. If any of the values QUAL, MIN or REQ has 
changed, the master's request tables will be updated to the new values. Otherwise the new request will 
be ignored. This enables changes in the size of a requested burst, or its priority without the need to 
use Relinquish. If a request has not been satisfied within one minute it is repeated. It may be that 
the first requesting packet was lost. Relinquish Request The relinquish request is issued when a site 
no longer requires time in the time frame. It specifies the same SLOTID given in the assignment request. 
It may also specify that all requests made by a site should be relinquished. ThroughPut Indication 
This indication provides information about at a site's transmission requirements so that the master can 
decide which sites should be favoured in preference to others. Currently the information contained is 
the number of buffers queued in the LDC waiting to be sent to the satellite. The indication is sent every 
two seconds, but only when the value has changed. Allocation Information The allocation information 
is given by the sequence followed by: ISITE ISLOTID ISTARTI STOP1  for each allocation in the current 
time frame. The SEQ number is increased every time the allocation char~es. A receiving site will know 
that it is not necessary to change its transmission times if the sequence number has not changed. FRAME 
specifies the length of the time frame. UNUSED is a two-byte field which specifies the integral number 
of milliseconds available when the minimum time has been allocated for each outstanding request held 
by the master. The MASTER field contains the master's site number. Although this is not strictly necessary 
to the operation of the satellite protocol, it is useful for users to know which site is master in case 
of network problems. SITE and SLOTID specify a request which has been allocated the times in the frame 
between START and STOP. Time allocated to small bursts is given with SLOTID set to zero. At the end of 
the allocation list a zero is substituted for the site number. START and STOP times are always given 
relative to the start of the received time frame. Each site makes an adjustment to its transmit times 
to ensure that its own burst arrives at the correct time in the received data. This adjustment is determined 
by running a short program once at each site, acting as master, and the value is then used as a constant 
in the LDC program. This adjustment allows for the difference in delay times due to the position of the 
various sites relative to the satellite. 2.2.7 Broadcastin~ Facilities A number of control functions 
are used to co-ordinate a list of active channel numbers which are used for broadcasting. This list is 
held by the master and all the negotiations are done using the satellite transmission protocol. This 
means clients involved in broadcasting can make connections to their nearest satellite bridge. Broadcasting 
techniques in Universe are discussed in [5].  2.2.8 Schedulin ~ Algorithms The time frame is set to 
the initial of 130 msec. The small bursts are defined, as soon as the master site has locked on to its 
own reference bursts successfully. When the first allocation request is received this is given the maximum 
time available so that it can use as much bandwidth as possible. On further requests the bandwidth is 
split proportionately between requests. Priority requests are always put at the front of the queue and 
bulk requests are allocated in every time frame wherever possible. As a result of throughput indications 
the channel is split with a bias to the sites with the most traffic. An allocation is never allowed to 
fall below the minimum requests length. If there is insufficient time to allocate the minimum time to 
all outstanding requests the allocations will be spread over two or more time frames viewed as a superframe. 
 When a burst is relinquished (or removed because a site goes down) the opposite sequence takes place. 
Firstly, allocations are contained within one time frame. Secondly, the bursts are allocated to those 
still transmitting. Figure 2 shows some sample allocations. h  Fotr requesting sires equally active 
  II H Three requesting sires equally active Three requesting sites, one with a high ~raffic load Fi~Ee 
2. Sample allocations 2.3 Experience The Universe network was commissioned during 1982 and has been in 
use on a regular daily basis for experimental purposes for over a year. Experiments have been successfully 
conducted to transmit slow scan TV, real time voice, remote file access [6] etc. Many of these experiments 
use techniques which do not require frequent handshaking across the network with its inherent delays. 
Three exhibitions have been mounted during 1983 when the integrated mix of techniques was demonstrated. 
An overall rate of about 500Kbits/sec has been measured when four sites were transmitting test data simultaneously. 
This is a very reasonable figure when account is taken of the time taken by guard times, bit acquisition 
and HDLC overheads. This rate was achieved with maximum size blocks. For shorter blocks, throughput was 
limited by the block rate of the current bridge implementation which was about 45 blocks/second on transmission. 
 The problems of managing the data transfer from the ring to the satellite have been achieved as follows. 
Queues of packets waiting to be transmitted to the satellite may build up while a site is waiting for 
its time in the time frame. In addition to sending throughput indications if the queue becomes too large 
the LDC will temporarily suspend reception from the ring. In the reverse direction there is no way of 
knowing in advance where the data is destined, so each site must be capable of accepting the maximsm 
bandwidth of traffic. Since the ring is of comparable speed, blocks will usually pass onto the ring successfully. 
Blocks which have been received from the satellite and cannot be delivered on the ring are held in queues 
while stations on the ring which are prepared to receive information are served. If free buffer space 
becomes too low blocks are thrown away from the longest such queue, thus affecting the least number of 
applications. A fuller description the implementation of the satellite bridge can be found in reference 
[7]. 3. The New satellite Brid~e The current satellite bridge is based on 1970s technology and many 
i~provements could be made, which would provide better use of the satellite channel. A design group was 
set up within the project and has produced a design for a new satellite bridge. The transmission and 
reception paths ~re handled by separate systems. The new bridge Will allow varying encoding rates, a 
variety of speeds up to 8 Mbits/sec, quicker burst acquisition and reduced guard times. The hardware 
will allow blocks to be chained in memory, removing the wasteful requirement for all transmission bursts 
to have room for a maximum size block. It is described in reference [8].  4. Future Developments to 
the Protocol The new satellite bridge will enable the techniques described above to be used in a more 
flexible manner. A quality of service parameter provided by the OPEN request for a virtual circuit could 
specify priority, buffering needs, bandwidth and data security requirements. This information could then 
be used by individual sites in determining both the urgency and bandwidth requirements of future allocation 
requests to the master station. Two main types of traffic are envisaged. The first is low or medium 
priority bursty traffic which would rely on throughput indications. The second is high priority low delay 
traffic such as voice. Circuits could be opened for the second type if sufficient bandwidth were available 
or if the allocation to the first kind of traffic could be reduced equitably. Otherwise the high priority 
channel would have to be blocked until sufficient time were available. A time frame of 20msec has been 
proposed and these will be grouped in superframes of 2, 4, 6 or 8 frames. Each frame may contain transmission 
bursts for more than one site, and a site may have transmission bursts in several different time frames 
in the superframe. A single contention burst in each frame would enable satellite control messages to 
be sent if a site had no other burst allocated. These developments would improve response time and efficiency 
and enable expansion to a greater number of sites. 5. Conclusion The protocol described above has enabled 
the Universe project to undertake a wide variety of experiments in high speed data communications. The 
use of the improved protocol described should prove an efficient way of sharing a satellite channel in 
a highly integrated way for many types of digital traffic. 6. Acknowledgements The authors would like 
to thank members of the Universe project who have contributed to this work. These include members of 
the Protocols Working Group, the Satellite Bridge design group and the team at RAL. We are also grateful 
to Erina Ferro and Nedo Cellandroni of CNUCE, Pisa for their comments and help. 7. References [1] P 
Kirstein, J Burren, R Daniel, R Griffiths, D King, C McDowell, R Needham: "The UNIVERSE project", ICCC'82 
pp 443-447 (1982) [2] I M Jacobs, R Binder, E V Noversten: "General Purpose Packet Satellite Networks" 
Proceedings of IEEE special issue on packet communications November 1978 [3] S Hanell and M G N Hine 
(eds.) "The STELLA Experiment" technical report. June 1978 [4] I M Leslie, R M Needham, J W Burren, 
G Adams: "The architecture of the Universe Network" Proceedings of ACM Sigcomm '84 Symposium on Communications 
Architectures and Protocols, Montreal. [5] A G Waters, C J Adams, I M Leslie, R M Needham: "The use 
of broadcast techniques on the Universe Network" ibid. [6] C S Cooper: "Managed File Distribution, ibid. 
 [7] A G Waters: "Project Universe -Implementation and Experience of the Satellite Bridge" Conference 
on "Networks and Electronics Office Systems organised by IERE, Reading,UK September 1983. [8] C J Adams, 
J W Burren "A New satellite Bridge" Project Universe paper UP/304 [9] I Jacobs, L Lee: "A prlority-oriented 
demand assignment (PODA) protocol and an error recovery algorithm for distributively controlled packet 
satellite communication network" in EASCON 77 Con. Rec., pp 14-1A to 14-1F, 1977.  
			