
 The Insider: The Web Site That Brought Mesa s Williams Campus Together Bert Valenzuela Arizona State 
University, East Campus Information Technology 7001 E. Williams Field Rd. Building 20 Room 151 (480) 
727-1183 valenzuela@asu.edu  ABSTRACT Many campuses have central points of information dissemination, 
but few have an Insider (http://insider.east.asu.edu) like system [1]. The Insider is Arizona State University 
East s and the Williams Campus s central point of communication for day to day campus happenings and 
events. It is a web-based application that was developed mostly by student workers and graduate assistants. 
It was the result of the idea for an intranet that kept snowballing into something wonderful. The Insider 
is an ASP based web application with many channels that is very easy to maintain. Self-maintenance is 
one beauty of it, but its power for being the central point of information dissemination for students 
is another. It contains: 1) a headlines section that points out current campus events or neat things 
happening around the community. 2) a calendar of campus events that s just a click away. 3) the daily 
weather forecast. 4) a page that lists campus outages. 5) a Cheers &#38; Jeers section that allows everyone 
on campus to give feedback about situations and services. 6) a summary/snapshot page that is the Active 
Desktop page for our 300+ Commons/Site/Classroom computers. 7) an advertisement section to search for 
a roommate or try to sell a car, bike, TV, etc. This paper will examine The Insider, how it works, how 
it is administered, the development/planning process, and how it benefits the campus community. Categories 
and Subject Descriptors H.1.1 [Information Systems]: Systems and Information Theory Information theory, 
Value of information. H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information Services Data sharing, 
Web-based services. H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Information Interfaces and Presentation 
 Graphical user interfaces, Interaction styles. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 03, September 21 24, 2003, San Antonio, Texas, USA. Copyright 
2003 ACM 1-58113-665-X/03/0009 $5.00. General Terms: Documentation, Human Factors.  Keywords Active 
Desktop, Arizona State University, ASP, Channel, Collaboration, Database, IIS, Insider, Intranet, Newspaper, 
Participation, Web, Williams Campus. 1. INTRODUCTION Around 1999, a couple students who worked for Information 
Technology East, set out to create a website that s intended audience was the students on Mesa s Williams 
Campus. The Williams Campus, opened in 1996, is an educational consortium that is made up of primarily 
Arizona State University s East Campus and Chandler-Gilbert Community College s Williams Campus. The 
campus s student body is comprised of students who potentially go to Chandler-Gilbert Community College 
(CGCC) for their first and second year classes and gradually transfer into Arizona State University (ASU) 
for their third year and above. Many students take classes from both institutions during their first 
couple years at the campus. ASU hosts many of the primary services for the campus, including the Campus 
Union, the Library, the common computing areas and sites, and the dining hall. In addition, ASU plays 
a major role in campus housing. CGCC hosts services such as a Fitness Center, Science Laboratories, Aircraft 
Maintenance Technology Laboratories, a full size running track, and a gymnasium. One student who attended 
both CGCC and ASU East had an idea to create a website called The Williams Gazette. The Williams Gazette 
was a site that resembled a newspaper and listed events and links to services for the entire Williams 
Campus. This, combined with a staff member s wish for a campus intranet, evolved into The Insider. 2. 
WHAT IS THE INSIDER The primary difference between The Insider and the Gazette is that the Gazette was 
a flat web page that only a couple web administrators within IT could update. Many managers, staff, and 
students submitted changes. It was extremely maintenance intensive and time consuming for the administrators 
to constantly make these updates. The Insider is a homegrown, dynamic ASP web application that runs under 
Microsoft s Internet Information Server (IIS) [3]. It provides an environment where its audience can 
make requests to post new items. Once a request is submitted, it goes to an approval queue. From the 
approval queue, The Insider administrators simply approve the request and it is automatically posted. 
  3. THE SECTIONS OF THE INSIDER Like a newspaper, The Insider has many sections. At the top, it has 
a section called Headlines. Headlines are used for campus announcements. For example, the edition of 
The Insider that is displayed in Figure 1, shows a couple of articles and their summaries. The first 
is titled, Printing will be 5 cents per side in Fall 2003. The last article displayed is titled, Summer 
Shuttle Bus Service. If the audience clicks on the title of the article, The Insider will open a web 
page that displays the full article along with who wrote it and the author s contact information. Also, 
some articles have expiration dates. These items will automatically disappear when the article expires. 
Another important section is Upcoming Events. The Events section promotes both on and off campus activities 
as they pertain to the Williams Campus Community (students, faculty, staff, management, parents, and 
campus residents of all the schools and entities that make up the Williams Campus). This section is linked 
to a calendar that is displayed on the right side of the front page. On the calendar, each day is a link 
to the events of that day. If there is an event on a particular day, the date on the calendar appears 
in bolded red text. For example, a current upcoming event promotes a play called, The Music Man. This 
play will be performed at CGCC s Performing Arts Center, that is a couple miles away on CGCC s Pecos 
Campus. Another event, not displayed on the front page, is accessible if the audience clicks on July 
31st. This announces a trip to the movies promoted by the Williams Campus Housing Office. The next section, 
Announcements, is a heads up area. It displays updates to current campus happenings and is an area where 
events can be further promoted. In Figure 1 announcements include, an article that gives an update on 
the new parking decal sale procedure for the campus, and further promotion of the Fourth of July pool 
party. Below the Announcements section are the Classified Ads. This includes ads for items both on and 
off campus. Currently, there are several items for sale and roommates wanted. 3.1 Cheers &#38; Jeers 
Section One of the most useful tools within The Insider is the Cheers &#38; Jeers section. This allows 
the audience to submit a concern and have the concern addressed by the person or committee who has authority 
over the area. For example, a couple months ago a student submitted a Jeer stating that the lab hours 
for our Computing Commons that were posted on the web were incorrect. The Insider administrators forwarded 
the concern to the person who maintains the Commons web page. The correct hours were immediately put 
up and a response article was published apologizing for the oversight. Had the student not submitted 
the Jeer, the incorrect hours might still be posted. My role at ASU East is to maintain the technical 
aspects of the computing labs and classrooms. This includes some public relations and communications 
items, one of which is the Commons web page. I always joke that, My worst fear is to be jeered on The 
Insider. All joking aside, I consider the Cheers &#38; Jeers section of The Insider to be one of the 
best customer service tools because it keeps everyone honest and in touch with the customers. When a 
customer is dissatisfied, he/she can place a concern on The Insider and it is always addressed one way 
or another. Also, the other side of Cheers &#38; Jeers are the Cheers. There are many Cheers articles 
that commend individuals and services (IT, Library, Campus Housing, DPS, Administration) that are doing 
a good job. It is a nice public place to write Good Job and Thank You. 3.2 Outages Section Another important 
section is a place where IT, Facilities, Housing, and other areas can determine when services are unavailable. 
If an outage is posted, it shows up under a section that appears before the Headlines. It states what 
service is unavailable, whether the outage is planned or unplanned, and when the service is expected 
to be restored. For example, the electricity is scheduled to be out in our Computing Commons building 
on Saturday, July 12th. On that day, IT East will temporarily relocate the Commons to a computer classroom 
in another building. The outage article about this will state the day and time this will take place and 
the location of the temporary Commons.  3.3 Special Sections The Insider contains special sections that 
only appear when certain campus, community, or nationwide events are happening. One section is a public 
opinion poll. To illustrate, ASU East holds a fundraiser for student scholarships as part of our Homecoming 
Festival called Kiss the Pig. Several faculty members and Deans participate. Their name and picture are 
placed on a jar, and the campus community donates money to each jar. Whoever has the most money in their 
jar at the end of the contest has to kiss the biggest, ugliest swine we can find (usually a cute baby 
pig). The Insider has the capability of holding an independent poll and its audience can vote (without 
donating money) on who they would like to see Kiss the Pig. Based on the results of the poll, an anonymous 
donor may donate funds to the winner s jar. Also, The Insider hosts Feedback Polls where its audience 
can post their thoughts. For example, after September 11th and on its anniversary, a poll is usually 
opened up so that the campus community can electronically post their thoughts. Then, the results/thoughts 
are printed and displayed as part of the campus September 11th memorial.   4. HOW DOES THE INSIDER 
WORK The Insider is an Active Server Page (ASP) driven application that runs under Microsoft s Internet 
Information Server (IIS) [3]. Each section of The Insider runs off a separate database known as a Channel. 
The most frequently hit pages are pre-created flat ASP pages that are based on these Channels. This is 
to limit the resource drain on the server so that it doesn t have to send database calls to the databases 
under the Channels each time a page on The Insider is loaded. When you first go to The Insider s home 
page (http://insider.east.asu.edu), The Insider displays a pre-created ASP page. The Insider calls on 
several databases to create its home page based on scripts that refresh its contents every so many minutes. 
Each section/channel dynamically builds the page s contents from an MS Access compatible database. There 
is a separate database for each section/channel. The database that is under Headlines is a separate database 
from the one that s under Events. To further illustrate what each section really is, let s pick one apart. 
Let s take a closer look at the Headlines Section. Each part of the Headlines section represents a database 
field. The fields in that database are illustrated in Figure 2. Figure 2. Headlines Table Design View 
Each component of the article (author s last name, author s first name, the title of the article, the 
article itself, etc.) is a separate database field. To further illustrate the structure of The Insider, 
see Figure 3. 5. ADMINISTERING THE INSIDER Every article or event that is posted to The Insider by a 
member of its audience must be approved before it is displayed. One of the most popular sections for 
submissions is Cheers &#38; Jeers. The process for having an article posted is as follows: First, the 
audience member clicks the link to submit his/her submission and types the article/concern. The author 
enters his/her contact information, specifies whether the article is a cheer, jeer, or neither, and specifies 
whether he/she would like to be kept anonymous. Next, the author submits it for approval and awaits a 
response. Upon submission, The Insider application notifies all administrators via email that there is 
a Cheer/Jeer waiting for approval. The administrator logs into a special administrative web page that 
allows him/her to view the request. This is shown in Figure 4. From the administrative web page, the 
administrator will click to see the articles pending approval. For example, Figure 4 shows a link to 
Cheers &#38; Jeers 1 . When the administrator clicks on this link, he/she sees a queue of articles waiting 
for a response or approval. Below each pending article, there is a section where the administrator can 
write status updates such as, Concern was emailed to John Doe from IT East for a response. Updated author 
of concern with this information and am waiting to hear back from John. An example of this is shown in 
Figure 5. Once a response is received from John in IT, both the concern and the response will be posted 
to The Insider. In most cases, the author is emailed the response to the Cheer/Jeer before it is posted. 
 Figure 5. Approve a Cheer &#38; Jeer The Insider administrative web page gives administrators access 
to edit the contents of an article or delete it in a graphical user­friendly interface. All changes dynamically 
interact with and update the back-end databases, so there is no manual manipulation to the Access database 
or HTML coding. 6. WHAT MAKES THE INSIDER SUCCESSFUL Participation by numerous campus community members 
has made The Insider a powerful tool on the Williams Campus. It appears as the home page in ASU East 
s computer labs and classrooms. Also, an abbreviated version of it appears on the right side of the desktop 
in the labs and classrooms running Windows XP. This is shown in greater detail in Figure 6. Every member 
of the Williams Campus community has easy access to contribute to it. For example, ASU East s Exercise 
and Wellness Department posted an article in Headlines when the campus pool opened for the summer. They 
also posted a classified ad when they were in search of lifeguards. Another example is that the Campus 
Union staff act as Insider administrators and play a major role in getting Cheers &#38; Jeers addressed 
and approved. Insider administration is not limited to Information Technology East staff. Representatives 
in all the departments step up to the plate and respond to Cheers &#38; Jeers as appropriate. In short, 
everyone participates and no one works against it. The Insider was not something that was proposed by 
University and Campus Administration. It was an idea that the campus community kept adding to, that created 
an evolving web application. The Insider is a project that represents true innovation and creativity 
that was initiated by students.  7. CONCLUSION The Williams Gazette and then The Insider were created 
to disseminate campus information to the Williams Campus community. The student team who created this 
worked under a staff advisor (Jeni Li), and used parts of this for class project credit. As an observer 
who watched The Insider evolve from a distance, I never imagined that The Insider would catch on as well 
as it did. The versions of The Insider keep getting better and better with each passing semester. For 
example, when The Insider was first brought online, the East Web Team asked me to make it the home page 
in all the computer labs and classrooms. I then took it one step further when ASU East implemented Windows 
2000, I made it part of the Active Desktop. Unfortunately, The Insider application generated a fresh 
ASP page and made database calls every time someone logged on to one of the 300+ lab computers on campus 
or launched a web browser. This caused The Insider application to crawl. The Insider Team came up with 
the idea of having the lab computers load a flat version of the page and have the web server generate 
this flat page every couple minutes. That way, there would only be a few database calls to The Insider 
server instead of ten each time someone logged on to a lab computer. Another illustration of growth is 
that the first incarnation of The Insider s Active Desktop page was the home page of The Insider itself. 
This page covered half the desktop on the Windows lab computers and most customers did not like it because 
it made the desktop seem cluttered. The Insider Team was amongst those who didn t like it and automatically 
created an abbreviated page that blended stylishly into the Active Desktop [2]. The Insider Snapshot 
as part of the Active Desktop is shown in Figure 7. Another later edition to The Insider was the Outages 
section. This was a class project by a student team member who was not a member of the original Insider 
Team. The Outages section was originally an Insider like application but was a separate entity. Upon 
completion of the Outages project, the Outages application was integrated to become part of The Insider. 
The collaborative spirit that created The Insider as we know it today snowballed outward and pulled in 
the campus community. It brought the campus closer together by creating a common forum for campus communication. 
The Insider has brought student and staff IT East team members together to build something of which we 
are all extremely proud. The Insider s amazing capacity for being a common forum for communication has 
brought the whole Williams Campus Community closer together. In the years ahead, we will see it continue 
to develop in the creative spirit it has to date, and continue to facilitate communication between the 
Community College and University members that make up the Williams Campus Community. 8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Special thanks to Jeni Li and Alok Ghodke for providing me with the technical information needed to write 
this paper. Kudos to The Insider Team (Mohammad Armia, Alok Ghodke, Sarah Hall, Jeni Li, Rajeev Nagpal, 
Brian Schilt, and Hattie Wong). The above­mentioned made The Insider the wonderful tool it is today. 
GOOD JOB!  9. REFERENCES [1] Insider Home Page. http://insider.east.asu.edu [2] Insider Snapshot. http://insider.east.asu.edu/activedesktop/html. 
[3] Microsoft s Internet Information Server (IIS) Website http://www.microsoft.com/iis  Figure 7. Active 
Desktop with Insider Snapshot  
			