
 The Virtual Crepe Factory: 6DoF Haptic Interaction with Fluids Gabriel Cirio Maud Marchal Sebastien 
Hillaire Anatole L´ecuyer INRIA Rennes* INSA/INRIA Rennes* INRIA Rennes/Orange Labs* INRIA Rennes*  
Figure 1: The Virtual Crepe Factory allows users to interact with different viscous .uids to achieve 
a crepe preparation recipe. The user follows the different steps of the crepe preparation process (stirring 
and scooping the dough, pouring the dough into the pan, .ipping the crepe, spreading the toppings) and 
feels corresponding force and torque feedback through two haptic devices, one in each hand. Abstract. 
The Virtual Crepe Factory illustrates our novel ap­proach for 6DoF haptic interaction with .uids. It 
showcases a 2­handed interactive haptic scenario: a recipe consisting in using dif­ferent types of .uid 
in order to make a special pancake also known as crepe . The scenario guides the user through all the 
steps re­quired to prepare a crepe: from the stirring and pouring of the dough to the spreading of different 
toppings, without forgetting the chal­lenging .ipping of the crepe. With the Virtual Crepe Factory, users 
can experience for the .rst time 6DoF haptic interactions with .uids of varying viscosity. Our novel 
approach is based on a Smoothed-Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) physically-based simulation. Introduction. 
Fluids are present in many applications such as for industrial or medical manipulations -involving for 
instance blood .ow and natural liquids. The haptic simulation of .uids is partic­ularly challenging, 
especially to achieve realistic, stable and real­time force feedback. Previous methods for haptic .uid 
interaction [Baxter and Lin 2004] [Dobashi et al. 2006] were limited to 3DoF, simple objects or pre-computed 
forces. Thus, as for today, there is a lack of haptic rendering techniques handling complex interactions 
with viscous .uids. Our approach allows real-time 6DoF haptic in­teraction with .uids of variable viscosity, 
through arbitrary shaped rigid bodies and 6DoF haptic devices. Particularly, .uid containers can be created 
to hold .uid, hence transmiting to the user strong forces such as .uid resistance and weight, as well 
as light forces like the inertia of the .uid inside the container. Virtual Crepe Preparation Scenario. 
As shown in Figure 2, the user holds a 6DoF haptic device in each hand. The scenario can be divided in 
4 distinct consecutives stages. The .rst stage requires the user to stir and scoop the dough from a bowl 
on the table with his scooping object. It enables the user to feel the torque generated by the resistance 
from a highly viscous .uid opposing his stirring movement, and the weight and inertia of the .uid inside 
the hand­held object. In the second stage, the content of the scoop is poured into the pan held with 
the second hand. The user feels the weight transferring from one hand to the other. The third stage is 
the solid­i.cation and .ipping of the crepe. The user feels how mass shifts slow down as the viscosity 
of the dough raises with the solidi.ca­tion process. When the crepe is ready, it becomes a deformable 
ob­ject, and the user can try to .ip the crepe by throwing it into the air, illustrating the underlying 
phase-change capabilities of our model. The fourth and last stage is the spreading of toppings on the 
crepe, which combines all the previous haptic interaction possibilities by making the user scoop, pour 
and spread a low viscosity .uid (maple sirup) and a high viscosity .uid (Brittany s salt-butter caramel). 
*e-mail: {gcirio,mmarchal,shillaire,alecuyer}@inria.fr Figure 2: Setup: Bimanual interaction with two 
6-DoF haptic de­vices (Virtuose, Haption). Left hand for virtual bowl manipulation, Right hand for virtual 
pan manipulation. Technical Description. Our approach is based on an SPH physically-based simulation. 
We use a uni.ed model to achieve a real-time simulation by using SPH particles for both .uids and rigid 
bodies. Our approach allows real-time simulation of solid­.uid interactions with arbitrary-shaped rigid 
bodies and .uids of different viscosities. Furthermore, we use a novel 6DoF haptic ren­dering based on 
SPH, providing a soft and continuous haptic feed­back particularly well suited for the haptic interaction 
with .uids. This allows the seamless 6DoF haptic coupling between a haptic device and any rigid body 
of the virtual scene, but also between N haptic devices and the same rigid body (as holding a bucket 
with two hands). Our method is implemented on GPU and preliminary testings with standard PC led to 170Hz 
with 25,000 particles. Vision. The Virtual Crepe Factory proves that .uids are now ready for complex 
6DoF haptic interactions, and opens a new hori­zon of applications in Virtual Reality. Applications span 
from the medical .eld (organic .uids) to industrial scenarios (painting, ma­nipulating dangerous .uids) 
and entertainment simulations (natural scenes, water sports). We challenge the SIGGRAPH audience: are 
you a good crepe maker... or a bad one? Acknowledgements This work was supported by the European Community 
under FP7 FET-Open grant n.222107 NIW -Natural Interactive Walking. References BAXTER, W., AND LIN, 
M. C. 2004. Haptic interaction with .uid media. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface. DOBASHI, Y., SATO, 
M., HASEGAWA, S., YAMAMOTO, T., KATO, M., AND NISHITA, T. A .uid resistance map method for real-time 
haptic interaction with .uids. In ACM VRST 06. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH 2011, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, August 7 11, 2011. ISBN 978-1-4503-0921-9/11/0008  
			