
 The Practical Need for Fourth Normal Form Margaret S. W% 425 Beldon Ave Iowa City, Iowa 52246 Phone: 
(319) 335-0846 ABSTRACT Many practitioners and academicians believe that data violating fourth normal 
form is rarely encountered. We report upon a study of forty organizational database$ nine of them contained 
data violating fourth normal form. Consequently, the need to understand and use fourth normal form is 
more important than previously believed. INTRODUCTION A paramount issue in the design of any database 
is that the relation has no modification anomalies. what data fields should be grouped together into 
records. There is some evidence that academicians view In the relational model, the data fields are grouped 
into fourth normal form (4NF) as unimportant and thus may logical structures called relations. The determination 
of neglect the topic in database management courses in M [S. which data fields are placed together in 
a relation is based Stamper and Price in [10] state that fourth and fifth upon the concept of normal 
forms; the process is known normal forms are so rarely encountered in business as normalization. The 
set of data fields comprising the applications as to be almost obscure; hence, they are not database 
is progressively organized into relations in first described in thk book. Mittra [8] states that Although 
through fdth normal form (5NF) according to constraints BCNF and 4NF may be less rare than 5NF, they 
are still placed upon the relations in each normal form. At any highly theoretical in nature. Other database 
texts [1,6,9] step in the normalization process, we may find that the either ignore or do not fully explain 
4NF. The view of relations no longer require further reorganization, in that practitioners regarding 
4NF is represented by Edwards in case, we say that final normal form has been achieved. [3] where he 
states that 4NF is merely an academic issue. Frequently, a set of data may be in final normal form Thus, 
the practical use of normalization theory apparently when it has been normalized only to third normal 
form stops with 3NF or BCNF for some academicians and (3NF). Because the definition of 3NF does not treat 
practitioners. Because the normal forms were defined in certain instances of data adequately, an additional 
normal order to prevent data inconsistencies and update form called Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF) was 
anomalies, the termination of the normalization process created to replace 3NF. In theory, BCNF is placed 
after with the database violating 4NF will result in recc~rd 3NF in the normalization process. There 
is an addkional designs that are ineffective in meeting these objectives. normal form called Domain Key 
normal form which is The purpose of this paper is to present the results not applied to normalize data 
but serves to verify that a of an empirical study which investigated the practical need relation has 
been normalized to its final form by showing for 4NF by the examination of real world databases. In the 
next section, we state the normalization procedures for 4NF and discuss the advantages of 4NF. The second 
 Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is grantad provided that tha copies are 
not made or distributed for section details the research methodology of this study. In direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notica and the the third section, we present the results of the empirical 
title of the publication and its date appear, and notica is given research. Additional insights into 
the organization of data that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing gained during 
this investigation are presented in the Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee 
fourth section. Finally, a summary of these results is and/or specific permission. e 1992 ACM 0-89791-468-6192100021001 
9..,$1.50 given in the last section. NORMALIZATION OF DATA The deffition of 4NF is then given by Fagin 
[51 as To normalize a set of data items, we may proceed follows: from frost normal form (lNF) to second 
normal form A relation schema R* is in 4NF if, w~enever a (2NF) to third normal form (3NF) to Boyce-Codd 
normal nontrivial MVD X ->-> Y holds for R , then so form (BCNF) to fourth normal form (4NF). In practice, 
does the functional. dependency X -> A for every we can proceed directly from lNF to BCNF. The use of 
column name of R . BCNF rather than 3NF is preferred because If X ->-> Y, we also say that Y is a mukivalued 
fact normalization to BCNF is easily understood by students about X. It is possible for Y to be called 
a multivalued and can be quickly implemented, in addition, a relation in fact about X and yet the relationship 
between X and Y is BCNF is dSO in 3NF. not a mukivalued dependency. When a multivalued fact To normalize 
a record type to lNF, any repeating is not independent, i.e., a mukivalued dependency does fields or 
groups of fields are repeated for each record. not exist, redundancy of data values is necessary. To 
The only attribute values permitted by lNF are single obtain 4NF, the relation R is decomposed into two 
or atomic values. A relation schema R is in Boyce-Codd more relations which meets the constraints given 
by the normal form if whenever a functional dependericy X -> deftition of 4NF. A holds in R, then there 
do not exist two tuples tl and t For the purpose of normrdizing real world data, we in R such that tl[X] 
= t2[X]. X is called a superkey o3 may restate the deftition of 4NF as follows: R. To define fourth normal 
form, the concept of A relation R is in fourth normal form if R is in multivalued deDendencv (MVD) is 
required. An MVD X BCNF and does not contain any nontrivial ->-> Y holds for R(X,Y,Z) if and only if 
whenever multivalued dependencies. We note that this simpler statement does not conform (XJ,Z ). An MVD 
X ->-> Y is said to be. trivial ifY is fidly to the original deftition given by Fagin [4]. a subset of 
X or XUY = R. However, the theoretical differences do not affect the normalization of real world databases. 
(FY,Z) ad LY ,z ) are tuples of R, then so are (Ly ,z) and Table 1 The nine databases with data violating 
4NF Functional Total * Record Orszanization Area Fields Z!I&#38;S Financial Firm Sales Management System 
307 24 Physician Database Data on Individual Physician 68 6 Publishing Firm Job Scheduling 63 9 ColIege 
of Nursing Student Skills Database 55 8 Apartment Complex Maintenance Tracking 47 17 Division of Sponsored 
Grants Database 42 7 Research Animal Laboratory Inventory of Animals 33 5 Athletic Tutoring Program 
Assignment of Tutors 18 7 Automotive Parts Retailer Inventory 16 4 RESEARCH METHODS The databases from 
forty organizations were studied for this project. Each organization was a small firm, a division of 
a large fum, or a division of a major university. The database for each organization was limited to the 
data required for the functional area of the organization with the exception of one business firm which 
was studied in its entirety. Eighteen organizations were functional units within a large university, 
twenty were private firms, and the remaining two were government organizations. The study included the 
entire database for a reprographics firm, the manufacturing database for a Fortune 500 firm, and the 
sales management system for a major financial firm. These three large databases were examined for data 
that violated 4NF. The remainder of the organizations were studied by student teams for undergraduate 
classes in the Systems Analysis and Design course. Each team was required to present the data as a set 
of record types in 3NF. These reports were then carefully reviewed and revised by the author as necessary 
to obtain record types in 4NF. Additional contact with the organizations was made to resolve any ambiguities 
in the data and the relationships between the data. RESULTS OF THE STUDY This study has determined that 
data violating 4NF occurred at least once in nine organizational databases constituting over twenty percent 
of the databases in this study. Twenty of the 350 record types comprising the forty databases resulted 
from normalization of BCNF relations to 4NF. These record types represent six percent of the normalized 
record types in this study. Because of this incidence, 4NF is not so rare. Table 1 provides information 
regarding the data found in the organizational databases which contained data violating 4NF. The number 
of data fields for each organizational database has been tabulated. The number of normalized record types 
for each organization is also given. The tabulation of the number of data fields found at each organization 
yields a general picture of the magnitude of these databases. Both large and small databases were included 
in the study. The database represented by the 307 data fields required for the sales management system 
of a major financial firm was found to violate 4NF. The other eight databases contain an average of over 
40 data fields. AVOIDANCE OF FOURTH NORMAL FORM It is sometimes possible to avoid the use of fourth normal 
form by representing the data differently. As an example of this approach, let us consider the database 
of the Financial Organization. This database in BCNF contains the following relation violating fourth 
normal form: Codes (ACCOUNT ID, HOME PENDING CODE, FIELD PENDING CODE) To obtain 4NF, thk relation is 
decomposed to form two relations: Home-Codes (ACCOUNT ID, HOME PENDI~U CODE) Pending-Reqts (ACCOUNT ID, 
FIELD PENDI~U REQUIREMENT) It is possible to represent the attributes of HOME PENDING CODE and FIELD 
PENDING REQUIREMENT so that the data does not violate 4NF. The value of these fields is given by a numeric 
value that indicates a particular item of information has not been received by the organization. For 
example, if the value of 01 is present for HOME PENDING CODE for a particular value of ACCOUNT ID, we 
know that the document identified as 01 has not been received. To represent this information without 
violating fourth normal form, we will require that all values for HOME PENDING CODE be given and an additional 
field called HOME-PENDING-CODE-Y-N be included. This latter field will contain either a Y or N value 
to indiciite whether a particular document identified by its corresponding value in the HOME PENDING 
COI)E field has been received or not. Similarly, we add the field P-REQTS-Y-N to contain a Y or N value 
corresponding to a particular value of FIELD PENDING REQUIREMENT. We then have two relations as shown 
below Home-Code-YN (ACCOUNT ID, HOME PENDING CODE, HOME-PENDING­ CODE-Y-N) Pending-Reqts-YN (ACCOUNT 
ID, FIELD PENDING REQUIREMENT, P-REQTS- Y-N) These two relations do not violate fourth normal form and 
require no further normalization. Another representation for this data is possible by the use of buckets. 
In actuality, the HOME PENDING CODE field has only 19 possible codes while the FIELD PENDING REQUIREMENT 
field has only five possible codes. Table 2 The Violations of Fourth Normal Form In this research study, 
nine databases were found to contain data violating organizations is shown below in relations normalized 
to 4NF. fourth normal form. The relevant data for these nine 1. Financial Organization -Sales Management 
System Home-ties (ACCOUNT Pending-Reqts (ACCOUNT ID, HOME PENDING ID, FIELD PENDING CODE) REQ UIREMEMP) 
2. Physician Identification System Is-Member (PHYSICIAN Works-At (PHYSICIAN ID, GROUP ID) ID, LOCATION 
ID) 3. Publishing Firm -Scheduling System Associated-Job Colors (JOB (JOB NUMBER NUMBERj COLOR ASSOCIATED 
REQUIRED) JOB NUMBER) 4. College of Nursing -Student Skills Database Has-Prerequisite (SKILL CODE, PREREQUIWI 
E Course (COURSE, SKILL CODE) SKILL CODE) 5. Family Housing Office -Maintenance Tracking System Adjoining-Apt 
(AIT CODE, ADJOINfNG APT CODE) Maintenance (APT CODE, MAINTENANCE CODE, MAINTENANCE Spraying (APT CODE, 
SPRAY DATE, AREA SPRAYED) DATE) 6. Division of Sponsored Research -Grants Database Grant-Area (GRANT 
CODE, DISCIPLINE) Grant-Keyword (GRANT CODE, KEYWORD) Faculty-Interests (UNfVERSITY ID, KEYWORD) 7. Animal 
Laboratory -Inventory of Animals Account-Investigators (ACCOUNT NUMBER INVESTIGATOR Account-Animals (ACCOUNT 
NUMBER ANIMAL ID) NUMBER) 8. Athletic Tutoring System -Tutor Assignment Note: The Athletic subject areas 
Tutoring for which Service did not wish to a student was deemed classify individual qualified to sewe 
courses by subject as a tutor. area(s) but did wish to track both courses and Tutor-Subjects Tutor-Courses 
(TUT OR (TUT OR ID, ID, SUBJECI_ COURSE AREA) lD) 9. Automotive Parts Retailer -Inventory Vehicle-Engine-Part 
(W3 HICLE, MODEL. YEAR ENGINE TYPE, ENGINE-PART-NUMBER) Vehicle-Feature (VEHICLE, MODEL, YEAR FEATURE, 
~ ENGINE FEATURE, Note: The field FEATURE consists of several subfields. Consequently, we may choose 
to store thk same information in one relation as shown below All-Codes (ACCOUNT ID, HOME-PENDING-CODE-1, 
.... HOME-PENDING-CODE-19, FIELD-PENDING-REQUIREMENT-1, .... FIELD-PENDING-REQUIREMENT-5) Although the 
relation All-Codes is technically in 4NF, the use of the bucket violates the principles of the relational 
model. The organization may choose the bucket representation because these data fields have been in use 
for several years and it is unlikely that change would occur. The bucket representation presents potential 
problems due to its inflexibility. We note that the proper choice for data representation is dependent 
on the individual installation s preference for data representation, the requirements for flexibility, 
the need to minimize storage space, and the trade-off of data structure for ease of programming. CONCLUSION 
The study of forty real world databases showed that 4NF occurs more often than we previously believed. 
Data violating 5NF did not occur in any of the databases which may indicate that 5NF is only an academic 
issue, Because data violating 4NF was found to occur in over twenty percent of the organizations in the 
study, it is advisable that practitioners understand and apply the constraints for 4NF. It is also imperative 
that the rules for 4NF be emphasized in the teaching of normalization theory. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author 
wishes to thank Jeff Hoffer for su~esting this research project. REFERENCES 1. Courtney, James F. and 
David B. Paradice. Database Svstems for Management. St. Louis: Times Mh-ror/Mosby College Publishing 
Co., 1988. 2. Date, C. J. An Introduction to Data Base m. 5th ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Co., 1990.  3. Edwards, Joe B. High Performance Without Compromise} Datamation, ~, 13, (July 1, 1990), 
53-58. 4. Elmasri, Ramez and Shamkant B. Navathe. Fundamentals of Database Svstems. Redwood City, CA: 
Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co.  1989. 5. Fagin, Ronald. Multivalued Dependencies and a New Normal 
Form for Relational Databases+ ACM Transactions on Database Svstems, ~, 3, (Sept. 1977), 262-278. 6. 
Fife, Dennis, W. Terry Hardgrave, and Donald R. Deuth. Database Concepts. Cincinnati Southwestern Publishing 
Co., 1986. 7. Kent, W. A Simple Guide to Five Normal Forms in Relational Data base Theory, Communications 
of the ACM, 26, 2, (Feb. 1983), 120-125. 8. Mittra, Sitansu S. PrincirJes of Relational Database Svstems. 
Englewood Cliffs, N. Y.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1991.  9. Pratt, Philip J. Microcomputer Data Base Mana~ement 
Usimz dBASE III Plus. Boston, MA Boyd &#38; Fraser Publishing Co., 1988. 10. Stamper, David and Wilson 
Price. Database Desire and Mana~ement: An A~plied Ap~roach. New York McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1990.  
			