
 Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation Conference ed. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, and 
D, Goldsman THE CUSTOMER SERVICE OFFICE SIMULATION Marda Redditt Defense Logistics Services Center OffIce 
of Planning and Resource Management Battle Creek, Michigan 49017-3084, U.S.A. ABSTRACT This paper presents 
the analysis of our Customer Service Office (CSO) process. The CSO was undergoing many changes and needed 
to look at automating more of their process. Under the as-is process, they were not keeping up with the 
customers inquiries. They were averaging about 13,500 inquiries a year and a backlog of about 75 inquiries. 
Though 75 inquiries does not suggest an excessive backlog, when you are a customer waiting, it is. The 
Corporate Modeling and Simulation (CMS) Oflice reviewed the as-is process and then performed what-if 
analysis on the proposed automated effort. Looking at the proposed automation through simulation would 
let the CSO determine if there were any problems that might occur and correct prior to implementation. 
1 INTRODIJCTION The Defense Logistics Services Center (DLSC) plays an integral part in the Department 
of Defense s (DOD) mission. At DLSC, we provide support to all military services, other defense agencies, 
industry, NATO, other foreign governments and federal civil agencies for the management and dissemination 
of logistics information. In this role, we must perform our processes efficiently to meet our customers 
requirements. In this light, one of the most critical processes at DLSC is our CSO. In the early 1980 
s, DLSC established the CSO. Its mission is to serve as the focal point for receiving, controlling, evaluating 
and processing all inquiries regarding the Federal Catalog System (FCS), Milita~ Engineering Data Asset 
Locator System (MEDALS), Federal Logistics Information System (FLIS) and any related DLSC products or 
services. In the beginning, it was a total manual effort with research being done through mountains of 
paper. The response time to the customer was hours or days. Since then, the CSO has evolved into an almost 
paperless environment and the response time now is within minutes. To insure that the CSO continues to 
operate efficiently, the DLSC CMS OffIce conducted simulation analysis. We developed an as-is simulation 
model, and validated it with the current process. We then conducted whi~t-if analysis on alternatives 
to the process, In this paper, we will describe the simulation model with different what-if scenarios 
and the results of the simulations, 2 PROBLEM The CSO receives about 13,500 inquiries a year, and increasing, 
via many means; e.g., telephone, fax, the electronic bulletin board system, letters, e-mails, etc. Under 
the current process, the technician would manually annotate the inquiry on a preprinted form. If unable 
to answer the inquiry immediately, the technician will research for the problem and then respond to the 
customer. Types of inquiries can range from when will the next publication be produced ? to specific 
information on an item or National Stock Number. The technician is also responsible for inputting each 
inqumy into the CSO database. Use of the database is for tracking the number of inquiries received, from 
whom, the type of inquiry and the amount of time it took to respond to the inquiry. Because of the time 
spent in manual research and answering inquiries, there is always a delay in inputting entries into the 
database. This delay results in technicians making mass entries to the database at the end of the month. 
Monthly reports from this database are grouped as follows: a. Referrals -inquiries referring customers 
to another agerwy or activity. b. General -inquiries that do not fall within any of the specific categories, 
e.g., technical assistance, other assistance, etc. c. Bulletin Board System (BBS) -provides assistance 
for inquiries received via the BJ3S. d. Federal Logisitcs Data on Compact Disc (FEDLOG) -inquiries on 
distribution, set-up, hardware/  1073 1074 Reclditt software problems and information presented on 
CD-ROM. e. Logistics Remote Users Network (LOGRUN) ­inquiries requesting on-line access, problems accessing, 
and how to use the system. f. Publications -inquiries about products other than FEDLOG. g. Rejects 
-inquiries regarding cataloging transactions that did not process. h. Daily Report -a morning report 
giving interest items and number of LOGRUN access requests from the previous day.   3 SIMULATION MODEL 
ANALYSIS Since the CSO needed to improve their process, the CMS OffIce received a tasking to perform 
simulation analysis on a proposed improvement. Using simulation allows the CMS Office to determine if 
the proposed improvement will allow the CSO to perform more efficiently. It also allows us to review 
the results within sTART w RECENE INQUIRY FROM C ,TOMER ENTEN CUSTOMER INFORMATION ,.,0 OATABASE REusw 
,.0 ,. m DETERMI!IE NPE  a few minutes rather three to six months. We in the CMS OffIce use a software 
called Hand or Computer Universal Simulator (HOCUS) to perform this analysis (PE Inbucon, Ltd. 1994). 
Before developing the actual simulation, we needed to analyze the steps taken by the technicians to 
perform the CSO function. The CMS OffIce accomplishes this using flow charts developed on a software 
called EasyFlow (HeavenTree Software 1991). The CSO developed six flow charts (one for each type of inquiry) 
documenting the sequential steps necessary to respond to an inquiry. In analyzing the flow charts, we 
looked for similar steps in each function. By identifying similar steps, we were able to consolidate 
steps for preparing the model for simulation. Figure 1, is a macro level flow chart of the six CSO flow 
charts. We then looked at the changes submitted for the new process. Included were on-line access to 
many of the publications and manuals used for research in responding to an inquiry, and development of 
a database containing an inventory of customers, These changes ho [ TECHN(CW. RE,WRCHE$ ,0,7 RESPONSE 
m TECHNIOM Cusnlml ,RE%+7GS ml,, REPORT .0 TECHNICW PRO.4DES TECHN,CWA C JSTOMER A Summs REPORT RESPONSE 
m S PERW,OR NO NO Figure 1: Macro Customer Service Office Flow Chart Customer Service enabled the CSO 
technician in completing their on-line activity log sheet. The CMS Office ran three scenarios of the 
CSO process (current, new and new with 25°h increase in inquiries). We used the current process model 
as the baseline. We modified the baseline model to conduct sensitivity analysis with the new cor@urations. 
These models reflected a decrease in resources, reduction in processing times for the flow chart steps, 
elimination of manual input of the activity log and holding the log sheet for mass inpul. at the end 
of the month. In each of these variations, we were looking for the effects on resources, number of inquiries 
processed, and the processing time of each inquiry. Standard parameters for these simulations were: a. 
Simulations run for 90,480 minutes for an equivalent of 260 eight-hour days (one year). We base this 
on a personal, fatigue and delay standard of 5.8 productive hours or 348 minutes for one day. b. The 
models begin with no backlogs. (Unless necessary to determine length of time needed to eliminate current 
backlog.) c. Dividing the number of inquiries by available time for a month determines when an inquiry 
generates in the model. However, development of batch inputs are done if it would better represent reality. 
 d. The process owner provides average processing times for each step of the flow chart. In some instances, 
time ranges are needed. These can be weighted tables to show shorter or longer times as required.  Following 
are the results of the three simulations. 3.1 Resources First we wanted to determine if our resources 
were adequate. In the current process model, we had six technicians at 100°/0 of their time, one technician 
at 500A, one technician at 250/ and one SupeNISO1 at 5°/0. In running the model with this input, the 
100°/0 technicians time was at 92°A utilization (see Figure 2), Special work assignments make up for 
the 8°A difference. Unless CSO can acquire a~dditional resources, there is no room for growth. This is 
not an option. In looking at the new proposed process, we can reduce resources as follows: five technicians 
at 100!4. of their time and two technicians for 500A. As result of process changes and decrease in resources, 
utilization dropped to for ftrll­ 74~0 time technicians and 44°A for the half-time technicians. With 
this reduction m utilization time, we increase the number of inquiries received by 250/o The results 
increased to S7°/0 and 63°/0 respectively for the technicians. Yes, the 500/0 technicians were over about 
130A. Why d]~dthis occur when the full-time technicians Office Simulation 1075 still have about 13% 
of their time left? Occasionally, when the 50°A technicians cycle is complete they are still processing 
a step in the simulation and cannot immediately return to their downtime. In reality, we feel that the 
full-time technicians could assist whenever the 50% technicians did not have the time to complete. The 
100 A technicians still had around 12°A under-utilized time. Based on this information, the reduced resources 
support the proposed enhancements.  3.2 Inquiries Processed We then analyzed the number of inquiries 
processed in a year (Figure 3). The current process resulted in 13,495 inquiries processed. Two steps 
of the process resulted in a backlog totaling 75 inquiries (those steps were: processing calls received; 
and inputting the information into the database). When performing what-if analysis for the new process, 
the number of inquiries processed in 100 80 El Current 0 New 0 25% 20 Increast 0 lt)()~o 50% 25°A 5?40 
Tech Tech Tech Supv Figure 2: Resources a year remained at around 13,500. This was done to coincide with 
the reduction of resources. The results indicate that it is possible for us to receive additional inquiries. 
Therefore, we performed another what-if analysis by increasing the number of inqumies by 25V0 for a total 
of about 17,000. Again, the results indicate that the technicians can complete these inquiries without 
any significant backlog.  3.3 Inquiry Processing Times Figure 4 reflects the average processing time 
for each type of inquiry. We used the total number of inquiries processed in a year for each group as 
the basis for these figures. In all but one case, the processing time decreased by almost half. Even 
when the number of inquiries increased by 25°/0, the processing time only 1076 Recldit t E! Current 
6000 I % % 8 g 5000 4000 E New Q 3000 l 25V0 2000 Increase 1000 0 Figure 3: Inquiry Processed increased 
approximately 1°/0 over the new processing times. The reject inquiry was the only area that increased 
in processing time when the 25°/0 increase was considered. We attribute this to reject inquiries being 
considered the lowest priority when running the simulation. 10 El Current 8 0 New 6 4 0 zsyo Increase 
2 0 H Figure 4: Inquiry Processing Times  4 SUMMARY Based on the above analysis, we concluded that 
the CSO should continue to pursue the automated process. The efficiency of the process will not only 
improve but customers will also receive responses in a more timely manner. Completion of this simulation 
occurred about one year ago. Since then, the CSO implemented the automated system. They are handling 
customers inquiries in less time and the efficiency of the process is continually improving. The automated 
system generates all monthly reports. The CSO S automated system is a DLSC success story. REFERENCES 
HavenTree Software Ltd, 1991. EasyFlow. Kingston, Ontario, Canada or Pineview, NY PE Inbucon, Ltd., 1994. 
Hand or Computer Universal Simulator (HOCUS). Egham Surrey, United Kingdom or Hampstead, MD. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY 
MARDA K REDDITT is a Senior Management Analyst in the Corporate Modeling and Simulation (CMS) OffIce 
at the Defense Logistics Services Center (DLSC), Battle Creek, MI. As the senior analyst, she is responsible 
for the development and implementation of CMS functions for confQuration management of DLSC S processes. 
She also performs analysis and studies of DLSC processes, products and services and serves as the advisor 
for the CMS OffIce. The CMS OffIce is currently involved in a business process improvement study of DLSC 
S On-Line System process. 
			