
 PANEL The Impact of Graphics Standards An American Point of View CHAIR: David H. Straayer Tektronix, 
Inc. This panel session will consist of reports from participants in the effort to standardize computer 
graphics functions in America. There are two principal goals. The first is to provide status reports 
for the groups represented by the panelists. The second is to explain relationships between different 
standardization efforts. Panelist: Tom Wright ISSCO GRAPHICS Mr. Wright is the chairman of the ANSI 
X3H35 task group to develop an American National Standard for a Programmer's Minimal Interface to Graphics 
(PMIG). His topic is: The Proposed Programmer's Minimal Interface to Graphics Mr. Wright will be addressing 
the following questions: What is the PMIG? Who is the PMIG for? What functions are in the PMIG? What 
is the state of PMIG today? What form will the PMIG spec have? What about implementations of PMIG? 
 Panelist: Theodore Reed Los Alamos National Laboratory Mr. Reed is the chairman of the ANSI X3H33 task 
group to develop Amer- ican National Standards for Virtual Device Interface (VDI) and Virtual Device 
Metafile (VDM). His topic is: Graphics Metafile and Virtual Device Interface Mr. Reed will be addressing 
the following questions: What is a Metafile? What does the Metafile contain? What is a VDI? What will 
the VDI contain? How does the Metafile relate to the VDI? What is the relationship between ANSI X3H33 
and ISO? What is the status of the standards? 31 PANEL (continued): The Impact of Graphics Standards 
 Panelist: David Shuey McAuto Corporation Mr. Shuey is the chairman of the ANSI X3H31 task group. This 
group is developing an American National Standard for computer graphics func- tionality at a similar 
level to the SIGGRAPH GSPC Core. His topic is: Current Status of 3-D GKS Extensions and a "Rich" Graphics 
System Mr. Shuey will be addressing the following questions: What is GKS? What is the ANSI relationship 
to GKS? What types of extensions are being considered for GKS? What is the role of the GSPC Core in the 
developing ANSI standard? What is the "Rich" Graphics System? What is the status of the "Rich" Graphics 
System? Where is X3H31 concentrating its future efforts? Panelist: Bruce Cohen Intel Corporation Mr. 
Cohen is a member of the ANSI X3H33 task group and is the liaison to the ANSI X3L2 Committee. X3L2 is 
developing an American National Standard for coded character sets for Videotex/Teletext. This Videotex 
standard will be based on the North American Presentation Level Protocol drafted by the Bell System. 
Mr. Cohen's topic is: The Relationship Between Videotex and Graphics Standards Mr. Cohen will be addressing 
the following questions: What is the NAPLPS? Does the NAPLPS attempt to standardize graphics? What is 
the relationship between VDM and NAPLPS? Will VDI/VDM and NAPLPS be compatible? How are these committees 
working together? Panelist: Bradford M. Smith National Bureau of Standards Mr. Smith is head of the 
Manufacturing Systems Group at the National Bureau of Standards. He serves as the program chairman of 
the Initial Graphics Exchange Standard (IGES) specification. His topic is: Status, Use, and Implementations 
of the IGES Specification Mr. Smith will address the following questions: HOW does IGES function as 
a critical interface in CAD/CAM systems? What is the extent of vendor commitment to its implementation? 
What future improvements can be expected? Where is additional information available? What is the relationship 
between IGES and ANSI YI4.26-M? 32 
			