
 THE COMPUTER AND YOU A Proposed New Course on the Impact of Computers on Society by W. B. Andrews Purpose 
 That the applieations of computer systems are having an increasing impact on the lives of people at 
present as well as for the foreseeable future has become commonly ac- cepted to almost everyone, particularly 
to the citizens of highly industrialized coun- tries such as the United States. Creating and implementing 
means for educating people to cope with the issues and problems raised or promised by these information 
processing systems is of importance especially in any form of democracy. This is particularly true since 
little accurate and detailed knowledge of the larger problem has been widely dis- seminated. One often 
hears people express ignorance or misconceptions concerning the particular issues with some commonly 
mentioned pervasive fear of consequences for people from computer systems in the future. Something must 
be done! Large segments of the populace must be given adequate bases for decision-making insofar as 
the applications of computer systems promise to affect the present and future. This paper proposes a 
university course as a realistic and practical approach to the cre- ation of these bases in an important 
segment of the population--college undergraduates. The Growth of Computer Usage The actual and estimated 
growth in the number of computer installations in the U.S. from 1950 until 1975 is expressed by the following 
table (found also in Computers in Higher Education, a report of the President's Science Advisory Committee, 
p. 58): Total Year Installations 1950 ......... i0 15 - 1955 ......... 1,000 1960 ......... 6,000 
1965 ......... 30,000 1970 ......... 50,000 1975 ......... 80,000 A clearer perception of the actual 
increase in effective computing power which can be purchased per dollar can be gotten from the figure 
on the following page (also bas#d on data from Computers i__n Higher Education, p. 60). The decrease 
in multiply time, the slight increase in cost and, cumulatively, the decrease in the cost of multiplications 
since before the middle 1930s, all closely ap- proximating strict linearity, demonstrate through extrapolation 
on the past and present trends that the cost of computing will continue to decrease significantly into 
the future. Little accurate measure of the actual computing power in use at any particular time is available 
or possible but it can be assumed to be enormous. Again, to date, the impact of these machines has been 
significant and the data show that their use and power are still in a period of very rapid growth which 
accentuates the need for a course now to be concerned with current and emerging societal issues raised 
by the myriad applications to which the end-user has and will make of the computer and its associated 
software. COST TIME ($) (sec.) 100M 100s TIME 10M 10s iM ls COST 100K 100ms 10K 10ms OF 125 M MULTIPLICATIONS 
 iK ims i00 100~s S i0 10~s i lus .% \ .i lOOns .01 10ns 1936 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76 > >M > 
z z ~ o Z ~ ~ H ~ O ~ TRENDS DEMONSTRATING THE STEADY AND VIRTUALLY LINEAR DECREASE IN COST OF COMPUTING 
 Problem Areas Related to the Development of the Course Realistic concern should be shown by the course 
planners for aspects of the exist- ing student body, university academic milieu, and the actual available 
resources before and during the creation and implementation of the new course. The audience should be 
a directly available group eager and willing to learn. Pre- sumably such conditions are met by college 
undergraduates. First and second year students from all disciplines might be those generally aimed for. 
They should need to satisfy no prerequisites for entrance into the course. A smaller audience, but an 
important one to reach, are practicing And promising educators, particularly secondary, both within 
and outside the active university community. Any course of this nature should emphasize trying to relate 
to this group. The decision on placement of the course involves a consideration of two other questions: 
(i) Where does it go now? and (2) Where should it be later ideally? Early~ the course has to be located 
where convenient for the available human and computer re- sources. Computer sciences departments, where 
they exist, would be the most desirable initial home. This recommended placement certainly should not 
preclude the active in- volvement of other faculties in the course development and implementation. All 
of the situations will be unique, often requiring placement elsewhere, again where of the greatest utility 
vis-a-vis the students and resources. Later, after the early develop- ment phase of the course is complete 
and many other disciplines have had some part of its design and implementation; after growth of involvement 
with computer usage by other departments; the course might then be best placed elsewhere--perhaps in 
a new department such as one on "contemporary issues." Central to questions about the development of 
the course are questions concerning the availability of resources. Assuming students to be a resource, 
how can they be most effectively accessed? How can they best communicate with the teaching and source 
person- nel resources? How can computing resources be best related to the course scheme? How can the 
educational facilities be best utilized by the course? The four questions must be considered in unison 
for answers which will be unique to the situation at the college or university initiating such a program. 
In planning this particular course, attempts should be made to glean as much information as possible 
about the available resources. It is necessary to base decisions about the organization and implementation 
of the course upon such information. Those decisions will guide the creation of the course, and the quality 
of the course--given the real resources--will highlight the quality of study and planning--and teaching, 
too--which went into it. A Proposed Course Content Outline The following course outline is to be considered 
tentative and certainly far from definitive. It supplies one overall organization as a jumping-off point 
from which a progressively more effective and relevant course can grow as experience is gained with 
its implementation. The outline is for a three-credit, one-semester course of the type which meets for 
roughly three 50-minute sessions per week. Philosophically, the outline shows concern with taking a 
practical approach to selecting and organizing the course content with the following major partitions: 
(i) re- quiringstudents to have a "real" experience interfacing with a computer system; (2) giving 
significant effort to studying software applications in the "real world" from the point of view of the 
end-user; and (3) raising the various societal issues suggested by the applications. Outline for "The 
Computer and You" Time, Assignments g Course Topics Examinations i. A perspective on the course 3 sessions 
i.i Introductory remarks on the focus of the A paper might be assigned at this course time to be due 
three weeks before the end. 1.2 The history of the concern with societal issues raised by computer applications 
 A series of readings can be relied upon here from such authors as N. Wiener, B. Russell, H. Kahn, 
etc. 1.3 Raising some initial societal issues Issues of a moral, cultural, political, social, etc., 
nature can be approached with some initial attempt made at focus- ing them. 2. Considerations about 
the computing machine 3 sessions 2.1 The historical development of the machine Reading assignments on 
societal issues. 2.2 The organization of the machine 2.3 Modern computers 2.4 Communicating with the 
computer These topics are to be interleaved with the other three preceding in this section. This is 
intended to permit students to begin actively communicating with the machine early in the course which 
can help ease their introduction to a more formal presentation of basic FORTRAN programming to follow. 
 2.4.1 Using a keypunch 2.4.2 The computer system to be used 2.4.3 A sample of simple programs 2.5 
A consideration of any societal issues which might have newly emerged 3. Programming the computing machine 
3 sessions 3.1 Languages Reading assignments to continue on societal issues.  3.1.1 Machine language 
 Programming examples supplied.  3.1.2 Assembly language Programming examples supplied.  3.1.3 Higher 
level languages 3.1.3.1 FORTRAN 3.1.3.2 Other languages Programming examples will be supplied here. 
  3.1.4 Compilation and execution of programs 3.2 Computer systems 3.2.1 Their history 3.2.2 Modern 
systems 3.3 Using the available system to communicate with a computer in FORTRAN This section will 
require that students continue their initial programming exposure with opportunities to do such things 
as correct simple programs with errors or write an extremely simple program. These activities are 
to be interleaved with those of the previous topics in this section. 3.4 A consideration of any societal 
issues which might have newly emerged, especially from the students' new focus on software Issues should 
emerge for discussion from time to time as a result of the students' reading and research on their papers. 
 4. Basic FORTRAN programming 4.1 FORTRAN A few weeks spent in giving students a realistic experience 
programming 3 or 4 relatively simple and thoroughly under- standable problems in addition to those to 
which they have been exposed earlier. 4.2 Consideration given to any new societal issues raised by the 
students 5. The world of software applications 5.1 Software in a historical perspective 5.2 Modern 
software, software applications by the end-user, and societal issues Several weeks of study of the kinds 
of software in use in the "real world." Pro- grams used for data processing, information retrieval, analytic 
computation, non-numeric problem-solving, simulation, etc., will be studied from the point of view of 
the impact of their application on man: the individual An examination should follow the completion of 
this section. 12 sessions An examination on FORTRAN should follow the completion of this section. 
 16 - 18 sessions An examination on software and societal issues should follow the completion of this 
section. and society. Moral, economic, cultural, social and other human value issues will permeate the 
study. 6. Using an actual software package 3 sessions 6.1 The package Reading assignments to continue 
on societal issues. The students will be required to inter- face with a commercially used canned The 
papers assigned at the be- program. Report Program Generator (RPG) ginnlng of the course are to be 
 zs such a package which is available for collected now. many computers, large and small, which could 
be used by students with a minimum of additional programming experience. RPG is a limited purpose programming 
language without complicated logic such as that found in FORTRAN. It is used for pre- paring programs 
to perform some relatively easy computations generating an output in the format of a report. RPG permits 
specification of the report form. 6.2 Consideration of societal issues 7. Societal issues reconsidered 
3 sessions  7.1 Additional speculations on the present Some of the papers might be dis- cussed with 
select ones presented 7.2 Speculations on the immediate future by their authors. 7.3 Speculations on 
the distant future  8. Summary and conclusions 1 session  8.1 Impact of the course on the students 
A final examination to be given after this session should include 8.2 Proposals for action in dealing 
with any questions concerning the history problems raised by the use of the of computing, programming 
in computer FORTRAN, machine organization, general examples of software 8.2.1 Questions of value for 
people applications, a specific example 8.2.2 Questions of practical action of a software package, 
and the many aspects of the societal 8.3 Feedback from the students on needed issues. improvements to 
the course Research must go into developing effective reading, audio-visual, programming, human and 
other resources for the course. Experience with developing and teaching this type of course is of the 
greatest importance. Aspects of Presenting the Course The lectures should be as interesting as possible 
with many opportunities for interaction with the students either as a body or in smaller groups. Seminars 
would be of use. Imaginative use of audio-visual aids, field trips--judicious use is also recom- mended 
here--and invited presentations by informed speakers can all add good dynamic qualities to the course. 
A widely varied but pertinent set of informative and inter- esting outside readings is a must for assignment 
to the students. A few books have ap- peared recently which could serve as textbooks. Realistic interaction 
with a computer system is required by the course instead of simulated or no interaction, since it is 
 thought that the course should maintain as much as possible a closeness to real computers for the students. 
 S£eculations on the Future of the Course Keeping such a course in a computer sciences department has 
its limitations, es- pecially as we move into the future and with other fields becoming enmeshed with 
computer usage. The course could integrate some material from such other campus programs as management 
science, economics, philosophy, history, psychology, sociology and so on. A particular relevance of this 
course to a previously-mentioned possible new department of "contemporary issues" is obvious. One,more 
extensive, possibility would be the creation of a kind of "super department" of the three departments--one 
is old, two are new-- history, "contemporary issues" and "futures." The three in unison should serve 
as a focus for studies leading to more practicable plans for dealing in the present and future with the 
various aspects of the impact of technology on man. In summary, the course is proposed not to be a definite 
solution to the problems facing man concerning the applications of computers, but to be a recommended 
approach which is possible now. Some approaches to preparing man to deal with the effects of these systems 
must be taken. The most pressing need is for experience with different approaches. Bibliography Davidson, 
D. and Koenig, E. Computers. New York: John Wiley g Sons, Inc., 1987. Davis, Gordon B. Computer Data 
Processing. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1969. Martin, James and Norman, Adrian. The Computerized 
Society. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1970. The President's Science Advisory Committee. 
Computers in Higher Education. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1987.    
			