
 Thermotaxis Takuji Narumi , Tomohiro Akagawa , Young Ah Seong , Michitaka Hirose Graduate School of 
Engineering, the University of Tokyo Graduate School of Film and New Media, Tokyo University of the Arts 
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, the University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Information Science and Technology, the University of Tokyo   1. Introduction1 To change the spatial 
structures of our living spaces, we usually take an architectural approach. However once such structures 
have been constructed, re-configuring them incurs substantial costs. Reserving the flexibility to change 
spatial design is essential for the effective use of spaces. Our research aims to make spatial design 
flexible. New characteristics are added to an existing space using information technology, so the relationship 
between the space and people within changes. In this paper we propose a method of characterizing the 
space by presenting thermal information. Although thermal sensing is slower in response time and lower 
in resolution than visual and audio sensing, it is suitable for informing users of characteristics gradually, 
without giving a clear border. Moreover, a thermal spot has power to encourage people to gather together. 
By presenting thermal information, we can create a novel type of communication field. 2. Thermotaxis: 
Characterizing the Space by Presenting Thermal Information   Figure 1: Thermotaxis Thermotaxis (Fig.1) 
is a system that creates thermal sensory spots in an open space. The term "Thermotaxis" signifies a movement 
of a living organism in response to heat stimulation. The work displays temperatures in several grades. 
In this system, we use earmuff like wearable devices that provide thermal sensation depending on the 
location of people. By feeling the temperature, people distinguish different thermal areas, though there 
is no visual distinction between them. The system is designed to be controlled by a computer as an operating 
unit via wireless communication, and all electronic modules that control temperature are installed in 
the earmuff. This system consists of several earmuff-like wearable devices and a control unit that controls 
the wearable devices and recognizes their locations. Figure 2 shows the configuration of devices. An 
IEEE 1394 camera with an infrared filter for earmuff tracking is attached to the ceiling above the floor. 
Infrared LEDs are attached to the top of the earmuff device for camera tracking. To build a wearable 
device that displays warm and cool temperatures, we use an Arduino Nano. It controls two Peltier devices 
in each side of the earmuff. It also controls infrared LEDs. There are five heating levels on the Peltier 
device control. Two of them are heating, two of them are cooling and one in the middle is without heating 
or cooling level. The difference in temperature created by these Peltier devices is about 15 degrees 
to 40 degrees. The control unit and the earmuff device communicate via a Zigbee network. If the position 
is detected, the unit determines the heating level according to the thermal field and sends the temperature 
level to the earmuff device. Because the thermal fields are defined by software, we can change the map 
of fields dynamically.  Figure 2: Earmuff Device and System Configuration 3. Visitor Experience A 
thermal spot has power to encourage people to gather together. Like open fires in winter and water places 
in summer, thermal locations have been work as attractive location since early times. We observed visitors 
behavior at the experimental exhibition on December 4th to 8th. At that time, the air temperature is 
about 10 degrees Celcius, so it's cold outside. Most visitors have wandered from place to place to explore 
the difference of the presented thermal information. Over 80% of visitors have experienced the warm area 
and intend to stay there for a long while in the cold conditions. The visibility of other visitors also 
effects how visitors transition through the areas. In the open space, people can see each other. If one 
stays in a particular place, other people may be wonder why he or she is there. So, people influence 
each other by their positions. The result of this effect is that if there is at least one person in a 
warm or slightly warm area, people tend to become close to each other. In other words, people stay by 
the thermal spot.  email: {narumi, hirose}@cyber.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp email: toakmoak@gsfnm.jp email: yabird@hc.ic.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
			