
 TO WHAT EXTENT WILL CASE TOOLS ASSIST USERS IN THE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT? -A CASE STUDY IN ACADEMIC ENVIRONMENT 
Yaw-Chin Ho School of Business Auburn University at Montgomery Montgome~, Alabama 36117 ABSTRACT The 
purpose of this paper is to study the productivity and quality of thirty IS students data flow diagraming 
by hand and by using CASE tools to construct data flow diagrams for two selected cases. The study shows 
that the use of the POSE tool to construct data flow diagrams will improve the students productivity. 
However, the quality of diagrams constructed by the students using CASE tools is not better than the 
quality of diagrams constructed by hand. Appropriate training is necessary if the users are expected 
to use CASE tool technology to improve their productivity as well as quality of the systems development. 
INTRODUCTION During the past five years, many studies have indicated that the use of CASE (Computer-Aided 
Software Engineering) tool technology has become sufficiently mature to produce savings in time and cost, 
in the improvement of productivity and quality of software (Gibson, 1988; Pallato, 1989; Taft, 1988; 
Texas Instruments, 1989). Because of this maturity, hundreds of forward-looking companies have applied 
CASE tools in their software development life cycle (Taft, 1988; Texas Instruments, 1989). It is claimed 
that the success of CASE tools creates a thirty-five percent annual growth in the market for CASE products 
in 1988 (Warner, 1987). Industry analysts project the market for CASE software to grow to nearly $1 billion 
in 1990 (Norman and Nunamaker, 1988). The current generation of information systems is complex and large. 
The need for tools to help in dealing effectively with them in the new age of information is obvious. 
Traditionally, this process has relied upon the artistic and cognitive abilities of designers. It now 
is heavily dependent upon CASE tool technology. Because of completeness and consistency checking and 
standardization and formalism, CASE tool technology can introduce more of an engineering aspect into 
the information systems development process (Norman and Nunamaker, 1988). Even though CASE tools have 
been used for systems development, there is one major question that still remains @1992 ACM 089791-501-1/92/0004/0093 
$1.50 unanswered: To what extent will CASE tool technology assist users in the software development? 
Accordingly, the purpose of this paper is to study the productivity and quality of thirty IS students 
 data flow diagraming by hand and by using CASE tools to construct data flow diagrams for two selected 
cases. In accomplishing this task, the hypotheses to be tested will first be formulated. Secondly, the 
methodology used for the analysis will be described, followed by presentation and evaluation of the results 
of the study. Finally, conclusion and implications of the analysis will be outlined. FOCUS AND HYPOTHESIS 
Many functional parts of CASE tool technology have been identified. Unfortunately, their definitions 
vary with different vendors, professionals and in the literature. Among these definitions, seventeen 
functional parts of the CASE technology have been identified and clearly defined by Norman and Nunamaker 
(Norman and Nunamaker, 1988). In their survey of information systems professionals productivity perceptions 
of CASE technology, Norman and Nunamaker discovered that the data flow diagraming function was given 
as the highest rank among the seventeen functions that made the most contribution to the improvement 
of the respondents productivity. Thus, this study will focus the use of a CASE tool for the data flow 
diagraming function. In order to determine whether or not a CASE tool can improve user s productivity 
and quality of data flow diagrams, the following hypotheses are tested: 1. 2.  Permission urovided 
commercial publication g 3 permission wise, or The time used to construct data flow diagrams by hand 
is the same as the time used by a CASE tool regardless of whether the individual has a prior knowledge 
of modeling techniques. A data flow diagram constructed by hand is of as good quality as a data flow 
diagram constructed by a CASE tool regardless of whether the individual has prior knowledge of modeling 
techniques. to copy without fee that the copies are advantage; the ACM and its date appear, of the Association 
for to republish, requires all or part of this material is granted not made or distributed for direct 
copyright notice and the title of the and notice is given that copying is by Computing Machinery. To 
copy other­ a fee and/or specific permission. METHODOLOGY AND DESIGN Subjects for the study were IS students 
at Auburn University at Montgomery, who studied systems design in the Summer quarter of 1989, and the 
Winter and the Summer quarter of 1990. A total of 34 students participated the study initially, but only 
30 students completed the study requirements. Two cases were selected from systems design books (Amadio, 
1989; Yourdon, 1989). The descriptions and requirements of cases were modified in order to make each 
case have the same degree of difficulty. Each student was asked to construct data flow diagrams for Diagram 
Zero of the current logical model for both cases by hand and by using POSE CASE tools. The POSE (Picture 
Oriented Software Engineering) published by Computer Systems Advisors, Inc., was used because it was 
the only tool available for the design class in the Summer of 1989. The following guidelines were used 
to monitor the study: 1. Each student was given an one hour lecture on data flow diagraming and how to 
use the POSE tool in diagraming. 2. Each student then constructed data flow diagrams for two cases on 
two separate trials. If a student constructed the diagrams by hand for one case, she/he must use the 
POSE tool for the other. 3. The time used to complete the model either by hand or the POSE tool were 
recorded by an administrator. Timing began when the student accepted the case from the administrator 
and stopped when the student indicated that she/he had completed the model. 4. When the POSE tool was 
used, the students were asked to use the built-in functions in the POSE tool to check the consistency. 
 5. For simplicity, only one criterion is used to measure the quality of diagrams. That is presentable 
data flow diagrams were scored on their completeness, correctness, consistency and clearness, 6. For 
each student, two items of data were collected: the time for the completion of the case, measured in 
hours and a score that measures quality clearness, consistency, completeness, and  correctness of the 
model constructed. When a presentable solution was completed, a numericat value 1 was given. For every 
substandard item discovered in each of the areas of clearness, consistency, completeness and correctness, 
one half of a point was added. Thus, the maximum score was three and the minimum was one. Since this 
evaluation was done subjectively, the scores were evaluated by one person in order to avoid inconsistency. 
7. No student had prior experience using a CASE tool. However, some students had prior knowledge of data 
flow diagraming techniques. But, a student who did not have prior knowledge of diagraming techniques 
was regarded as an experienced after she/he had completed one case for the study. ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
Student s t-tests for the mean time and the mean score were performed and are summarized in Table 1 and 
Table 2. The question of whether a CASE tool can improve the user s productivity may be answered by the 
following analyses: 1. The t-test on mean time for completion for all students indicated that the time 
used to construct data flow diagrams by hand and by using the POSE tool are significantly different (p 
<= O). It shows that the use of the POSE tool had made a 770 improvement in the student s productivity. 
 2. If the student had a prior knowledge of  diagraming techniques, the improvement is even higher when 
the POSE tool is used. The average time for the students who used the POSE tool with prior knowledge 
of diagraming was 1.0432 hours as compared to the 1.6925 hours for the students who used the POSE tool 
without prior knowledge of diagraming techniques. This represents a 70% improvement in productivity. 
3. However, in the case of diagraming by hand, it was found no significant difference in -the productivity 
between the students who had prior knowledge of diagraming techniques and who did not have prior knowledge 
of diagraming techniques. 4. When considering all students who did not have prior knowledge of diagraming 
techniques, it was found that the POSE tool had increased the student s productivity. The average time 
savings were 0.56 hours or a 25~0 increased in productivity. This also implies that CASE tools will help 
the beginner in learning diagraming  94 techniques faster. 5. Similarly, when considering all students 
who had prior knowledge of diagraming techniques, it showed that the POSE tool had increased the student 
s productivity even more. The average time savings were 0.92 hours or a 50 %0increased in productivity. 
TABLE 1 STUDENT S t-TEST ON MEAN TIME Descriptions Mean t-Test DF P-value . _ 1. All Students By Hand 
2,0793 By POSE 1.9333 7.2727 58 0.0000  2. By POSE No-Knowledge 1.6925 Pre-Knowledge 1.0432 7.8467 28 
0.0000 3. By Hand No-Knowledge 2.2463 Pre-Knowledge 1.9596 1.3997 28 0.1725 4. No-Knowledge By Hand 
2.2463 By POSE 1.6925 2.2681 14 0.0397 5. Pre-Knowledge By Hand 1.9596 By POSE 1.0432 9.1082 42 0.0000 
 TABLE 2 STUDENT S t-TEST ON MEAN SCORE Descriptions Mean t-Test DF P-value . _ 1. All Students By Hand 
1.9333 By POSE 1.9667 -.1771 58 0.8601 2. By POSE No-Knowledge 2.5000 Pre-Knowledge 1.8636 1.3192 28 
0.1978 3. By Hand No-Knowledge 2.3750 Pre-Knowledge 1.7727 2.0836 28 0.0465 4. No-Knowledge By Hand 
2.3750 By POSE 2.2500 0.4035 14 0.6927 5. Pre-Knowledge By Hand 1.7727 By POSE 1.8636 -.4124 42 0.6822 
 The above analyses clearly indicate that the use of the POSE tool did indeed improve the student s 
productivity in diagraming. Can a CASE tool improve the quality of the user s work as well? The quality 
of diagrams is highly dependent on the artistic abilities of individuals. In this regard, an individual 
s talent, training and experience will play an important role in obtaining and improving such ability. 
It should be very interesting to learn whether CASE tool technology will be able to enhance an individual 
s artistic abilities. Especially, from a training perspective, it is important to know whether CASE tool 
technology will improve the beginning user s quality as much as it improves the user s productivity. 
The following analyses based on Table 2 statistics may provide the answers. 1. There was no significant 
difference in the mean score between diagraming by hand and by using the POSE tool for all students. 
This implies that the POSE tool did not have impact on the quality of diagrams. 2. In addition, when 
considering the diagrams constructed by the POSE tool, the mean score for the students with prior knowledge 
of diagraming techniques is not significantly different from the mean score for the students without 
prior knowledge of diagraming techniques. 3. It is ~noteworthy that prior knowledge of diagraming techniques 
did improve the quality when the diagrams were constructed by hand. The average score of 1.7727 for the 
students with prior knowledge of diagraming techniques is statistically better than the average score 
of 2.375 for the students without prior knowledge of diagraming techniques. 4. Among the students who 
did not have prior knowledge of diagraming techniques, no difference was found between the mean score 
by hand and by using the POSE tool. 5. Similarly, among the students who had prior knowledge of diagraming 
techniques, no statistical difference was found between the mean score by hand and by using the POSE 
tool.  Obviously, the POSE tool did not improve the beginning user s quality in diagraming regardless 
of whether the students had prior knowledge of diagraming techniques. CONCLUSION This study has shown 
that the use of the POSE tool to construct data flow diagrams will improve the student s productivity. 
In fact, if the students had prior knowledge of diagraming techniques, their productivity could be improved 
substantially. Based on the study, for students 95 who had prior knowledge of diagraming techniques, 
it took an average of two hours to construct the required data flow diagrams by hand, but it only needed 
one hour by using the POSE tool. The average time savings were 50%. This finding seems to be consistent 
with several existing studies and reports. For example, a survey conducted by Voeleker indicated that 
experts estimated that CASE tools improve programming team productivity by fifteen to forty percent in 
one case and an average cost savings of seventy percent for the maintenance phase alone in another case 
(Voeleker, 1988). To get a job done quickly does not ensure that the job is done well. In general, it 
may be easy for an individual to learn how to operate a CASE tool quickly, but it is not easy for an 
individual to learn how to skillfully operate the tool in a short period of time. The quality in diagraming 
by using a CASE tool, must rely in part on the user s understanding of the basic concepts and operational 
procedures of the tool. Since the students in this study were all the first time users of the POSE tool 
and their understanding of the concepts and the operational procedures of the tool was limited. The quality 
of diagrams constructed by the students using CASE tool should not be expected to be better than the 
quality by hand. Furthermore, it must be recognized that CASE tool technology is not merely the latest 
fad of industry software designers. It represents a philosophy for information systems development that 
provides a faster and more comprehensive method for dealing with changing information needs (Taft, 1988). 
Appropriate training is necessary if users are to be expected to use CASE tool technology to improve 
their productivity as well as the quality of the systems. Finally, it should be noted that this study 
was performed as a pilot project. Its design and methodology were not structured as rigorous. l%e measurement 
was subjective, the sample size was somewhat small, and only one CASE tool was used. An objective measurement, 
a larger sample size, and more than one CASE tool will be used in a well structured follow-up study. 
REFERENCES Amadio, William, Systems development A Practicat Approach, Santa Cruz, California: Mitchell 
Publishing, Inc., 1989. Case, A. F., Jr., Information Systems Development Principles of Computer-Aided 
Software Engineering, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1986. Eisner, Howard, Computer-Aided Systems Engineerin&#38; 
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1988. Forte, G., In Search of the Integrated Environment, CASE Outlook, March/April 
1989, pp. 5-12. Gibson, M., Implementing the Promise , Daumation, 35(3) 1988, pp. 65-67. Martin, James 
and Carma McClure, Structured Technictues the Basis for CASE, Revised Ed., New Jersey Prentice-Hall, 
1988. McClure, Carma, CASE IS Software Automation, New Jersey Prentice-Hall, 1989. Norman, R. and J. 
Nunamaker, An Empirical Study of Information Systems Professionals productivity Perceptions , Proceedings 
of the Ninth International Conference on Information Systems, Minn=polis> Minnesota, 1988, pp. 111-116. 
Pallatto, J, CASE Speeds Unum s Development Effort , PC Week, February 6, 1989, pp. 39,47. Taft, D, Navy 
Begins Work on Software Engineering Project , Government Comtmter News, December 5, 1988, pp. 47-48. 
Texas Instruments, Inc., Information Engineering Facility: Methodology Overview, Piano, Texas: Texas 
Instruments Incorporated, 1989. Texas Instruments, Inc., Information Engineering Facility: A Totally 
Integrated CASE Environment, Piano, Texas: Texas Instruments, Inc., 1989. Texas Instruments, The Integrated 
CASE Satellite Seminar: Methodology and Technology for a new Generation of Information Systems , May 
16, 1989. Voeleker, J., Automating Software Proceed with Caution , IEEE Spectrum, 25(7), 1988, pp. 27-29. 
Warner, E., Software Design Packages Coming into Their Own , Infor World, 9(27), 1987, p. 17. Yourdon, 
Edwmd, Modem Structured Analysis, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1989. 96
			