
 TOWARDS A MASC APPLIANCES-BASED EDUCATIONAL PARADIGM Sandeep Chatterjee sandeep@lcs.mit.edu Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Laboratory for Computer Science 545 Technology Square, NE43-505 Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA Keywords: educational computing, instructional paradigm, computer architecture, multiple 
modalities ABSTRACT As society moves forth into the Information Age and computers become increasingly 
important, educators are faced with the dilemma of shrinking budgets and the need to purchase expensive 
computer equipment. This large investment on the part of schools is compounded by the rapid pace of technological 
advancement in the computer industry which makes computers obsolete within a few years. This paper describes 
MASC, a credit card-sized computer device which can be externally connected to educational appliances 
to realize a fully functioning computer system with that appliance providing the user interface. We propose 
to leverage the ultra-portability of MASC cards to provide an economically viable school- and home-computing 
solution. By treating MASC cards as consumables, which are owned by students, schools relieve themselves 
from having to invest in rapidly changing computer equipment and instead, must only purchase slower changing 
educational appliances and peripherals. INTRODUCTION Globalization and the increasingly competitive 
landscape of today's society is renewing interest in the widespread use of computers as an educational 
tool. It has long been shown that people's ability to learn, to retain, and to readily use their knowledge 
is enhanced through an interactive approach to teaching; in essence, people learn by doing [I]. Unfortunately, 
as the number of students per classroom continues to increase, educators' ability to provide one-on- 
one instruction is dwindling. Educational researchers are heralding computers as the savior. The holes 
left by the status quo method of paper and pencil education, computers will fill. The dream is that computers 
running interactive software will allow all students to receive one-on-one instruction no matter how 
large classrooms get. Furthermore, the use of computers and visualization software will facilitate students' 
learning of Permission to make digital/hard copy of all or part of this work tbr personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed Ibr profit or commercial 
advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given 
that copying is by permission of ACM. Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a the. (t> 1998 ACM 0-89791-969-6/98/0002 
3.50 complex mathematical and scientific concepts while the use of word processors will instill pride 
in creating professional looking documents [5]. Homework quality will also improve as students using 
computers to do their homework tend to spend more time on their assignments than non-users [6]. Although 
the use of computers in education is compelling, a viable educational computing paradigm has yet to emerge. 
Presently, there have been two educational computing paradigms suggested in the literature: using desktop 
computers and using portable laptops [1]. The desktop computer paradigm suggests using standalone or 
networked desktop computers as computer stations available for educators and students. The relatively 
low cost (as compared with laptops) of desktop machines makes them attractive as educational computers, 
but their large size disallows placing more than just a few within a classroom or laboratory. Moreover, 
their size and weight preclude students from taking them home when needed. The portable laptop paradigm 
proposes using laptops for providing computation capability in schools. This approach is an improvement 
over the desktop paradigm because the smaller size and increased portability of laptops enable moving 
them from classroom to classroom and allow students and educators to take them home. However, laptops 
suffer because they are typically more expensive than their desktop counterparts and are very fragile 
(primarily because of their display screens). Unfortunately, neither desktops nor laptops are sufficient 
as a complete educational computing paradigm. There exists a need for a low-cost, easy-to-use, and highly 
portable educational computing device. Such a device could be privately purchased by each student (possibly 
with school subsidy) and would serve as both a school-and home-computing solution. With a computer for 
each student, education could become more computer-driven (rather than textbook-driven). in this paper, 
we introduce our vision and implementation of a complete educational computing solution. We begin by 
describing our approach and the underlying hardware and software architecture. Next, we discuss an educational 
paradigm based on our approach and present a potentially viable economic model. We conclude by recapping 
the economic and strategic benefits of our approach. 112  but also the education and entertainment 
of the family. For example, in the evening, when the student is not using her MASC card, her father may 
download tax preparation software onto the card and prepare the family's taxes; or, her motber may run 
a Web browser and gather data for her own work. Having described the MASC approach to educational computing, 
we next present its underlying hardware and software architecture. THE MASC ARCHITECTURE MASC realizes 
our vision for a new educational computing paradigm. It is essentially comprised of the five following 
components: MASC computer and I/O modules  MASC-based educational appliances  Software environment 
 Internal (school-wide) network  Gateways to the external network infrastructure  MASC Computer and 
UO Cards MASC computer cards form the computation hardware platlbrm of our approach. Each card synthesizes 
the properties of "smart cards" and PCMCIA cards (PC cards) and contains within it microprocessor(s) 
and memory, and implements a common interface with all appliances. Computer cards may also contain network 
adapters and non- volatile storage. Microprocessor. Any standard microprocessor can be used as the computation 
engine for MASC. Different implementations may emphasize different performance characteristics, e.g., 
speed versus power consumption, to suit different applications. The openness of the architecture to competitive 
solutions is one of its key strengths. Memo~' and Non-Volatile Storage. Each MASC computer card will 
contain memory for use by the processor and may contain some non-volatile storage. Again, the type and 
amount of memory and storage can be tailored to meet the demands of different educational class levels. 
For example, 2 "a and 3 rJ graders may be given x486-based MASC cards with 8Mbytes of memory, whereas 
4 a~ and 5 a' graders are given x586-based cards with 16 Mbytes of memory. Network Adapter. Any network 
can be used as the vehicle for communication between different MASC cards. Accordingly, different implementations 
may represent different combinations of processor and local network architecture. Interface Block. The 
interface block allows communication between each MASC card and the connector socket on the host appliance 
(e.g., television). When a MASC card is first connected to an appliance, the interface block deciphers 
the type of the appliance and how to communicate with it. After this. its primary task is to send data 
and commands between the MASC card and the appliance socket. MASC Input/Output (I/O) cards allow alternate 
forms of user interaction than those already supported by the host appliance. For example, since most 
television sets do not come equipped with keyboards, a MASC keyboard module can be connected to one of 
the connector slots on a MASC- based television set. Other MASC I/O modules include network adapters, 
hard disks, joysticks, and microphones. MASC.Based Appliances MASC-based appliances are standard educational 
appliances that have been outfitted with a MASC appliance- side backplane module. Appliance-side backplane 
modules consist of a set of connector sockets into which MASC cards can be connected in order to electrically 
couple the MASC cards to one another and to the host appliance. Appliance- side backplane modules support 
multiple computer and frO cards. Software Environment A thin operating system (OS) runs atop each MASC 
computer card. The OS exports not only the computer resources but also provides high-level "hooks" into 
the appliance-specific components of the current host appliance and any connected I/O cards. Application 
programs can use these hooks to communicate with the host appliance and I/O cards. In addition to the 
OS, the software environment also consists of application software. These will typically be comprised 
of educational tools, such as mathematics software packages, and may also include so-called software 
agents which monitor the student's progress and guides and motivates him.  The Internal School-Wide 
Network The internal school-wide network is potentially optional. The small size and low weight of MASC 
cards make them highly portable which can be leveraged to somewhat reduce the value and importance of 
an internal school-wide network. For example, a teacher may track the progress of a student by asking 
him to bring his MASC card to her instead of her remotely logging into the student's card. However, 
if possible, it is advisable to have an internal school-wide network onto which each student's MASC card 
can connect. The connectivity allowed by this school-wide network will provide a means for: Exchanging 
application-specific information. That is, MASC cards connected to the school-wide network would be able 
to transfer data and commands between one another, either for communication or to reap synergistic value. 
 Replacing and upgrading software. The internal network is a convenient vehicle for augmenting or replacing 
the software platform on MASC cards.  Accessing external network infrastructure, such as the lnternet. 
 114  asked to provide funds for 50% of the cost of a computer card, each student would need to provide 
$75 per year, or just over $2 per week (assuming a 36 month school year). Clearly, schools can increase 
or decrease the amount of school subsidy in line with the socio-economic realities of that particular 
school district. It is important to note however that some sort of financial commitment by students may 
foster ~eater care of MASC computer cards. When analyzing the socio-economic effects of asking students 
to partially fund the purchase of MASC computer cards it is important to remember that the benefit or 
value of these cards extends far beyond the education of a single student. Since MASC cards implement 
a common interface with all appliances (education or otherwise), a single MASC computer card will not 
only be useful for the education of the student, but also for the education and entertainment of the 
family. Moreover, when a student decides to purchase a new MASC computer card, the old one can be used 
together with the new one to create a parallel computer system, or the old one can be left connected 
to a home appliance, whereby adding "intelligence" to it at zero marginal cost. We believe that the value 
of implementing a MASC-based educational paradigm, combined with the intrinsic economic and strategic 
benefits of the MASC architecture, far outweighs the associated costs. CONCLUSIONS This paper presented 
the MASC computer architecture and an educational paradigm based upon it. MASC addresses the need for 
an educational computing paradigm which allows multiple educational appliances per student, yet does 
so in a way that is economical by creating a core computational platform that can be quickly and easily 
connected to different appliances, at school or at home. Once a MASC computer card is connected to an 
educational appliance, the system is essentially a fully functioning computer system with that appliance 
providing the user interface. The hope is that a diverse set of educational appliances providing multi-sensory 
stimuli will make the learning process more enjoyable whereby allowing students to learn more quickly, 
and to retain and recall their knowledge more effectively. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author would like to 
thank the many individuals who have contributed to this research through their helpful discussions and 
insight. The research described herein was supported in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency 
under contract No. DABT-63-95--C-0060 (monitored by U.S. Army, Fort Huachuca), and in part by a National 
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. REFERENCES 1. Anderson, J.R. and J.B. Reiser. "The 
LISP Tutor" Byte Magazine, April 1985, pp. 8-14. 2. Bertrand, D., et al. "Laptop Schools: A Paradigm 
Analysis". Illinois State University, College of Education,http://coe,ilstu.edu/rpriegle/eaf524/projects/la 
ptop/iaptop.htm, 1996. 3. Chatterjee, S., "The First 10 Feet: The Missing Story for Encouraging User 
Investment in Universal Broadband Connectivity", in The First 100 Feet: Options for Internet and Broadband 
Access, D. Hurley and J. Keller, Editors. 1998, MIT Press: Cambridge. 4. Chatterjee, S. "The ModuleC 
Network Architecture: A Novel Paradigm of Computing Through Information Appliances". in Proceedings of 
IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics. 1997. Singapore.  5. Franklin, S., Breathing Life 
Into Reluctant Writers: The Seattle Public Schools Laptop Project. The Writing Notebook, 1991.8(4): p. 
40--42. 6. Ziegler, Y.M., and Siegel, L. "Laptop Computers and the Learning Disabled Student: A Study 
of the Value of Portable Computers to the Writing Progress of Students with Fine Motor Problems". February 
1990, Canada Research Services, Toronoto Board of Education: Ontario, Canada. i16  
			