
 Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, and 
A. F. Seila TRANSPORTATION APPLICATIONS Paul T. Fishbum Kevin M. Taaffe SABRE Deeision Technologies 
P.O. BOX 619616 MD 4432 Dallas/Fort Worth Airport, TX 75261-9616, U.S.A. ABSTRACT 2 BENEFITS OF SIMULATION 
This tutorial describes the benefits of using simulation to evaluate the performance of transportation 
facilities Simulation is a valuable decision support tool for and systems. SABRE Decision Technologies 
presents evaluating transportation facilities or systems. There specific examples in which simulation 
analysis has been are many reasons why one should consider simulation applied to the transportation industry. 
in making decision in the transportation industry. 1 INTRODUCTION SDT simulation projects evaluate the 
flow of vehicles, passengers, bags, and aircraft in the airport SABRE Decision Technologies (SDT) is 
a consulting environment and pedestrian and other vehicle traffic in and systems development firm of 
over 2500 operations the non-airport environment. In the airport research/management science, industrial 
engineering environment, passengers travel in different numbers, at and computer science professionals 
specializing in cost different speeds, and are serviced in a number of ways reduction, revenue enhancemen~ 
quality improvement in facilities depending upon their origin and and strategic decision evaluation for 
the transportation destination, citizenship, travel class, etc. Using and related industries. Based in 
Fort Worth, Texas, the concepts such as queuing theory or mathematical firm was originally the Operations 
Research department equations to determine flow are intractable as the for American Airlines and began 
providing products combinations of characteristics for a passenger are and consulting services worldwide 
in 1988 as American numerous. Simulation allows SDT to assign specillc Airlines Decision Technologies 
(AADT). In early characteristics to each passenger and to allow the 1994, the company reorganized as 
SDT underneath The passenger to undergo different processes depending SABRE Group of AMR Corporation 
to consolidate the upon those characteristics. Similarly, simulation can corporation s software development 
and consulting capture statistics on the variability of these services into one organization. characteristics 
on an hour-to-hour, day-to-day, or seasonal basis. During the past ten years, SDT has extensively applied 
simulation to transportation problems. The first Similarly, aircraft have many characteristics or section 
describes the benefits of using simulation to parameters that dictate how each one moves on the model 
the various transportation areas that SDT has airfield or the airspace. Some of these characteristics 
studied. Examples of these transportation areas include include size, airline, weight, and engine type. 
These passenger and baggage flow through airport terminals, aircraft characteristics affect how an aircraft 
responds to aircraft movement in the airspace and airfield, and the rules and procedures for taxiways, 
runways, and pedestrian traffic flow within monorail and people various decision points in the airspace. 
In addition, mover systems. The following sections present project safety factors require aircraft separation 
for wake work in the above three mess in which simulation vortex, runway usage, and airspace routings. 
assisted in makhg statistically reliable decisions. 22 Transportation Another advantage of using simulation 
is the ability to trace entities--passengers, bags, pedestrian traffic, etc.--through a system of multiple 
processes and operations. In most situations, the processes an entity undergoes through a transportation 
system are not independent. For example, if an entity incurs a long processing time in one area, it will 
most likely experience an increased time in the facility. Other entities in queue will also be affected, 
and any one entity may require expeditious treatment at the next processing area in order to meet a processing 
requirement or standard. Also, if entities occupy the entire queuing area, additional entities may be 
held at an upline processing station until ample queuing area is available. From this example, one can 
observe that a single occurrence in a facility can affect the upline and downline areas as well. These 
rippling effects are impossible to capture in pure mathematical terms because of the various interactions 
that are possible. As simulation will process each action and adjust depending upon the outcome of that 
process, the upline and downline effects are captured for all possibilities. There are also excellent 
economic reasons SDT encourages clients to study transportation issues with simulation. Simulation analysis 
can be performed with minimal risk to clients. By performing simulation analysis prior to construction 
of the transportation facility or system, changes can be made to the system design at a fraction of the 
construction cost. Also, simulation is very flexible for providing what-if analyses with little further 
development. Once a simulation model of the base operation is built, the client will spend minimal resources 
evaluating numerous alternatives, such as increasing demand levels, changing passenger, baggage, or aircraft 
flow, and increasing or decreasing the size of the transportation facilities. 3 PASSENGER/ BAGGAGE FLOW 
IN AIRPORT TERMINALS The Berlin Brandenburg Flughafen Holding GmbH (BBF) is responsible for planning 
and operations at the three existing commercial airports in Berlin: Tegel, Tempelhof, and Schonefeld. 
During the last 17 years, Tegel was the primary airport for the former West Berlin. Currently, Tegel 
is Berlin s busiest airport and is approaching capacity. Tempelhof, former West Berlin s older and smaller 
airport, is limited to small and low-noise aircraft and general aviation. Schtmefeld previously served 
East Berlin as the hub of East Germany s Interflug air carrier. Expansion measures planned for Schonefeld 
included an Interim West Applications Terminal that will serve charter and intercontinental flights. 
SDT was selected by the BBF to analyze the proposed design of the Interim West Terminal at Berlin Schonefeld 
Airport. SDT was tasked to analyze passenger and baggage flows within the terminal. The Interim West 
Terminal for Schonefeld is planned to accommodate the predicted shortfall in existing airport capacity 
in the Berlin airport system. The existing Berlin airport system will not be able to handle the expected 
increase in air traffic demand and will require a long-term solution of an international airport with 
significantly greater capacity than the existing airports. In the short term, the Interim West Terminal 
expansion at Schonefeld was the most practical way to add capacity to the Berlin airport system that 
is constrained by a lack of terminal facilities. The BBF wanted to ensure that the design of the Interim 
West Terminal maximized both passenger and baggage throughput in the facility. Using simulation and an 
accompanying animation, SDT evaluated the performance of the terminal from a passenger and baggage flow 
perspective, identified bottlenecks in the terminal design, and suggested modifications to improve passenger 
and baggage flows. For the Schonefeld analysis, SDT developed a discrete event simulation model of the 
Interim West Terminal that accounted for all passenger and baggage movements through the facility. Using 
this simulation model, SDT introduced two possible levels of passenger and associated baggage throughput 
into the terminal based on the anticipated flight schedule. By modeling the individual passenger and 
baggage movements through the terminal, SDT identified areas of the terminal in which bottlenecks and 
over-crowding occurred. To alleviate the congestion and improve facility throughput, SDT performed a 
number of additional analyses to verify recommendations of staffing and procedural changes. Some of these 
recommendations included: dynamically assigning the check-in positions, opening lower-level departure 
lounges simultaneously with check-in counters for departing flights, and increasing outbound passport 
control positions. In addition, SDT determined that the planned bagroom was not appropriately sized. 
Subsequently the BBF was able to revisit their bagroom design before construction on the facility began. 
Also, the BBF revised procedures for terminal operations. 24 Fishburn AIRSPACE/ AIRFIELD ANALYSES The 
recent Akport Master Plan Update for Spokane International Airport (SIA) recommended the construction 
of a new runway to meet forecasted traffic demand. However, the Master Plan did not resolve possible 
interference of SIA runways with Fairchild Air Force Base (FAFB). Since FAFB and SIA are only 4 miles 
apart, the airports share some final approach flight paths. The proposed runway location is between SIA 
and FAFB, bringing SIA flight tracks in potential conflict with the FAFB runway. In addition, Felts Field 
is located approximately 11 miles from SIA with runways parallel to SIAS primary runway. SDT performed 
an airspace simulation analysis of these three airports--SIA, FAFB, and Felts--to quantify delays associated 
with traffic forecasts and to evaluate the proposed runway alignment at SIA. For this project, SDT used 
the FANs Airport and Airspace Simulation Model, SIMMOD, for its ability to model multiple airports and 
airspace conflicts. Simulation modeling was the tool of choice to study the joint use airspace plan for 
Spokane and to ensure the airspace will accommodate current and future traffic demand for both Spokane 
International Airport and Fairchild Air Force Base. SIMMOD provides measures of aircraft delay in the 
airspace and on the ground, which can be used to determine available capacity. SDT developed a model 
of the terminal airspace, including airfields for SIA, FAFB, and Felts Field. After building the model, 
SDT valklated the model by comparing the simulation output to data collected on­site. Data typically 
used for validation include airspace travel time, taxitimes, and departure queuing statistics. SIMMOD 
requires many parameters that describe the modeled airports and the aircraft that use those airports. 
Since many of the parameters and data input for a SIMMOD study remain constant over each scenario, a 
number of scenarios can be evaluated quickly. For example, the valklated model was used to determine 
the impacts of future SIA traffic (year 201 O) and the future FAFB mission on the existing airspace system 
in instrument conditions, or low visibility, This analysis of forecast traffic determined that the airspace 
delays were within acceptable levels, thus the existing airfleldhirspace system would operate within 
capacity. SDT dso evaluated two airfield alternatives. First, a proposed connector taxiway between SIA 
and FAFB could be used in severe weather conditions. Even though the airfields are very close, there 
are often times and Taaffe when one is fogged in while the other is open for operations. Results on taxi 
distance, taxitime, and gate arrival delays were presented to SIA, FAA, airlines, and private company 
operators to ensure the costs of the taxiway construction are offset by the benefits to the airport users. 
Second, the new runway alignment proposed in the Master Plan Update was analyzed to determine the gain 
in capacity it will provide. Also, the results showed that the airspace structure will accommodate the 
excess SIA traffic without negatively impacting FAFB operations. 5 MONORAIL/ PEOPLE MOVER SYSTEMS Las 
Vegas recently experienced a significant increase in hotel and casino construction. As each new hotel 
opens, Las Vegas receives more and more tourists, each wanting to visit the different hotels and casinos 
on the Strip. In an effort to improve pedestrian access between casinos and hotels, some neighboring 
casinos have entered into partnerships by building light rail shuttle systems. Although there are two 
small systems currently in place, each system provides very limited capacity. When MGM Grand and Bally 
s decided to be the next group to build a light rail system, they envisioned having a system that will 
be a main source of transport between the two hotels. VSL and Gensler &#38; Associates Architects contracted 
with MGM Grand/B ally s Monorail Corporation to design and build the monorail system. In May 1994, VSL 
and Gensler asked SDT to assist in evaluating the performance of the monorail design prior to construction. 
The two-train shuttle rail system has two platform stations, each station containing two areas for train 
loading and unloading. From the MGM Grand and Bally s monorail stations, customers reach the respective 
hotel and casino via lower levels that have access to shopping areas and parking garages. SDT was responsible 
for evaluating monorail system performance in two phases. Phase I concentrated on ensuring the monorail 
system would provide a sufficient level of service for all activity at the platform stations. This evaluation 
included validating the station designs, quantifying system performance during peak usage, and identifying 
any customer bottleneck areas at the stations. Phase II concentrated on ensuring MGM Grand and Bally 
s provide enough shopping and corridor space in the lower levels for customers to walk between the casinos 
and the monorail. SDT modeled all customer movements and operations between the casinos and the monorail 
Transportation stations. After modeling the base operation, SDT identified the areas where customers 
did not have the required space for walking or queuing. Through simulation, SDT quickly ran new scenarios 
with different parameters and compared each scenario to the base operation. SDT found that the monorail 
system provides sufficient throughput to accommodate expected customer demand for traveling between MGM 
Grand and Bally s. While trains experienced longer than anticipated dwell times at each station, the 
monorail system still had sufficient capacity. SDT S analysis assisted MGM Grand in deciding to provide 
alternative access to and from the MGM Grand shopping level in the form of additional escalators and 
stairs. Various escalator speeds were simulated to observe the increase in ridership on the monorail, 
and to distribute the flow and passenger occupancy levels evenly between the shopping areas and the monorail 
stations. Based on the analysis, MGM Grand selected an escalator speed that provided an efficient and 
safe monorail system. SUMMARY The consulting projects described above represent typical transportation 
issues that lend themselves to simulation modeling. SDT still encounters people in the industry that 
do not realize the benefits simulation brings to transportation planning. The response is significantly 
different from the planning personnel who have invested in simulation studies. Planning personnel have 
saved millions in construction costs by appropriately sizing a transportation facility or accurately 
assessing the requirements for runways and taxiways. COMPANY BIOGRAPHY SDT S Transportation Planning 
Group works with architectural/engineering firms, transportation firms, airport authorities, and airlines 
to develop feasible, cost­effective designs and operational policies for airports and other transportation 
facilities. Our consulting services combine an interdisciplinary approach with leading-edge technology 
to provide our clients with better decision-making information, thus allowing them to improve operational 
efficiency, forecast expansion requirements, enhance the level of customer service, and reduce costs. 
The group has extensive experience evaluating both airspace/airfield and terminal designs as well as 
determining operational solutions for international Applications transportation facilities. Our analyses 
include not only detailed statistical evaluations, but also graphical animations that provide clients 
with a dynamic representation of demand flowing through the facility. Specific airspace and airfield 
expertise includes analyses of runway configurations, taxiway structures, air traffic control procedures, 
airspace route structures, and gating constraints. Specific terminal and landside expertise includes 
analyses of the entire terminal facility and its subcomponents, such as ticket counters, security screening 
operations, passport control operations, baggage handling/sortation systems, passenger lounges, immigration 
and customs facilities, terminal curbside operations, and people-mover systems. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES PAUL 
T. FISHBURN is a Senior Consultant in the Transportation Planning Group of SDT. His primary responsibilities 
include leadlng the development of simulation and animation models. He received a B.S. and M.S. in Management 
Science from Penn State University. KEVIN M. TAAFFE is a Senior Consultant in the Transportation Planning 
Group of SDT. HIS primary responsibilities include serving as a Project Manager and assisting in simulation 
and animation development. He received a B.S. and M.S. in Industrial Engineering from University of Illinois-Urbana/Champaign. 
 
			