
 Tulane Faculty Symposium on Digital Trends: An experiment in instructional technology and outreach 
Ariana French Tulane University Innovative Learning Center New Orleans, Louisiana 70118 00 1 504 862 
8594 afrench@tulane.edu ABSTRACT Tulane Faculty Symposium on Digital Trends: An experiment in instructional 
technology and outreach In many universities, instructional technology groups struggle with creating 
new opportunities for collaboration with faculty. Nonexistent or infrequent communication, overburdened 
workload, and lack of active outreach and resources prevent the full and appropriate utilization of instructional 
technology teams. At Tulane University, these challenges are being addressed through a multi-faceted 
program designed to bring instructional technology and faculty into a mutually beneficial partnership. 
One aspect of this outreach program, the Tulane Faculty Symposium on Digital Trends, was specifically 
designed to introduce faculty to the instructional technology group and instructional new media topics 
through discussion-based sessions on current technology trends. This program was launched in March 2007, 
and the response from campus faculty has been overwhelmingly positive. Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 [Computing Milieux]: Computer uses in education collaborative learning, computer-assisted instruction, 
computer­managed instruction, distance learning.  General Terms Documentation, Performance, Theory. 
 Keywords Faculty, outreach, Web 2.0, Training, Documentation, Workshop, Communication, Education, Instructional, 
Technology, Podcasting, Plagiarism, Mobile, Classroom, Wikis, Blogs, Weblogs. Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided 
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7 10, 
2007, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010...$5.00. Linda Wright Tulane 
University Innovative Learning Center New Orleans, Louisiana 70118 00 1 504 862 8594  wright@tulane.edu 
1. INTRODUCTION The Innovative Learning Center (ILC) at Tulane University is the principal group of instructional 
technologists and web-based application developers on Tulane University s Uptown campus. The ILC works 
in collaboration with faculty and administrators to develop applications and web sites that meet institutional 
and curricular goals. 1.1 History of Instructional Technology at Tulane University In 1999, the Tulane 
Provost created and supported the Academic Centers for Learning Research and Technology (ACLRT). The 
staff was comprised of one manager and three Instructional Technologists by the end of that year. The 
center s mission was to provide instructional technology services for Tulane faculty to enhance the teaching 
and research experience. With a change in Provost in 2001, ACLRT became an independent Tulane Center 
and adopted a media production group of two people, for a total of seven employees. In 2002, ACLRT became 
the Innovative Learning Center (ILC) and experienced another shift in organization structure by being 
moved to directly report to the university s CIO. In 2003, the ILC merged with the university s five-person 
web team to become a larger Innovative Learning Center with a staff of twelve. Between then and now, 
the ILC s mission has changed slightly to include the support of learning as a focus, along with support 
for teaching and research. 1.2 Identifying a Need for Outreach Instructional technology groups in higher 
education have suffered historically from being misunderstood. Traditional technology teams may not understand 
the pedagogical aspects of instructional technology, and faculty do not always understand the breadth 
of technological knowledge that instructional technologists bring to the table. The result is too often 
a high involvement in instructional technology initiatives by a small set of tech-savvy faculty, but 
a poor rate of utilization by other instructors. Without a concerted effort on the part of instructional 
technologists and their administrators, there is little to change these institutional misperceptions. 
 2. THE CAMPUS CONTEXT The climate at Tulane University is fairly typical in its utilization of instructional 
technology. The ILC was stretched thin in its dedicated resources on administrative projects, and lacked 
an ongoing, regular dialogue and outreach program with faculty on campus. Services beyond the ILC s support 
of Blackboard course management software were not well known. Prior efforts at outreach and communication 
resulted in existing faculty collaborations and increased visibility on campus. Several years ago, the 
ILC published a weekly newsletter which outlined current events, tech tips, and ILC news, and was distributed 
to interested subscribers. News and events were also posted to the main web site for the ILC, which was 
then the main distribution point for workshop and Blackboard information. Following Hurricane Katrina 
and its devastating effects upon the campus, such outreach efforts were discontinued (or not renewed), 
and an increased focus upon large projects consumed many of the ILC s resources. Among these projects 
were the redesign of the entire Technology Services web site and an upgraded Blackboard installation 
and hosting contract. This required heavy training of both instructional technologists and campus faculty. 
Numerous other projects also demanded the resources of the ILC, including a large community-based service 
learning project, an online ticketing system for the campus theatre community, and the ongoing maintenance 
of the campus public safety web site. While these projects and many others were necessary to meet the 
institutional goals of the university, the dialogue between the ILC and faculty faltered as a result. 
As the university regrouped and reorganized following Hurricane Katrina, the ILC recognized the need 
to increase its visibility on campus and foster additional dialogue and more frequent communication with 
its two main client groups: faculty and administrators. To meet this need, Linda Wright, Director of 
Instructional Technology, and Ariana French, Instructional Technology Specialist, identified the following 
three points as primary goals and incentives for the creation of an outreach program, as outlined in 
the project s charter document: Better communication between faculty and the ILC. Currently, few faculty 
members understand and utilize the services of the ILC. This is likely due to an ongoing lack of communication 
and publicity on the part of the ILC. By introducing events and opportunities for fresh dialogue between 
faculty and the ILC, the offerings of the ILC become less opaque and more of a hands-on service for faculty. 
Likewise, getting to know the pedagogical/research needs of faculty will help the ILC target opportunities 
for projects, as well as stimulate discussion within departments around appropriate technology solutions. 
 Better visibility on campus for the ILC. Establishing a more visible presence as a vital, innovative, 
and necessary service will place the ILC as a top of mind unit for faculty and administrators when considering 
technology issues and needs.  Better, wider use of technology in teaching and learning environments. 
Augmenting traditional teaching and learning tools with appropriate technology (everything from Blackboard 
to iPods to web sites to  cell phones) will help to stimulate and create an engaging learning environment. 
Without an effective outreach initiative, the ILC was concerned that the ongoing problems of lack of 
communication, limited understanding of the ILC s offerings on campus, and a poor rate of utilization 
of the ILC s services may persist. The ILC also identified the increased use of new media tools in the 
classroom as a potential recruiting aid for prospective Tulane University students. With the support 
of the Deputy Chief Information Officer, Ann Kovalchick, the ILC began to discuss which instructional 
technology topics would best serve the needs of faculty and administrators. The ILC also spoke informally 
with various faculty members on campus, with the hopes of getting current insights into the teaching 
interests of faculty. By understanding these interests, the ILC could then design its outreach initiatives 
to maximize relevance to its outreach participants. 3. REACHING OUT TO FACULTY As the ILC s efforts 
to design outreach programs took shape, several initiatives were discussed as primary elements within 
our outreach agenda. 3.1 Tulane Faculty Symposium on Digital Trends This symposium currently is the main 
effort in our outreach program, and is the focus of this paper. The symposium is a series of informal 
presentations given by ILC staff or speakers outside the ILC and/or Tulane University community. The 
topics are geared toward their use in teaching and learning environments, and as such, are most relevant 
to faculty and anyone involved in designing distance learning education. The symposium was launched in 
March 2007, and is projected to cover the following topics through December 2007: Plagiarism: Online 
Tools for Faculty  Podcasting &#38; Coursecasting  The Mobile Classroom  Wikis  Blogs  Web 2.0 
 Each topic, depending on interest, may spawn multiple symposium sessions. Discussion and input from 
faculty during the presentation is encouraged. Presentations are typically 1 ½ - 2 hours long, with many 
opportunities for discussion both during and after the session. Following the presentation, there may 
be a hands-on workshop in cases where either a) interest exists and/or b) the topic lends itself well 
to a hands-on experience. Faculty are encouraged to register for each symposium session via the Technology 
Services web site, though this is not required. This registration information provides the ILC with an 
approximate head count, and it also gives us the chance to follow up with participants after the symposium 
session. A brief feedback survey is given to session attendees, where we ask for input on how to improve 
the symposium, how they heard about the session, whether the information learned would be applied in 
the classroom (and how), and an area for general comments. This simple, paper-based survey has perhaps 
been the most useful feedback mechanism for the ILC in tailoring each session to the interests of attendees. 
The symposium is currently underway, and as of this writing, two topics have been presented: Plagiarism 
and Podcasting &#38; Coursecasting. In our inaugural symposium session, Ann Kovalchick, Deputy Chief 
Information Officer, presented an engaging and highly participatory session on plagiarism and online 
tools that may be used for identifying plagiarism in its various forms. Attendees were led through a 
learning and discussion-based exercise designed to provoke critical thinking around the topic of plagiarism, 
and Ann presented information relevant to faculty and their efforts to identify and educate students 
on the topic of plagiarism. Online tools such as Turnitin.com were discussed, as were other online tools 
(e.g. google.com) and their relative utility in identifying plagiarism occurrences. Following the session, 
interested attendees were invited to participate in a hands-on workshop at the ILC, where they could 
try out online tools and visit web sites mentioned during the symposium session. The next symposium session 
brought together distance learning staff and interested faculty to discuss podcasting and coursecasting. 
The ILC has been running two main podcasting pilots on campus: eNotes, a customized, onsite application 
for the download of digital lectures recorded by faculty in the classroom; and a collection of digitally-recorded 
lectures available for download through iTunesU. These pilots gave the presenters, Derek Toten, Director 
of Instructional Media, and Ariana French, Instructional Technology Specialist, a rich source of content 
and experience from which to discuss podcasting on campus. An overview of the technology was presented, 
followed by a discussion of the recorders themselves, the technical challenges of podcasting, podcasting 
at other universities, a brief presentation by a faculty member participant in the eNotes pilot, and 
then an informal discussion among all attendees. Perhaps the most rewarding aspect of this particular 
session was the lively dialogue among attendees. There was considered debate over the effect of offering 
recorded lectures to students and its merits relative to the effort of creating these lectures. Those 
involved in distance education were motivated differently than those who were not, and offered valuable 
insights into the pedagogical rewards of audio lectures. Response to these sessions was overwhelmingly 
positive. Attendees learned about these technologies and their role in higher education, and received 
feedback from peers that may have not otherwise been heard. The ILC gained visibility among those who 
attended, and presenters encouraged faculty to spread the word about the symposium and the services offered 
by the ILC. Attendees also became familiar with the ILC and its facility, as well as meeting the staff 
of the Center. 3.2 Other Outreach Initiatives In addition to the faculty symposium, the ILC has anticipated 
several other projects to further strengthen our outreach agenda. Face-to-face meetings with department 
heads, thought leaders on campus, and deans are currently being scheduled. Thought leaders are those 
faculty who are deemed leaders in their classroom efforts and are highly regarded in their teaching style 
and skills. In these informal meetings, the ILC will introduce available services to faculty and promote 
the symposium, while establishing a point of reference for departments around campus whenever instructional 
technology assistance is needed. In our experience, it is this kind of in-person communication that is 
fundamental to the success of any outreach program. The ILC is also exploring the possibility of bringing 
in leaders in the technology community to speak on topics related to technology and social change. An 
example may be Dick Rowe, one of the principals in MIT s One Laptop Per Child program in Africa, who 
could discuss the goals and challenges of such a monumental undertaking. This aspect of our outreach 
efforts will be more inspirational and designed to stimulate the imagination of faculty and administrators 
to consider using technologies in ways never before imagined. In post-Katrina New Orleans, this kind 
of a community mindset is not only germane to the university s institutional goals, it is necessary for 
the reinvigoration of our city.  4. ASSESSMENT &#38; KEYS TO SUCCESS The symposium, informal chats, 
and notable speakers are all part of raising visibility of the ILC on campus, but it is the supplemental 
tools of listservs, email, web site announcements, survey feedback, and other means of communication 
that may become our easiest measure of success for our program. Our faculty appointments, scheduled with 
ILC staff for assistance with tasks ranging from document scanning to Blackboard help, are one set of 
benchmarks from which to gauge the possible success of our outreach. However, there is no direct way 
to measure its success, only anecdotal and specious correlations. We anticipate looking at several metrics, 
over time, in judging our own progress: number of walk-in appointments, number of new project requests, 
number of symposium attendees, number of listserv subscribers, and anecdotal feedback through surveys 
and conversation. The success of this outreach program depends upon the continued and dedicated efforts 
of those involved in its leadership. Currently, there is one dedicated (approximately 20% of the time) 
instructional technologist on this project who receives additional assistance from other instructional 
technologists in the preparation and presentation of symposium topics. Other factors that may affect 
the success of this project include funding for speaker fees; funds for renting facilities and providing 
refreshments; availability of ILC personnel; disinterest among faculty attendees; and unforeseen organizational 
changes. 5. CONCLUSION There is some concern over whether we may generate too much interest among faculty 
for instructional technology services, and we will fail to meet the demand. If the symposium and its 
related efforts succeed, this may become a very real risk. However, this has historically been a balancing 
act that the ILC has had to perform, and the group has systematically paced requests to match available 
resources. The advantage of increased visibility on campus and an increased rate of utilization may also 
become an asset if the ILC seeks additional personnel. Only time will tell whether resource availability 
will become an issue or not. In creating new opportunities for collaboration and dialogue with campus 
faculty, the ILC is also creating new opportunities for growth and the continued success of its group. 
The more the ILC knows about what faculty find interesting, engaging, and motivating, the more the ILC 
can develop skills and do research on topics to maximize its relevance to everyone in the academic community. 
There is no better way to learn a skill than to teach it, and the ILC is leveraging its role as teacher 
of teachers to build skills and relationships with those we serve. In this way, the symposium and all 
related outreach efforts will create a mutually beneficial partnership between instructional technologists 
and faculty members for many years to come.  
			