
 Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain A TUTORIAL ON ~ROSIM % A KNOWLEDGE-BASED SIMULATION MODEL DESIGN TOOL Madhavi Lingineni 
Bruce Caraway Perakath C. Benjamin Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. 1500 University Drive East College 
Station, Texas 77840, U.S.A. ABSTRACT This paper introduces PROSIM, a knowledge-based simulation design 
tool that automatically generates simulation models from process models. Domain experts who are familiar 
with the various aspects of the system may be interviewed and process models can be developed based on 
the evidence collected using pROSIM. The built-in simulation design support environment of PROSIM enables 
building simulation models automatically from process models. A purchase order processing system example 
is described to demonstrate the utility of PROSIM. INTRODUCTION The increasing complexity of organized 
enterprises has enhanced the utility of simulation as a managerial problem-solving and analysis tool. 
While specific areas in simulation modeling technology have shown rapid advances in the recent past, 
there are a few areas which would benefit from further research. Specifically, current simulation practice 
1) affords little support for the initial analysis and model design tasks which are largely qualitative 
in nature, 2) involves the unproductive use of both the domain expert s and the simulation analyst s 
time in the modeling process, and 3) suffers from lack of widespread acceptance by decision makers due 
to the relatively long lead times and sophisticated skills needed for the effective use of simulation 
modeling techniques. It is the purpose of this tutorial to introduce PROSIM, a knowledge-based simulation 
model design tool that automatically generates WITNESSm simulation models from IDEF3-based process models, 
as a possible solution for the aforementioned shortcomings. 476 Richard J. Mayer Department of Industrial 
Engineering Texas A&#38;M University College Station, Texas 77843, U.S.A. 2 PROCESS MODEL GENERATION 
USING PROSIM PROSIM enables a modeler to capture processes or situations as an ordered sequence of events 
or activities. It is designed to capture process descriptions of the precedence and causality relations 
behveen events/situations in a form that is natural to domain experts in an environment. One of the primary 
goals of the tool is to provide mechanisms for expressing a domain expert s knowledge about how a particular 
process works. PROSIM uses scenarios as the basic organizing structure for establishing the focus and 
boundary conditions for the process description. This feature is motivated by the tendency of humans 
to describe what they know in terms of an ordered sequence of observed activities within the context 
of a given situation. The basic syntactic unit of PROSIM graphical process descriptions within the context 
of a scenario, is the Unit Of Behavior (UOB) represented by a rectangular box. Each UOB represents a 
specific view of the world in terms of a perceived state of affairs or state of change relative to the 
given scenario. UOBS are connected to one another via junctions and links. Junctions provide the semantic 
facilities for expressing synchronous and asynchronous behavior among a network of UOBS. Links represent 
temporal precedence, object flow, and relations between UOBS. Each UOB can have associated with it both 
descriptions in terms of other UOBS (a decomposition of a parent UOB) and a set of participating objects 
and their relations (an elaboration). Let us consider a situation of an analyst interviewing a purchase 
department manager to capture main activities involved in generating purchase orders at the comtxmy. 
The purchase department manager is mainly respo~sibie for the pmeessing of purchase request forms, finding 
existing suppliers for the part, inviting bids from potential suppliers, receiving bids, evaluating bids, 
activities at various stages of the model design process. placing purchase orders, and acquiring the 
material. PROSM can be used to support the analysis andldesign of First, the initiating department (typically 
design or manufacturing systems, business systems, logistics process planning) formally requests the 
needed material. systems, command, control, communication, and If the requested material has existing 
suppliers, a intelligence systems, concurrent engineering systems, purchase order can be placed immediately. 
On the other service systems, and information systems. It is a critical hand, if the requested material 
is new, or the existing tool for realizing the monetary benefita of business Figure 1: A Process Flow 
Diagram supplier no longer produces the part, then the purchase dep-&#38;tment has to invite bids from 
potential suppliers, receive the bids, evaluate the bids, and place a purchase order to the selected 
supplier. The process flow diagram that depicts the sequence of activities involved in the purchase order 
generation process can be captured using PROSIM and is shown in Figure 1, GENERATING SIMULATION MODELS 
USING PROSIM The intelligent support provided by PROSIM reduces the expertise required to design effective 
simulation models and perform simulation experiments. It provides an environment in which users can develop 
designs for discrete event simulation models from process descriptions and supports the conceptual modeling 
of the Purchase Order Process process re-engineering and activity based costing. PRoStM has a built-in 
simulation modlel design support environment. In other words, it has an expert system programmed to provide 
expertise at a level comparable to that of a simulation modeling expert. Process flow diagram constructs, 
UOBS, objects, and junctions, are required to be detailed within PROSIM in order to generate simulation 
model. Consider the request for bids UOB in the example process flow diagram in Figure 1. The real world 
objects that participate in the process of requesting bids are Technical Package: Purchase Department 
Manager: Potential Supplier List; Bid Package; and Building 1. A technical package contains the technical 
data of the part to be ordered. The technical data of the part may include engineering specifications, 
tolerances, material to be used, special tools and jigs required to manufacture the part. A Purchase 
Department Manager requests bids by sending a technical package along with the bid package to potential 
suppliers. The Potential Supplier List consists of details of all the potential suppliers such as supplier 
code, supplier name, supplier address, supplier manufacturing capabilities. The Bid Package consists 
of information about the requirements of the bid responses, financial S-.-:1---?4 ,..LA.. ,.--...-,.... 
-.1 ,4.-.*,.:1 :---+;= :~ is Uai.ills, mm UL1lG1 UJ1l U CluLuLu uGLalls. Lllla auuvlcy performed in the 
location, Building l. In PROSIM, a dedicated resource is categorized as Figure 2: Dialog Box for Detailing 
a Unit of Behavior either a location or a queue. The location label is provided whenever a non-waiting 
activity is represented by the UOB. If the UOB is used to represent a waiting activity, the dedicated 
resource is associated as a queue. Flow objects that participate in UOBS are called entities. 3.1 UOB 
Detailing The dialog box shown in Figure 2 is used to record the process times for the Request Bids UOB. 
Process times are recorded for the entities that participate in the process. The names of the entity 
objects that participate in thk UOB are New Material Request Form (labeled New Order ), Bid Package, 
and Technical Package. The process time for New Order is a constant of 0.5 days. The process time for 
Bid Package is a normal random variable with a mean of 5 days and a standard deviation of 1 day. The 
process time for Technical Package is a normal random variable with a mean of 12 days and a standard 
deviation of 2 days. The Objects such as computers; personnel manager are categorized as resources in 
PROSIM. Resource objects, as well as other objects, can be shared between different UOBS in a PRoStM 
model. et al 3.2 Entity Detailing Entities flow between UOBS in a scenario. The inter­rtrrival time 
distribution is an item of information required to simulate the behavior of entities in a system. Figure 
3 displays how the details of New Materird Request Form are recorded in a I%OSIM model. Observe that 
the inter-arrival time for this entity is a negative exponential random variable with a mean of 10.0 
time units. The arrival point is the first process visited by the entity as it flows through the scenario. 
Figure 3: Entity Detailing 3.3 Decision Logic Specification Junctions in PROSM provide a mechanism to 
speci~ the logic of process branching. Different junction types are supported in PROSIM to aid in capturing 
the semantics of branching in real-world processes. Junctions support the description of 1) a process 
that splits into two or more process paths, or 2) two or more process paths converge into a single process. 
Junctions are classified in three different ways. First, they are classified according to the logical 
semantics involved: AND (&#38;), OR (0), and exclusive OR (X). Junctions are further classified as either 
Jan-in or fan-out, based on whether they represent a convergence or a divergence in the logic of the 
process description. They are also classified based on the coordination of the timing of the associated 
UOBS as either synchronous or asynchronous (KBSI 1992a). An exclusive OR (X) junction is used to model 
decision logic. In our purchase order processing example, an exclusive OR junction is used to represent 
the logic that activity request material is followed exactly by one of the following two activities: 
1) order from an existing supplier , or 2) request bids from new suppliers with probabilities of 0.8 
and 0.2, respectively (Figure 1). Figure 4: Adding a Junction Figure 5: Junction Detailing 3.4 Performance 
Metric Specification The goal in designing a simulation model is to generate data to answer a set of 
questions. Examples of questions include, What is the total process time? , What is the resource utilization? 
. PROSIM provides support for designing instrumentation to help answer these questions. In other words, 
PRoSmt helps you select appropriate performance metrics that will automate the generation of output data 
to answer the questions. For example, the performance metric used to answer the first question is Process 
Time for the UOBS preparation of bid package: preparation of technical package, fiiling in new material 
request form, and filling in the repeat material request form. The PROSIM dialog boxes used to specify 
these performance metrics are shown in Figures 6 and 7. Figure 6: Simulation Performance Metrics Specification 
Figure 7: Metrics to Compute Process Time 3.5 Model Verification In the context of PROSIM, model verification 
is defined as the process of ensuring that the minimum amount of information required to generate a WITNESS 
simulation model exists in the process model. Model verification is performed using the Model Verification 
option in the Diagram menu in PROSIM. A more detailed description is given in the PROSIM User s Manual 
and Reference Guide (1995). 3.6 Simulation Model Generation PROSIM simulation model design specifications 
are now transformed to an equivalent representation in the WITNESS Input Command Language. This is done 
by using the Build Simulation Model option in the PROSIM File menu. After the model has been generated, 
the next step is to open the application and load the model using the Read Commands option in the Model 
menu (see AT&#38;T ISTEL 1992). After the WITNESS model lm.s been loaded, the user can run the model 
and generate the desired performance metrics. WITNESS provides state­of-the-art capabilities for simulation-based 
analysis and experimentation. 4 POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF USING PROSIM PROSIM has the following potential 
benefits: 1) it enables novice simulation modelers to develop and use complex simulation models, 2) it 
encourages and promotes the use of simulation as a decision support tool among a wide group of users 
from a variety of application domains, 3) it substantially reduces time and effort needed to develop 
simulation models, and 4) it facilitates the capture and retention of simulation model design rationale. 
5 SUMMARY This paper described salient features of PROSIM, a simulation model design tool. An example 
of purchase order processing system is provided to demonstrate the procedure of building process models 
from domain experts descriptions and then generating a simulation model from this process model. REFERENCES 
AT&#38;T ISTEL Limited. 1992. WITNESS user manual, Release 4.0, Cleveland, OH. Knowledge Based Systems, 
Inc. (KBSI). 1992a. IDEF3 method report. Prepared for the U.S. Air Force Human Resources Laboratory, 
Contract No. F33615­ C-90-0012. Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1992b. Issues in knowledge-based 
assistance for simulation model design from IDEF3 descriptions. Technical Report for NSF SBIR Phase II 
Grant No. 111-9123380. Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). 1995. PROSIM user s munual and reference 
guide, Version 2.1, College Station, TX. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MADHAVI L. LINGINENI received her Master 
of Science degree in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&#38;M University in August 1993. She is currently 
working as a Systems Analyst at Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. Her research interests include business 
et al, process reengineering, database design, sinudation, system modeling, and reverse engineering. 
BRUCE E. CARAWAY received his Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in Industrial Engineering 
from Texas A&#38;M University in 1990 and 1994, respectively. He joined Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. 
in January of 1993 as a Systems Analyst. He is currently working on a project at Tinker Air Force Base 
which seeks to baseline and identify process improvements on the E-3 AWACS Programmed Depot Maintenance 
(PDM) line using the IDEF methods. He is also working on the development of a simulation and shop floor 
control system for the E-3 PDM line. PERAKATH C. BENJAMIN received his Master of Science degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering in 1983. He received his 
Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering horn Texas A&#38;M University in May 1991. As Vice President (Innovation 
and Engineering) at Knowledge Based Systems, Inc., Dr. Benjamin manages and directs research KBSI s research 
and development projects. RICHARD J. MAYER received a Master of Science in Industrial Engineering flom 
Purdue University in 1977. In 1988, he received a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&#38;M 
University. From 1984 to 1989, he was Project Manager and Principal Investigator on thirty-nine funded 
research efforts in the Knowledge Based Systems Laboratory. He founded Knowl~ge Based Systems, Inc. in 
1988 and has received funding for applications in engineering design assistance, systems analysis and 
concurrent engineering methods and tools. Currently, he is an Associate Professor of Industrial Engineering 
at Texas A&#38;M University. 
			