
 Uncompressed 4K2K and HD Live Transmission on Global Internet Masatoshi Kakiuchi, Akira Yutani* Keishi 
Kandori Atsuo Inomata, Kazutoshi Fujikawa Asahi Broadcasting Corporation Nara Institute of Science and 
Technology 1 Introduction There are some researches in transmission of high de.nition im­age using InternetProtocol 
(IP) before. Materials for TV stations require lossless transmission by uncompressed real-time transmis­sion. 
Also high performance camera and display require transmis­sion methods for 4K2K (3,840 × 2,160 pixels) 
image over HD (High De.nition; 1,920 × 1,080 pixels). Especially, projection to huge screen such planetarium 
requires at least 4K2K resolution. However, uncompressed transmission of both HD and 4K2K re­quire such 
high bandwidth network as 1.6 Gbit/s and 6.4 Gbit/s, then we prepared dedicated networks such SONET or 
wide-area VLAN service. Therefore we spent a lot of procedures and costs. The total solar eclipse of 
July 22, 2009 in Asia was the longest that of the 21st century. We tried the live transmission of this 
astron­omy shows with two images, 4K2K of the whole sky and HD of panoramic view. In this research, to 
solve these problems, we de­signed network systemandexecutedanexperimentationto transmit both4K2KandHDimagesoverglobal 
Internet.Wechallengedlive transmission with bandwidth of8Gbit/s for uncompressed 4K2K and HD images, 
and .nally we succeeded transmission with no lost frames continuously for2hours during solar eclipse. 
 2 Exposition In this live transmission, Firstly Asahi Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) at Osaka collected 
each of total solar eclipse images from the following three locations, and then re-transmitted whole 
sky 4K2K image and one of panoramic view HD image (Fig. 1). 1. 4K imageofthewholeskyandHDimagefrom Amami-OshimabyNa­tional 
Institute of Information and Communications (NICT). 2. HD panoramic viewimagesfrom IotobyNational Astronomical 
Obser­vatory of Japan (NAOJ), Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK), Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency(JAXA). 
3. Each of two HD images from China (Uhan and Shanghai)byKeio University. The most of network was dedicated 
IP network. Figure 1: Live transmission outline In this experimentation, we executed live transmission 
over the In­ternet through ABC experimentation network, JGN2 plus operated by NICT, WIDE Internet operated 
by WIDE Project and MAN-DARA Network which is campus network on NAIST. Figure 2 showsexperimentation 
network. FromAtoG are routers.1. Com­mon parameters of four networks are global IP address network, 10 
gigabit ethernet, and MaximumTransfer Unit (MTU) 9,000. The use of the Internet requires global IP address 
network. Transmis­ *e-mail: {masato,yuta}@itc.naist.jp sion of both uncompressed 4K2K and HD requires8Gbit/s 
band­width, therefore we selected 10 gigabit ethernet and applied MTU 9,000 insteadof1,500foreffective 
transmission.2.Weused static routing on ABC experimentation network and JGN2 plus which were prepared 
to connect with ABC and WIDE Internet. 3. We used the same OSPF autonomous routing on WIDE Internet and 
MANDARA Network as that we used for commodity traf.c. Figure 2: Network topology(A/B: Cisco CRS-1,C: 
Cisco Cat­alyst, D: Hitachi GS4000, E:Juniper MX240 as .rewall, F: NEC IP8800/S6708,G:Foundry FESX648) 
We transmitted both uncompressed 4K2K and HD images by 6.4 Gbit/s and 1.6 Gbit/s bandwidth for solar 
eclipse live transmission from 9:30 to 11:30. Figure3shows that inbound traf.c at routerE from routerD.Asa 
result, transmitted bandwidth reached8Gbit/s. There are no packet loss on path of WIDE Internet and MANDARA 
Network shared with commodity traf.c during this experimenta­tion. Figure 3: Network traf.c 3 Conclusion 
and Future Work We succeeded transmission with no lost framesover global Internet shared with commodity 
traf.c. Asa result, we got manypopularity offavorable reputation aboutexperience from about 250 viewers. 
Stable transmission requires feeding back network status into trans­mission control, roundabout routing, 
priority control, and so on, when the networkis jammed with traf.c.For futurework, we plan to resolve 
these problems. Acknowledgements Thisworkis supportedbyABC,NAOJ,NHK,JAXAandKeiouni­versity, and is .ndings 
of NICT contract research. Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). SIGGRAPH Asia 2009, Yokohama, 
Japan, December 16 19, 2009. ISBN 978-1-60558-858-2/09/0012  
			