
 Undergraduate Computational Science Education Angela B. Shiflet, Philip Holmes Chuck Niederriter Moderator 
Princeton University Gustavus Adolphus College Wofford College Princeton, NJ Saint Peter, MN Spartanburg, 
SC pholmes(~dmbaud.pdnceton.edu chuckl~gac.edu shifletab@wofford.edu Robert M. Panoff The Shodor Education 
Foundation, Inc Durham, NC rpanoff@shodor.org Ernest Sibert Syracuse University Syracuse, NY eesibert@top.cis.syr.edu 
 Introduction Computational Science is a fast-growing interdisciplinary field that is at the intersection 
of the sciences, computer science, and mathematics. Much scientific investigation now involves computing 
as well as theory and experiment. Computing can often stimulate the insight and understanding that theory 
and experiment alone cannot achieve. There is a critical need for scientists who have a strong background 
in computational science. Many significant applied and basic research questions in science today are 
interdisciplinary in nature, involving physical and/or biological sciences, mathematics, and computer 
science. For example, Nature reported in June 1998 that John Krebs, chief executive of Britain's Natural 
Environment Research Council, considers that the environment "requires a 'new breed' of scientist, and 
new ways of problem solving that cut across traditional disciplines" and that Britain expects a shortage 
of "environmental scientists with mathematical, computational and statistical skills." Computer simulation 
and modeling offer valuable approaches to problems in many other areas, such as human behavior, energy, 
and molecular dynamics. Massive amounts of information in Web-accessed databases (such as those for the 
human genome project) present to scientists new computational challenges in storage, retrieval, processing, 
and visualization. Despite the shortage of scientists who are adequately prepared in the area of computational 
science, a 1998 survey ("Computational Science Education") by Charles D. Swanson of Cray Research Inc. 
found only two undergraduate special degree programs and fifteen undergraduate courses in the area. This 
panel highlights several approaches to undergraduate computational science education and considers their 
challenges. Philip Holmes In engineering and science today, there is a trend toward the use of modem 
sophisticated mathematical techniques of both computational and theoretical types. One reason for this 
is the revolutionary development of computational resources. Modem engineers and scientists have at their 
disposal user-friendly, powerful computers with sophisticated graphics to display results. Such modeling 
and simulation techniques are also increasingly used in the biological and social sciences, especially 
economics. With such tools, interdisciplinary problems that are complex and nonlinear have become the 
norm in contemporary science and engineering. The engineer/scientist must learn to use such tools wisely, 
accurately, and to their full power. A natural time to be introduced to such skills is as an undergraduate. 
During these formative years the modem engineer or scientist should learn the use of mathematical and 
computational techniques in an interactive interdisciplinary environment. At Princeton, The Program in 
Applied and Computational Mathematics offers a unique opportunity for a small group of students to learn 
to perform accurate and controlled numerical studies and, perhaps most important, to expose them to the 
philosophy and tools of interdisciplinary applied mathematics in a very personal and individualized manner. 
 Chuck Niederriter The science faculty at Gustavus Adolphus College have been integrating computational 
science into their courses and research efforts for more than 10 years. We often 419 collaborate with 
the faculty from math/computer science and their students on projects. However, we have not yet developed 
a formal program of study in this important area because our students, some of whom are pursuing double 
majors already, would be unable to fit new courses into their already busy schedules. We have taken, 
the approach of teaching computation "across the curriculum" to borrow a catch phrase from Gustavus' 
writing program. Although our students take some computer language courses, most of their exposure to 
computation is in science or math classes taken for their majors and in independent research projects. 
The classroom and laboratory experiences involve the full range, from computer-controlled dam acquisition 
to computation and visualization. On March 26 and 27, the science and math/computer science departments 
at Gustavus hosted a one-day conference on Computational Science in Undergraduate Education. The purpose 
of the conference was to bring together faculty and students who are interested in integrating computational 
science activities and models into science curricula. Invited talks on computational science in physical 
sciences, biology, and math and high performance computing explored the role of computational science 
at undergraduate colleges that emphasize the liberal arts. A breakout session allowed participants to 
see several interesting uses of computational modeling in courses and laboratory projects and to try 
out some of SGrs new line of computers. The conference wrapped up with a panel discussion on the "Future 
Role of Computational Science in the Undergraduate Curriculum," which allowed all of the participants 
to share ideas and approaches to developing better programs. Robe~ M. Panoff The Shodor Foundation is 
a non-profit research and education organization dedicated to the advancement of science and math education, 
specifically through the use of modeling and simulation technologies. Shodor is a funded partner with 
the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
in the National Computational Science Alliance. The Shodor Computational Science Institute provides instructional 
resources and software ready to be used in the classroom as well as workshops and internships for faculty 
and students. Ernest Sibert The Computational Science (CPS) minor at Syracuse University provides an 
opportunity for students to explore the interplay between science and computation, an area which has 
become of great importance with the widespread availability of very high-performance computers and the 
pervasiveness of the web. The minor is especially suitable for students majoring in the sciences, mathematics, 
computer science, and engineering. To complete the minor, students must take a program of 18 credits 
developed in consultation with a CPS faculty advisor. The program must include Computational Science 
I &#38; II, Scientific Programming I &#38; II, a senior computational science project, and at least 7 
additional credits from a selection of courses. When the minor was introduced some years ago it emphasized 
numerical simulation; in recent years the emphasis has shifted toward distributed and web-based computing. 
 Angela Shiflet For a year, faculty members in biology, chemistry, physics, psychology, and computer 
science met to discuss how better to prepare students to use computing in the sciences. They also asked 
the advice of numerous scientists and computer scientists at laboratories, companies, and institutions 
of higher education around the country. Input from others had a significant impact on shaping the Emphasis. 
For example, Dr. Thomas Cwik of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's High Performance Computing group first 
suggested the particular grouping of topics in Wofford's two new computational science courses. In its 
November 1998 meeting, the Wofford Faculty unanimously approved the Emphasis in Computational Science 
for interested science majors. To obtain an Emphasis in, Computational Science, a student must major 
in a science; complete the courses C++, Data Structures, Data and Visualization, Scientific Programming, 
and Calculus I; and have an internship that involves computing in the sciences. Because large World Wide 
Web-accessed databases are becoming prevalent for storing scientific information, the new computational 
science course Data and Visualization will cover the concepts and development of distributed databases. 
Effective visualization of data helps scientists extract information and to communicate results. Thus, 
students will learn fundamental concepts, tools, and algorithms of computer graphics and scientific visualization 
in two and three dimensions. The new computational science course Scientific Programming covers modeling 
and simulation involving large, open-ended scientific problems. Throughout both courses, applications 
in the sciences will be emphasized. 420   
			