
 University of Toronto Mississauga The One Project Joe Lim Chief Information Officer University of Toronto 
Mississauga Mississauga, Ontario L5L 1C6 905-569-4455 joe.lim@utoronto.ca ABSTRACT Two years ago, the 
University of Toronto (UofT) Mississauga embarked on a project which we dubbed The One ; one identity, 
one card, one phone number, and one helpdesk, in response to the Provost s White Paper on Enhancing the 
Student Experience. UofT Mississauga began implementing and adopting a model to consolidate services 
to students, staff and faculty. In general, the University of Toronto (which UofT Mississauga is a part 
of) has a highly de-centralized IT structure. This paper will attempt to encapsulate our experiences 
and the aches and pains, of implementing The One Project. Adopting one identity for all members of the 
UofT Mississauga community means that our users do not have to remember multiple login ids and passwords. 
Using one card for food, printing, photocopying, and door access means that users have only one card 
to carry. Having one phone number that can reach all departments at UofT Mississauga means our constituents 
only have to remember one number. Having one helpdesk to deal with not just IT issues but facilities 
as well as utilities means our users have to go to only one location on campus for all of their needs. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.6 [Management of Computing Information Systems] system management, 
centralization/decentralization  General Terms Management, Human Factors, Standardization Keywords 
Help Desk, Enhancing Student Experience. ID, Centralizing Systems 1. INTRODUCTION Established in 1967, 
the University of Toronto Mississauga (UofT Mississauga) provides undergraduate and graduate studies 
and is the second largest division of the University of Toronto (UofT), Canada's largest university. 
Situated on 225 acres of protected green belt along the Credit River, the campus is 33 kilometres west 
of the St. George campus in Toronto. UofT Mississauga is home to 11,500 undergraduate students, 350 graduate 
students and more than 550 faculty and staff. The student population grew from 6,500 in 2002/03. IT is 
very de-centralized at the University of Toronto. We have just as many email addresses as there are divisions 
within the university. There are 128 known email systems at UofT, 17 academic divisions and 6 non-academic 
divisions. We do have central IT services that provide the Student Information System (SIS), Financial 
and Human Resources Information System (FIS and HRIS), Donor Information System (DIS), and Library Information 
System. We also have a central IT group, Computing and Network Services (CNS) that provides internet 
access and the campus backbone within UofT. Divisional IT expenditures are greater than that of the combined 
central services. 60% of the University s total IT expenditures are done at the divisional level. At 
UofT Mississauga, things are a little bit different. We have a more centralized IT support infrastructure 
than the rest of UofT. Computing Services provides all of the IT support services, including helpdesk 
and desktop support, telecommunication, network infrastructure and application development. We are also 
the liaising point for the central IT services at UofT. In 2005, the 2nd Provostial Academic Planning 
document (Stepping Up Document) for UofT called for all divisions to develop their five year academic 
plan revolving around the vision of enhancing the student experience . UofT Mississauga developed its 
five year academic plan based on this document; and, Computing Services developed its strategic plan 
based on UofT Mississauga s plan. While defining what enhancing the student experience meant to us, Uof 
T Mississauga Computing Services took it a step further by identifying areas where we could enhance not 
just our students experiences but all of our users experiences. Our users are student, staff, faculty, 
and graduate students. The four areas we identified to enhance were identity and authentication, help 
desk function, telecommunication, and the use of the T-Card for physical access and purchasing services. 
 2. IDENTITY AND AUTHENTICATION Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 07, October 7-10, 2007, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2007 
ACM 978-1-59593-634-9/07/0010 $5.00. UofT Mississauga was one of the first academic divisions at UofT 
to provide all students, staff, and faculty with an email address and a computer account (UTMid). UofT 
then came out with UTORid, the institutional identity for all UofT users as well as UTORmail, the institutional 
email system. However, not all academic divisions embraced this identity and email system as they already 
had their own. As time passed, it became apparent that more and more central services were being developed 
and tied into UTORid/UTORmail (e.g. Oracle Calendar, Blackboard LMS and Portal, and Wireless). UofT Mississauga 
users (staff, faculty, students and graduate students) would have at least 2 ids and passwords to contend 
with and in some cases more. It became a nightmare for our users; password resets and login id lookups 
were the two highest problem resolutions faced by our helpdesk. When wireless was instituted 4 years 
ago, UofT Mississauga decided against creating its own wireless infrastructure. We decided to use the 
wireless infrastructure offered by CNS thus allowing our users ease of use when commuting between campuses. 
UofT Mississauga decided to adopt the use of UTORid and UTORmail at our campus. This became even more 
important when a new budget model was introduced this year at the University of Toronto. The new budget 
model taxes all academic and non­academic divisions for central services including IT. Since we are paying 
for UTORid/UTORmail, by doing the migration, we are able to re-allocate local resources to serve the 
campus better. Having one consistent identity and one email address gives our users the convenience and 
flexibility of having to remember one id/password pair and one place to manage this identity. It also 
allows them to use the IT helpdesk from both campuses to resolve issues pertaining to their accounts. 
The UofT Mississauga Council, established by the University of Toronto Act, 1971, is the senior governing 
body that oversees the academic, business and student affairs of the Mississauga Campus. The project 
was presented to the UofT Mississauga Council for approval. Once it was approved, the fun began. As with 
any major IT project, time and resources had to be allocated to ensure the project was successful as 
well as getting the buy-in from the users. We decided to split the migration project into two phases; 
undergraduate students, and staff, faculty and graduate students. We did this so that lessons learned 
from the student migration could be applied to the staff and faculty migration and because we simply 
did not have enough resources to complete the migration in a single step. Our goals for this project 
were: user transparency, ease of transition and utilization of existing desktops and servers. UofT Mississauga 
Computer Services manages approximately 20,000 undergraduate accounts including alumni, 1500 faculty, 
staff and graduate student accounts including retirees and faculty emeritus. Students at UofT Mississauga 
have access to about 800 computers across the campus as well as central storage for their files (drive 
H). Drive H is available to them anywhere on campus in any of the computer labs. Faculty, staff and graduate 
students have their own drive H as well. We needed to ensure that there were no or minimal account clashes. 
These clashes occur when a UTMid is the same as a UTORid, but they do not belong to the same person. 
After reviewing existing accounts, we had approximately 200 account clashes. Since UofT Mississauga email 
addresses are actively being used by our users, we couldn t just cut off those addresses. UTORid authentication 
is based on Kerberos; UTM authentication is based on NDIS and UNIX password files. These technical issues 
had to be overcome in order for the project to be successful. Communication with students was an issue 
since the project s implementation date was during the summer. We had to do a complete overhaul of our 
authentication and authorization infrastructure to support UTORid and Kerberos. The mindset for our technical 
staff had to change as well. Prior to the migration, we had total control of all servers; after the migration 
we do not. With this change, we now had to rely on another group 33 kilometres away to support us. One 
of the goals of this project was to use existing equipment (desktops and servers). We could not afford 
to revamp our desktop and server technology. To tackle the technical issues, we created a virtual environment 
to test all of the changes that were required to adopt UTORid and Kerberos. We created a number of virtualized 
servers with different versions of the operating systems that we used in production. Unix/Linux servers 
supported Kerberos with minimal modification. NDIS was another story. It does not support the flavor 
of Kerberos that we used or required. It became apparent that the vendor s priority (Novell) and ours 
were not the same. At this point in time, we needed to evaluate other technologies that would work with 
Kerberos. We looked at using Linux desktops with Citrix providing access to Windows applications and 
Active Directory. Active directory was adopted as one of the course applications could not be supported 
on Citrix. Once the technical issues were tackled and set aside, we focused on the logistics of the migration 
and how to deal with the students when they returned in September. First year students were no problem, 
they received UTORids right from the onset. Returning students were a problem; we needed to figure out 
how to contact them and how to get them to acquire their UTORid. Working with staff from CNS, we were 
able to identify all the students, staff, faculty and graduate students who did not have or had not activated 
their UTORid. UofT Mississauga maintains a database of all owners of UTMid with their student number 
or personnel number. This list was compared to the list of all UTORid maintained by CNS and the identifications 
were made. We sent an email to all students informing them of the changes, and posted flyers around the 
campus. We also included the announcement on our webmail interface. We negotiated with CNS to pre-create 
or pre-activate the UTORids of the users we had identified. This made it easy for us to complete the 
last step. We modified our account management page so our users would go there to get their UTORid since 
most of them did not know what their UTORid was and had to change their passwords. On the account management 
page, the students login with their UTMid and password; the site then automatically gave them their UTORid 
and UTORmail information and connected them to the UTORid management page so they could reset their password. 
So, for users who didn t have their UTORid activated or created, the process was transparent. Once we 
knew their UTORmail address, we forwarded all incoming messages from UTMmail to UTORmail. 80% of our 
students were converted by the end of August. We applied what we learned on the student migration to 
the staff and faculty migration. To ease the transition, staff and faculty were migrated on a building 
by building, department by department basis. All new hires were introduced to UTORid and UTORmail immediately. 
2.1 LESSONS LEARNED In order for this project to meet its goals, enough resources had to be allocated 
to it. Five IT Staff from UofT Mississauga and two IT Staff from CNS were dedicated to this project. 
Clear direction and goals ensured that everyone was in sync throughout the project. Collaboration between 
the two campuses IT groups allowed road blocks to be reduced and avoided. The move to Active Directory 
was not anticipated nor was it planned. We had to quickly alter our thinking and begin to investigate 
other technologies when it was apparent that talks with the vendor were not going anywhere. We needed 
to allow our technical staff to see that even when they have no access to the UTORid/UTORmail system, 
that their technical expertise was needed to ensure the success of the project. Communication and collaboration 
with the technical staff at CNS greatly enhanced UofT Mississauga s staff own skill sets as they comprehended 
the intricacies of providing services on a larger scale than what they were used to. Users were given 
forums to discuss the issues and to ensure that their concerns were identified and taken into consideration. 
One of the themes that kept resonating was the loss of identity for the UofT Mississauga users. The campus 
community was also concerned that help would no longer be provided by Computing Services and that the 
users would have to deal with the St. George helpdesk. Assurances were given to the UofT Mississauga 
s users that Computing Services would still be providing the helpdesk function and maintaining relationships 
with our clients. The debate of the loss of identity was discussed at a higher level (Dean and Principal). 
Through these discussions, the campus community recognized that we are still part of the University of 
Toronto even though we are separated physically from the main campus; what makes UofT Mississauga unique 
is its academic program and its research rather than an email address or a login id.  3. HELP DESK FUNCTION 
UofT Mississauga has experienced unprecedented growth over the last five years. We used to be a small 
campus where everyone knew each other. Not anymore, many new hires are confused and do not know where 
to go for help. UofT Mississauga has four trouble­ticket/helpdesk systems (IT, A/V and Electronics, Residence, 
and Facilities and Utilities). The Chief Administrative Officer of UofT Mississauga wanted to explore 
the possibility of consolidating these helpdesk systems, not for cost cutting, but to improve services 
to our users. The Government of Canada also introduced their single website and phone number which consolidated 
all of their services. The concept was to have one phone number and one ticket system for all of the 
service providers at UofT Mississauga. Users would only have to remember one number and one website for 
all their problems. We started with the largest service providers first; IT, A/V and Electronics, Facilities 
and Utilities. A task force, chaired by the Chief Information Officer, was created to investigate the 
feasibility of this concept at UofT Mississauga and what resources it would take to make it a reality 
if the concept was viable. The task force consisted of personnel from each of the four groups mentioned 
above. They met and deliberated for four months and agreed that the concept was worth pursuing. Members 
of the task force were asked to put down in a block diagram their individual process flow, what works 
now and what other functionality would be required in the future. This exercise was used to identify 
common processes that could be shared. These common processes included a user entry point, feedback to 
users, problem assignment, problem tracking, knowledge base, and chargeback billing. There were other 
processes that simply could not be shared. Typically, a user would either call or open a ticket for problems 
with IT, A/V, Facilities or Utilities. Phone calls get translated into a ticket if the problem can t 
be resolved quickly. As soon as a ticket is generated, a message is sent to the user with a ticket number 
which they can use to track the status of their request. Tickets are assigned to the appropriate personnel 
and the users are notified through email that their ticket is assigned to a specific staff member. The 
appropriate personnel have 3 options; resolve the problem and close the ticket,  can t resolve the 
issue and escalate the ticket to the next tier support,  place the ticket in hibernation because the 
ticket is waiting for a resource (e.g. spare part) in order to resolve the issue  Tracking of problems 
is a necessity by both the user and service provider, especially the ones that have been escalated within 
the group or outside of the group. All problem resolutions should be searchable and indexed so that efforts 
are not wasted. Finally, an automated chargeback mechanism is required to recover cost from the user. 
All of these functions can be built into a helpdesk system. The current system was developed in-house 
but does not have all the features required by all groups. Request Tracker is an open-source helpdesk 
application which we tailored to our needs especially the chargeback mechanism which requires integration 
into the Financial Information System. Since we acquired a speech recognition system for our telephone 
system (see 4 below), we planned to use this system as an instrument for the helpdesk phone. We can program 
a number of keywords that ring to this particular number. The phone number contains a menu system which 
guides users to the right group to provide a quick answer to their question or they can zero-out to a 
staffed helpdesk where they can have their queries answered or a ticket opened for them. The UofT Mississauga 
IT helpdesk was identified as the area which would provide this consolidated approach. It is properly 
staffed and is well-known across campus. 3.1 LESSONS LEARNED It was touch and go at the beginning as 
each area was very protective of their processes and resources. All groups had to be convinced and re-assured 
that their resources would not be taken away and that, in the end, we would be able to provide a better 
service to the user community. Identifying common processes was another challenge of the task force. 
Different units used different acronyms and descriptions for the same processes. These differences had 
to be reduced to something everyone clearly agreed to. Differences were debated until it was determined 
who had to change their process or what kind of compromise could be implemented to adopt the common practice. 
The last hurdle left was to figure out which helpdesk to transform into this consolidated one. A/V and 
Electronics and Facilities and Utilities do not have a real staffed helpdesk. The administrative assistant 
of each department acted as the contact point for user inquiries and resolution. Only Computing Services 
ran a fully staffed helpdesk. It was determined that Computing Services would host the consolidated helpdesk 
at UofT Mississauga. Resources identified to implement this project included a developer s time to modify 
Request Tracker and additional helpdesk staff to be the point of contact for all users. Training was 
also provided for the helpdesk staff. The implementation plan is still being developed.  4. TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
UofT Mississauga does not have a general phone line that is operator-assisted. We have specific phone 
numbers for each department. External and internal callers have to remember these numbers. UofT Mississauga 
s Registrar s Office is one department whose main phone number is publicized because of their recruitment 
function. During their peak period, they sometimes handle up to 700 calls a day and many of them are 
not for their department. However, it is easy for people to just phone their number in hopes that they 
can re-route calls to the right area. The same can be said for the Computing Services help line. The 
Office of the Registrar demanded that UofT Mississauga look into an operator-assisted telephone line 
which would alleviate their phone calls throughout the year. It was identified that this lack of a general 
number greatly reduced staff productivity. It also created bad public relations when external callers 
are re-routed from one area to another or told to call another number. We started a conversation with 
our telephone provider to look at alternatives. Having an operator was not an option as it would be too 
resource intensive. We needed to find a suitable technology to achieve this purpose. We were able to 
obtain an evaluation system from a vendor (Nuance) and tested a speech recognition system. This system 
will be a front-end to the UofT Mississauga s phone system. It allows callers to say a name or keywords 
and have the call re-routed to the right department or area. It also allows internal callers to call 
this number and get connected to anyone within UofT Mississauga without having to consult with the internal 
phone directory. All additions, moves and changes are automatically propagated to the system. Internal 
and external callers will no longer have to remember phone numbers of all their contacts but just one 
number to connect with anyone they want. We were able to monitor the system and add more keywords as 
we examined the effectiveness of the system. We convinced the Office of the Registrar to assist in the 
initial evaluation of the system. We call forwarded their main number to the speech recognition system. 
The speech recognition system was programmed with a number of keywords which transfered the calls to 
the specific personnel. The system provided a zero-out option but UofT Mississauga had no operator. So, 
we decided to use the main operator of the UofT as our zero-out option. Big mistake! The moment we turned 
on the system, the UofT operator got inundated with calls coming from UofT Mississauga. In a span of 
2 hours they received more than 300 calls. Of course, we never informed them of our trial. And to make 
matters worse, they were giving the callers the main number of the Office of the Registrar which was 
forwarded to the speech recognition system. We immediately removed the zero-out option which forces all 
incoming callers to say the keywords. We changed the greetings as well to let callers know that they 
can not zero-out. UofT Mississauga s student population is very diverse and the speech recognition system 
was quite adaptive. We turned on logging for the first month of the trial and worked with the vendor 
with some of the speech recognition problems, especially from people whose first language is not English. 
One caller even spelled out the keyword when it was apparent that the system did not understand what 
they were saying. The evaluation was successful and we purchased the system. It has been in production 
for over a year. 4.1 LESSONS LEARNED Consistency of the voice recording, finding a familiar and friendly 
voice and locating a good recording facility were major tasks for us. Fortunately, we have a sound recording 
facility at UofT Mississauga, and convinced a staff member in Computing Services to record the greetings 
in the speech recognition system. Her voice is recognized by almost all users. One comment from a UofT 
Mississauga user voiced it s so wonderful that it is the only number I programmed into my speed dial 
on my cell phone. The Office of the Registrar was able to reduce the number of calls they received during 
their peak periods as calls were being routed to the right department. More than 93% of all incoming 
calls are routed to the correct person. Computing Services compiled their staff s cell and home phone 
number on the speech recognition system so that everyone has access to anyone without providing cell 
or home phone numbers. This service is provided with a pin number. When you dial in to the speech recognition 
system, you say the keyword and key in the pin number and you will be connected directly to that person 
s cell phone or home phone. Not all problems can be solved with technology, but certainly when confronted 
with a problem, one needs to pursue a solution incorporating technology. The success is measured by the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the technology to solve a particular problem. The technology has to be 
transparent as well. We are continuing to look at other opportunities where we could use the speech recognition 
system. Companies who use similar speech recognition systems tend to give their system a character or 
an identity such as Emily by Bell Canada, or Sandi by Symantec. We are working with our Campus Marketing 
group to give a similar identity to our system.  5. PHYSICAL ACCESS AND PURCHASING SERVICES Everyone 
at the University of Toronto has an identity card which has their photo and their University status (student 
or staff). We call it the T-Card. This card has a chip as well as a magnetic strip at the back of the 
card. The first use of this T-Card was to allow students to pay for printing and photocopying charges. 
The money is encoded on the chip and charges deducted. Cash to card machines are available on campus 
allowing students to put more money on their T-Card. The one disadvantage of this system is that when 
a user loses their card, they lose their money as well since the record is stored on the chip and there 
s no way for us to disable the use of that T-Card. Since the functionality is built in to the T-Card 
and everyone has one, we started to explore other possible uses for the T-Card. Three other uses of the 
T-Card were implemented: door access, meal plan, and Shuttle Bus. A fourth one is being devised and developed 
for implementation this September. Using one card makes it convenient for users, but if a T-Card is lost, 
more systems are compromised. The convenience factor outweighs the other considerations. When we built 
a new building three years ago, we investigated a door-access system that uses the T-Card. This system 
provides students with 24 hour access to computer labs allowing IT to control lab access. We worked with 
several lock vendors to develop a system which would read the magnetic strip at the back of the T-Card. 
The system allowed us to provide or revoke access to any computer lab for any student, staff or faculty. 
We can have a subset of our user base have access with time control features and we have the ability 
to do a total lock down of the door. The card-access is all IP-based. We were able to integrate the T-Card 
access doors with UTORid. It ties in to everyone s UTORid, thus one card, one identity. UofT Mississauga 
is building a new residence building complete with a kitchen and mess hall. Food Services had an RFP 
two years ago to select a vendor to implement a meal plan for residence. Computing Services was invited 
to participate. It was clear from the onset that we needed a system that will work with our T-Card. A 
vendor was selected (Blackboard). Blackboard was subsequently selected as the UofT Learning Management 
and Portal System. UofT Mississauga s selection of Blackboard did not influence the latter selection. 
A residence meal plan is being introduced to all residence students at UofT Mississauga this coming September. 
This is the first meal plan for residence. A separate meal plan is available to staff, faculty and non-resident 
students. UofT Mississauga implemented a transaction system that not only provides different meal plan 
options but also uses the T-Card as its form of payment. All food stalls have a T-Card reader installed 
with the cash registers. These cash registers are all IP-based. Student, staff, and faculty could opt 
to purchase their food using their T-Card. This process speeds things up and keeps the lines short. Incentives 
are given to users of the system to encourage its use. One goal is to reduce the number of cash transactions 
that occur at these food stalls. UofT Mississauga also provides a shuttle bus to transport UofT Mississauga 
students to and from the St. George Campus. UofT Mississauga students voted to fund this shuttle bus, 
therefore, it is free to UofT Mississauga students. Other users pay to ride on the shuttle bus. How do 
we identify UofT Mississauga students from UofT Mississauga staff or faculty, or St. George students? 
Again, the use of the T-Card was investigated. We provided bus drivers with IP-based PDA readers that 
read the magnetic strip on the T-Card. The drivers sync the PDA wirelessly twice a day to ensure the 
database is up-to-date. Each rider will swipe their T-Card as they get on the bus. The PDA lets the driver 
know whether they ride for free or have to pay. UofT Mississauga successfully negotiated with Mississauga 
Transit to provide a transit pass to our students at a greatly reduced cost. There s a complex formula 
to determine a student s eligibility. The T-Card is the transit pass. A system is currently being devised 
to identify the eligible students so a small sticker is placed on their T-Card which would enable them 
to ride the public transit system. 5.1 LESSONS LEARNED Training was a key issue. We needed to provide 
training to the bus drivers as well as the cashiers for the food stall. Acceptance of the technology 
was another factor. Since these people are not employed by UofT Mississauga, they were reluctant at first. 
We have bus drivers who claim the PDA does not work and it turns out that they did not synchronize it 
properly. These people are technology challenged . Patience and perseverance were needed to get the technology 
into and used successfully in these locations. The calculation of Canadian taxes also complicated this 
project. Cash registers need to be programmed carefully and the food menu has to be carefully constructed. 
Additional user incentives also made it more complex. An E-commerce site is currently being developed 
and cash to card machines are being installed across the campus to allow users to put money on their 
T-Card. A website is also being developed to allow users to report lost T-Cards so that it can be invalidated 
as soon as possible to minimize unauthorized use of it. Support of the technology is an issue which is 
being monitored and will be addressed once it is deemed to be critical. What happens when the network 
goes down? The scheme right now is to have a manual system of recording the transactions through the 
cash registers which can then be reconciled once the network or server comes back online.  6. CONCLUSIONS 
The One Project shows our commitment toward enhancing our users experience. Convenience, ease of use, 
and effective and innovative use of technology are the goals we set to enable each of these projects 
to be successful. Successful collaboration and communication were required as many people were involved 
in all of the projects. Effective project management ensured that critical timelines were met and expenditures 
kept within budget. The biggest contributor to the success of this project was the commitment and support 
from the Principal and CAO of UofT Mississauga. The project clearly aligned with the Academic Plans of 
UofT Mississauga and reflected a simplistic goal, to reduce the complexity of process for students, staff 
and faculty. The project was presented at the Principals, Deans, and Chairs retreat last year and the 
feedback was a positive one. One of the comments was I commend UofT Mississauga for their One Project. 
It made things easy for their users. We presented our projects at the annual UofT Techknowfile Conference 
and it generated surprisingly good feedback. Other divisional IT units are looking at adopting some of 
our projects especially the identity and authentication piece. The biggest contributing factor to the 
success of this project is the Computing Services staff. Their enthusiasm and commitment made the project 
a success. They were able to adapt to the changing environment and in the end the needs of the many outweigh 
the needs of the few or the one. We will be conducting a survey of our services in March, 2008 to gauge 
the actual success of the One project in the eyes of our users.   
			