
 User Experience Evaluation Metrics for Usable Accounting Tools Job Mashapa School of ICT Nelson Mandela 
Metropolitan University Port Elizabeth +27 7886 41526 Job.Mashapa@nmmu.ac.za ABSTRACT Small Medium and 
Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) have become active instruments for poverty alleviation, employment generation 
as well as economic and social development. However, SMMEs in developing countries operate under effervescent 
business environments characterised by high inflation rates, poor technology infrastructure, lack of 
business expertise and resources. There is a need for these organisations to strategically align their 
business processes for them to adapt and survive in the operating environment turbulence. There are dozens 
of application software designed specifically to support SMME business processes on the market. On the 
contrary, software developers pay little attention to the user experience and usability aspects of their 
products resulting in the packages falling short on overall usability. Highly usable applications improve 
users productivity, satisfaction and service quality delivery. Hence SMMEs in developing countries should 
implement software tools with usable user interfaces. Considering the applications usability failure 
it becomes vital to research the user experiences of a typical accounting tool commonly used in developing 
countries SMMEs. This paper proposes evaluation metrics that are applicable to evaluate the User Experience 
(UX) of a chosen accounting tool commonly used in developing countries. The paper introduces a brief 
background on the current situation in typical developing countries SMMEs. A discussion on the accounting 
tools used in SMMEs operating in developing countries follows with a definition of UX, its facets and 
evaluation methods. Evaluation results on the UX of Pastel accounting, Xpress 2009 is presented. The 
paper culminates with metrics proposed to evaluate the user experience of accounting tools and proposes 
future work to improve on the proposed metrics. Categories and Subject Descriptors C.4 [Computer Systems 
Organization]: Performance of Systems Design Studies.H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine Systems 
 Human Factors.H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces Evaluations, Graphical 
User Interfaces.J.1. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. SAICSIT 10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, South Africa. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-950-3/10/10 
$10.00. Darelle van Greunen School of ICT Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University Port Elizabeth +27 8256 
42356  Darelle.vanGreunen@nmmu.ac.za General Terms Human factors, Measurement  Keywords Usability, 
User Interface Design, User Experience, Accounting Tools, Small Medium Micro Enterprises, Developing 
Countries 1 BACKGROUND Information Communication Technology (ICT) developments, globalisation and world 
economy integration has cut the global geographical divide and created a one world virtual marketplace. 
This integration brought stiff competition for customers, resources and suppliers among organisations 
across the globe. The emergence of computers, the internet and other ICT related technologies has allowed 
organisations to penetrate both local and international markets [1]. Computerisation and office automation 
is happening frequently in developing countries. SMMEs in developing countries are quick to adapt to 
ICT advancements while the developing countries fail to move abreast with technology. This failure results 
in organisations in the developing countries losing out on world economic integration, competitive advantages 
and sustainable business opportunities. Current situations in typical emerging economies impede the swift 
ICT implementation. These include socio-technological factors, political forces as well as those internal 
to the organization. Internal factors include the lack of ICT infrastructure, lack of business expertise, 
failure to have collateral assets to acquire capital funding as well as business owner s attitude towards 
investing in ICT resources. These drawbacks have lead to little adoption of technology in developing 
countries as compared to their counterparts in the developed world. The little adoption of ICT in developing 
countries is more pronounced in SMMEs compared to large organisations operating under the same environmental 
constraints [2]. SMMEs play an important role in economic development. These organisations have often 
been referred to as economy growth engines [3]. Given the increasing need of SMMEs to penetrate in the 
global market arena, there is a need to implement affordable and sustainable software products developed 
specifically for the SMMEs. Software developers and vendors have realised this increasing emergence of 
SMMEs and therefore focused on SMME specific products. Examples of such SMME specific products include 
accounting tools, payroll management packages and human resources management information systems. Most 
of these software packages fall short on overall usability. Launder [4], states that 80% of software 
maintenance costs are as a result of human-system interaction problems. Poorly designed software applications 
fail to cope with business process requirements and are highly vulnerable to become immediate legacy 
systems [5]. Perry, [6], mentions poor user interfaces as one of the major causes of system failures. 
An investigation by Forrester Research into the usability of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) applications 
found that many of the applications fail on overall usability [7]. In a study conducted by the International 
Foundation of Science (IFS) to enhance usability, customers revealed that the top challenge they faced 
was the fact that different parts of their system worked in different ways and required different types 
of interaction [8]. Given this usability failure rate, it becomes vital to research the user interface, 
usability and user experiences of a typical software tool commonly used in developing countries. A good 
user interface results in reduced costs, increased application package scalability, fewer errors, reduced 
user disruption, training costs, and avoiding changes in software after release [9]. During a pilot study 
on the typical applications used by SMMEs, spreadsheets, word processors, email and Pastel accounting 
came out to be the most common technologies adopted by such organisations. Proper book keeping and accounting 
practice is critical for the success of the business. Therefore, it is of prime importance that SMMEs 
in developing economies should implement accounting tools with usable and appealing user interfaces. 
Based on the findings of the pilot study, this paper reports the usability and user experience aspects 
of Pastel Xpress 2009 accounting tool.  2 ACCOUNTING TOOLS The accounting business process is vital 
for any business to be successful. SMMEs in developing countries will derive their success and sustainability 
by implementing affordable and yet effective accounting tools to support their business accounting activities. 
An accounting tool is a specialised application used to record, analyse, interpret and report business 
transactions that are of financial nature [10]. Accounting is all about keeping track of activities such 
as how much has been sold, profit generated and cost incurred in business operations. Accounting is of 
paramount importance in managing relationships with the outside world [10]. External accounting processes 
include generation of reports for statutory regulators, government and tax authorities. Various tools 
can be used to record the accounting business processes. They can be recorded using a manual system (writing 
in pen and paper), an automated application (in spread sheet and / or word processor), an automated special 
package (commercial accounting application package for example Pastel, Quick Books, and Turbo Cash), 
or a combination of these. The accounting system therefore needs to be supported by usable tools so as 
to satisfy the external and internal stakeholders. The rapid growth of computer technologies adoption 
over the last decade has made the automation of operations essential for almost all organisations. An 
automated financial accounting system helps to ensure maximum efficiency and effectiveness in recording 
accounting transactions. Findings from a pilot study revealed the following accounting processes to be 
prevalent in developing countries SMMEs: Customer and supplier documents processing such as order processing 
and invoicing;  Cashbook for recording receipts and payments as well as bank accounts management;  
Inventory management;  Preparation of financial reports such as balance sheet, tax returns, and income 
statements.  2.1 Pastel Express 20091 Pastel Xpress is an accounting tool designed specifically for 
providing accounting solutions for SMMEs with basic entry accounting needs. By default Pastel Xpress 
2009 has the following features: Supports up to 30 cash books;  Unlimited number of companies;  Accommodates 
1 to 3 users at a time;  Supports one inventory store;  Runs on a pervasive database.  Pastel Xpress 
2009 has the following default functionalities: Customer and Supplier documents processing (customer 
and supplier account details orders, quotations and tax invoices);  General Ledger. The general ledger 
is the basis of an organization s financial system; it serves as the repository for financial and statistical 
information;  Cash Book (recording receipts, payments and bank accounts management);  Inventory and 
the Business Intelligence Centre (BIC) (for generating various reports and financial statements).  In 
addition to the default functionalities the following add on modules are available at extra cost depending 
on the needs of the organisation: Point of Sale;  Payroll;  Bank Manager;  E-Billing and e-Business. 
 Access and navigation to the various system functions can be performed through various options as illustrated 
in Figures 1 and 2. 1 Specifications on Pastel Xpress 2009 were obtained from the Pastel product brochure 
obtained from http://www.pastel.co.za/Accounting-Software-Products/Pastel­Xpress.asp.  The system navigator 
presents the functions in a three level labelled section iconic view. The labels tell who , what and 
what is within as illustrated in Figure 3. In Figure 3 the navigator shows who is being dealt with, 
in the above illustration it is the Customers option which is highlighted, it goes on to specify what 
is to being accessed in Customers option, and as depicted it is Reports and within the reports the user 
can make a choice of the specific report she or he wants to access. As Pastel Xpress has such vast and 
complex features and functionalities, it is essential that the tool must have a robust, easy to use and 
appealing user interface that promotes a positive user experience. A positive user experience maximizes 
the value of the SMMEs investment in the tool.  3 USER EXPERIENCE Despite the rapid advances in ICT 
and popular deployment of various computer based applications, the challenge still being faced by software 
developers is designing for a positive user experience. This challenge results in software applications 
being complicated for the intended users. Computer users in developing countries SMMEs lack advanced 
computer skills. Such users expect to harness the best experience when interacting with computers. They 
expect the computer applications to be user friendly, satisfactory, familiar, predictable, enjoyable 
and productively useful for a specific context of use [11]. However, in most cases users have difficulties 
in finding the functionalities they need. At times the icons used fail to match the users mental models 
and users encounter navigation difficulties hindering them from effectively and efficiently completing 
their intended tasks. This substantially distracts them from a positive from what they want to do with 
the application and impact on their overall user experience. Several authors have written on user experience, 
its facets, building blocks and its components and yet there is no generally agreed standard definition 
for user experience [12; 13; 22; 24; 25]. The diversity in definitions is attributed to the multi-faceted 
nature of user experience. User experience encompasses aspects of usability, user interface design, interaction 
design, human computer interaction, human factors engineering as well as information architecture. With 
such diversity of the field it makes it difficult to have a universally accepted definition for user 
experience. Hassenzahl and Tractinsky [12] defined user experience as a consequence of an internal state 
of the user, the characteristics of the designed system and the context within which the interaction 
occurs. According to Sharp, Roger and Preece user experience is how the interaction with the system feels 
from the subjective perspective of the user and not the usefulness of a system. The International Standard 
Organisation (ISO) definition of user experience states it refers to perceptions and responses of the 
user that result from the use or anticipated use of a product / system. A dissection of the above definitions 
reveals user experience to consist of the following common aspects: The user;  Subjective opinion / 
feeling;  System / product;  Specified context of interaction / use.  Thus defining user experience 
requires incorporating the stated component aspects. In this paper user experience is defined as subjective 
emotions, feelings and attitudes of the user(s) developed before, during and or after their interaction 
with a system / product to perform a specific task in a specified context of use. Such personal derived 
opinions are referred to as user experience goals which include descriptive terms like satisfying, enjoyable, 
annoying, confusing, helpful aesthetically pleasing, attractive, etc [13]. Focusing on goals of user 
experience this paper proposes metrics to evaluate the user experience of Pastel Xpress 2009 accounting 
application. The proposed metrics seek to measures whether Pastel Xpress 2009 gives a positive user experience 
or not. An application that is easy to use, user friendly and appealing to a pleasant interaction promotes 
the best user experience. Designing a product for meeting the expectations and mental models of the users 
is important in achieving a successful positive user experience [11]. Thus this paper proposes a metrics 
based criteria for measuring the attainment of the user experience goals. Pastel Xpress 2009 accounting 
application. 3.1 Measuring User Experience User experience like any other organizational service asset 
has to be measured and monitored [14]. Due to the complexity of user experience, evaluating it cannot 
be a simple straight forward task. User experience evaluation is a means of gaining perspectives of the 
users on how they rate their experience during and after interaction with a system. UX measuring methods 
are classified into three categories namely expert inspection methods, user testing methods and inquiry 
methods [15; 16; 17]. Expert inspection methods involve an expert in user experience examining the tool 
and evaluating the design problems that are likely to hinder the users from having a positive user experience. 
Such methods comprise of Heuristic Evaluations, Expert Reviews [18] and Cognitive Walkthroughs [19]. 
User testing methods are performance based measures presenting the users with a list of task scenarios 
to perform. The users are observed and notes taken with respect to their overall interaction with the 
system. Parameters that can be measured and recorded include number and percentage of tasks completed, 
users error rates, count of incorrect icons selected and many more that relate to performance measures 
[20]. Inquiry methods make use of user based opinions related to subjective rating of their interaction 
with the system [21]. This can be collected in the form of post-test subjective questionnaire and interviews 
where users are asked to comment on their experience on interacting with the system.  4 CASE STUDY: 
PASTEL EXPRESS 2009 USER EXPERIENCE Section 3 presented expert inspection methods, user testing methods 
and inquiry methods as criteria that can be used to measure the user experience of a product / application. 
In this section focus is on the method(s) employed to measure Pastel Xpress 2009 user experience. The 
purpose of the case study was to evaluate the applicability of metrics proposed to evaluate user experience 
of a selected accounting tool used in SMMEs operating in a typical developing country. Based on the metrics 
findings factors hindering Pastel Xpress 2009 from positive user experience were noted. The research 
strategy, user experience evaluation criteria and data collecting methods used are discussed in the case 
study description. 4.1 Case Study Description A context inquiry based case study investigating the UX 
of Pastel Xpress 2009 was conducted during the period May 2009 to September 2009. The context inquiry 
technique consisted of user testing and inquiry methods. The data collecting exercise consisted of direct 
and indirect techniques [21]. The direct method involved presenting participants with a set of tasks 
to perform. The users were observed as they carried the given tasks. Using the think aloud protocol and 
mouse movement tracking user experience observation notes were taken while users interacted with the 
tool. User observations, interviews and post-test questionnaires were used as the data gathering techniques. 
Observation notes, interview questions and the post test questionnaire were developed basing on the proposed 
metrics. These were used to determine how users feel and perceive their experience of using Pastel Xpress 
2009. 4.2 Derivation of the Proposed Metrics Various authors proposed different metrics for evaluating 
user experience [18; 22; 23; 24; 25; 26; 2] (See Appendix A for the outline of existing metrics). Based 
on the existing metrics from the various authors the following metrics were proposed.  4.3 Proposed 
Metrics Subjective satisfaction The metric quantifies the overall satisfaction of the users on the ease 
of completing a task and their pleasure or displeasure from interacting with the system. Consistency 
The metric measures whether similar function keys are used to perform similar tasks throughout the application. 
The labels, choice of colour and commands used should be consistent throughout the application. Keyboard 
shortcuts and commands should match the standard conventional design. Attractiveness Measures the subjective 
opinion of the users on how they find the visual design of the product. Familiarity Measures how the 
UI elements of the application matches the mental models of the user on their domain background and experience 
on other computer based applications. Error Tolerance This metric measures the extent to which the system 
give error warnings that are explicitly and precise to be understood by the targeted users. System Terminology 
Measures how much the system uses terms that are common to the domain of its application rather than 
computer-oriented jargon. Predictability Evaluates how much the users find the system to behave in a 
manner which they always expect and predict. Feedback The metric evaluates how much the system gives 
relevant messages on user action within reasonable time. Help This metric evaluates the accessibility, 
usefulness and informativeness of the help line. Control and freedom Measures the extent to which the 
users feel to be in control of manipulating the system.  4.4 Case Study Details A total of nine participants 
from SMME organisations currently using Pastel accounting were purposively sampled and recruited to participate 
in the evaluation exercise. The user observations were conducted individually at the workplace of the 
participants so as to obtain the real user experience in the context of use of the tool. The participants 
worked on an evaluation copy of Pastel Xpress 2009. Several similar companies were created so as to make 
the testing platform similar. The research purpose and procedure for the test was always communicated 
to each participant before the start of the evaluation activity. The exercise was lead by a moderator 
with the aid of an observer. The purpose of the moderator was to guide and probe questions to the participants 
while they performed specific tasks. The observer helped in taking notes as to the participant s interaction 
with the system. After the individuals agree to participate they had to complete a biographical questionnaire. 
Thereafter Pastel Xpress 2009 main window was launched and the participants were asked to comment on 
the main window of the application s user interface design. After commenting the participants were presented 
with tasks to perform in a similar order. Lastly the participants had to complete a post-test questionnaire 
rating their overall experience while interacting with the tool. 4.5 Participants Biographical Profiles 
Participants were further screened based on the biographical questionnaire. Only current users of Pastel 
accounting (any version) qualified to participate in the study. The biographical data was classified 
into two categories. The first category consisted of participants general demographic data. This data 
was considered not to have direct influence on the tool s user experience. The purpose of collecting 
such data was to collect typical profiles of SMME accounting tools users. The following data attributes 
were collected: Gender;  Age;  Home language;  General computer experience. The second category of 
data collected deemed to directly impact on user experience is participants accounting background profiles. 
Data on the following profiles of the participants were collected: Profession;  Training on accounting; 
 Current version of Pastel being used;  Level of experience on using Pastel accounting;  Duration 
of using Pastel accounting;  Frequency of using Pastel accounting;  Experience on other accounting 
packages besides  Pastel accounting. All of the participants responded they had used Pastel accounting 
prior to the evaluation exercise and they were recruited from SMME organisations. The paragraphs below 
summarize accounting background profiles for the participants. The majority of the participants (six 
out of nine) are in the finance / accounting sector, while two perform administrative duties and one 
in the Information Technology sector. The participants with different professions will help in evaluating 
the user experience of the application basing on their context of use of the system. Six of the participants 
responded that they had formal training in accounting and use of accounting applications, while three 
indicated they did not have any formal training in accounting. Training in accounting is the foundation 
of how the participants find the tool to be familiar in relation to the theory learned. The duration 
of using Pastel accounting ranged from less than one year to more than ten years. User experience feedback 
from such a sample having varying durations of using the tool yields expectantly meaningful satisfaction 
evaluations. All the participants indicated they use Pastel accounting on a daily basis. On the level 
of experience in using Pastel accounting, the participants sample comprised of two beginners, three intermediate 
users and four expert users. This is vital in evaluating the user experience at different levels of skills 
in using the application. One out of the nine participants, only one used Xpress 2009 version, four used 
Xpress 2007, three used Partner 2007 version and one used Evolution version of Pastel accounting. Recruiting 
participants using different version of Pastel accounting helped in comparing Pastel Xpress 2009 user 
experience with that of other Pastel versions. The comparative findings are vital in assessing consistency 
in Pastel user interface design. Three of the nine participants indicated they are familiar with other 
accounting packages besides Pastel while the other six indicated they have never used any other accounting 
package besides Pastel accounting. Feedback from those having experience with other accounting packages 
will motivate comparative study on user experience of other accounting tools developed for SMMEs in developing 
countries.  4.6 Warm up Comments After completing the biographical data questionnaire the participants 
had to comment on the Pastel Xpress 2009 main window. The comments were based on the attractiveness, 
appropriateness of icons used, navigation options and any general comments relating to Pastel accounting 
user experience. (See Appendix B for the warm up comments). Female participants were more pleased with 
the colours and visual aesthetics compared to males (six out of nine). What matters to the male participants 
is the functionality of the tool. Thus designers need to take note of such gender preferences in their 
user interface design directions. In general Pastel accounting received good remarks on the visual aesthetics 
and colours used. On the appropriateness of icons, Pastel Xpress 2009 icons were rated as bad compared 
to those used in the previous versions. Thus tool lacks consistency from one version to another. Developers 
need to maintain consistency in their user interface design to avoid confusing users. It was highlighted 
that the tool is not intuitive and difficult for first time users to understand. Humans are rational 
beings and their first experience interacting with an application determines their long lasting subjective 
satisfaction with the tool. Therefore it is important that the designers should have first time users 
in mind when developing the system. They have to make the application easy to use, easy to learn and 
appealing for a positive user experience.  4.7 Participants Observation Following comments on the main 
window, participants were presented with a set of tasks to complete. The purpose of task observation 
was to investigate user interface aspects of the system that worked well for the users and those they 
find to be hindering task accuracy. It was noted how many participants will accurately complete a given 
task with or without assistance and how many will fail. Participants navigation preferences and difficulties 
impeding them from successful task completion were also investigated. No time bound performance measures 
were recorded. The participants had to perform the following tasks: Task 1: adding a new user to the 
system  Task 2: adding a new inventory item to the inventory database  Task 3: processing supplier 
documents (purchase order and tax invoice)  Task 4: adding a new account customer  Task 5: cash book 
processing (recording receipts and payments)  A task is completed only if the user manages to enter 
all the given information and process the given transaction correctly. A participant is said to have 
failed if she / he gives up on the task or confirms she / he has completed while she / he has done a 
wrong transaction. Figure 4 shows task completion by the participants. Task completion Figure 4. Task 
completion. As depicted in Figure 4, Task 1, adding a new user task was poorly performed with 7 of the 
participants failing to complete the task. The participants failed to get the options to navigate to 
the required window for adding new user to the system. None of the participants consulted the online 
help and participants indicated the task was not familiar and they always call support when they need 
to add a new user to the system. Task 2 and Task 4, adding an inventory item and adding a customer to 
the database tasks were done accurately and with ease. Participants commented that the two tasks had 
some user interface design similarities. Such a consistency in user interface design made it easy to 
successfully complete the two tasks once one has managed to complete either task. Task 3 and Task 5 were 
overly well performed as shown in Figure 4.  4.8 Subjective Satisfaction Questionnaire A subjective 
satisfaction questionnaire developed basing on proposed metrics was given to the participants after performing 
the given tasks (See Appendix C). The questionnaire used a five point Likert scale rating ranging from 
Strongly agree (1), Agree (2), Neutral (3), Disagree (4) to Strongly disagree (5). The participants rated 
their level of agreement with the given metric statements. Questionnaire results are analysed using the 
top-2-boxes and bottom-2-boxes response technique [15]. Top boxes are response options with the highest 
number of participant response count. Bottom boxes are those with the lowest participant count. In cases 
where there is equal number of participants for response option, the equal response entries are all considered 
for analysis. (See Appendix D for the numerical questionnaire responses from the participants). It may 
be concluded that overall the tool is satisfactorily pleasing to interact with and is easy to use in 
performing specific tasks based on the results from Appendix D, Items 1.1 and 1.2. The overall response 
of the participants suggests that there is consistency (Appendix D, Items 2.1 and 2.2) in Pastel Xpress 
2009 UI elements. Once an individual manages to know some component of the user interface he / she is 
unlikely to be confused with the rest of the similar functionality, thus, promoting a positive user experience. 
In response to the familiarity of Pastel Xpress 2009 user interface, it is noted the participants have 
mixed experience on how they find the application to be familiar in relation to their general computer 
experience and accounting background. (See Appendix D, Items 3.1 and 3.2) Commenting on attractiveness 
of Pastel Xpress 2009 (Appendix D, Items 4.1 and 4.2), the top-boxes responses indicate that Pastel Xpress 
2009 choice of colours is attractive and enhances a pleasing experience to the users. Overly, Pastel 
accounting lacks lenience in warning users on possible errors and does not inform users on action to 
be taken to recover from the error as indicated in error tolerance (Appendix D, Items 5.1 and 5.2). As 
depicted in Appendix D, Items 6.1 and 6.2 Pastel Xpress 2009 system terminology avoids use of computer-oriented 
jargon but uses accounting-context specific terminology which is well understood and appreciated by the 
users. In response to the predictability of the user interface items of the system overall, the participants 
indicated to have mixed interaction experiences with the predictability of tool as illustrated in Appendix 
D, Items 7.1 and 7.2. As depicted Pastel accounting tool falls short on providing the users with feedback 
while they interact with the application in (Appendix D, Items 8.1 and 8.2) The tool does not inform 
the users whether a transaction has successfully been completed or not. In cases where the system is 
busy processing a transaction, the tool leaves the users wondering what is taking place and at times 
the users end up thinking the computer is frozen. The majority of the participants (eight out of nine) 
strongly indicated that they found Pastel Xpress 2009 Help function to be useless (Appendix D, Item 9.1). 
In the top-boxes responses none of the participants agreed to find Pastel Help to be of use. Responses 
to the extent to which the participants are in control of the application indicate that the participants 
encounter diverse experiences. Overall, participants find it easy to navigate from one screen to another; 
the system does not always tell the users what to do next to complete a given task and to some users, 
it is not easy to make the system do exactly what they want it to do. In summary, participants rated 
the following metrics positively:\ Subjective satisfaction; Attractiveness;  Consistency;  System 
terminology.  The following aspects were rated to pose a negative user experience: Error tolerance; 
 Feedback;  Help.  The participants had mixed experiences on the following aspects of the tool: Predictability 
4. CONCLUSION This study investigated the usability and user experience of Pastel Xpress 2009. Using 
the proposed user experience evaluation metrics, specific issues relating to the impact of the usability 
of the user interface design on the actual user experience were identified. These issues include the 
following: help is not helpful to users; the tool lacks informative feedback and error tolerance. Participants 
find the UI of the tool to be attractive, satisfactory and consistent. The participants had mixed experiences 
of the tool s use of familiar terminology, predictability and control and freedom. The problems identified 
by the users negatively impacted the overall user experience. Identifying such user experience factors 
is important for designers to understand how the design of the tool can be improved. The potential benefits 
of improving on user experience include motivated and effective users with a clearer understanding of 
their interaction with the tool. Such improvement in the product s user experience will save SMMEs resources 
through reduced training costs, uptimes, and sustainability in the competitive and changing environment. 
The proposed metrics proved to be appropriate, useful and usable in the evaluation of the UX of Pastel 
accounting. Applying the metrics to evaluate the UX of other accounting applications used by SMMEs in 
developing countries will further validate the applicability of using the proposed metrics. To improve 
on the credibility of this research, future research will focus on a comparative study of at least three 
accounting tools commonly used in developing countries. For further research it will be important to 
increase the sample size to at least thirty users to have a sound statistical inference. Further user 
experience methods will be used to include the use of expert based opinions and performance measures 
to evaluate the impact and applicability of the proposed metrics.  5. REFERENCES [1]. Schmid, et al. 
(2001). Towards the ESociety:E-Commerce, E-Business, E-Government . Zurich, Switzerland. [2]. Cloete, 
E. Courtney, S. &#38; Fintz, J. (2002). Small Businesses Acceptance And Adoption of E-Commerce In The 
Western-Cape Province of South-Africa. . Electronic Journal On Information Systems In Developing Countries 
, 10(4), 1 13. [3]. Brouthers, et al. (1998), "If most mergers fail., why are they so popular?", Long 
Range Planning, Vol. 31 No.3, pp.347-54. [4]. Launder, T. (1995). The Trouble with Computers: Usability 
and Productivity. MIT Press. [5]. Oboler, A. (2008). Does the Purchase and Installation of ERP Software 
Represent Investment in an Instant Legacy System? Available from http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/~oboler/LEGACY2.DOC; 
accessed 19 January 2009. [6]. Perry, W. E. (1989). Handbook of diagnosing and solving computer problems. 
Blue Ridge Summit: PA. [7]. Gilbert, A. (2003). Business apps get bad marks in usability. Available from 
http://news.cnet.com/2100-1017- 980648.html; accessed 20 May 2009. [8]. Matthew, D. (2008). Usability 
as an ERP Selection Criterion. Available from http://viewer.bitpipe.com/viewer/viewDocument.do?acces 
sId=7788041. accessed 13 June 2008. [9]. Myers, B. (1994). Challenges of HCI design and implementation. 
Interactions, Vol.1, No. 1 Jan , 73-83. [10]. Meigs, W. B., &#38; Meigs, R. F. ( 1981). Accounting, the 
basis for business decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill. [11]. Microsoft. (1999). Microsoft User Experience. 
Microsoft Press. [12]. Hassenzahl, M., &#38; Tractinsky, N. (2006). User Experience a Research Agenda. 
Behaviour and Information Technolog, Vol. 25, No. 2 , 91-97. [13]. Sharp, H., Roger, Y., &#38; Preece, 
J. (2007). Interaction Design: Beyond Human Computer Interaction. John Wiley &#38; Sons. [14]. Sauro, 
J., &#38; Kindlund, E. (2005). A Method to Standardize Usability Metrics into a Single Score. Proceedings 
of CHI 2005 (pp. 401-409). New York, NY: ACM. [15]. Tullis, T., &#38; Albert, B. (2008). Measuring the 
User Experience: Collecting, Analyzing, and Presenting Usability Metrics. Morgan Kaufmann. [16]. Rubin, 
J., &#38; Chisnell, D. (2008). Handbook of Usability Testing: How to Plan, Design, and Conduct Effective 
Tests. Indianapolis: Wiley Pub. [17]. Banati, H., Bedi, P., &#38; Grover, P. (2006). Evaluating Web Usability 
from the User s Perspective. Journal of Computer Science 2 (4), 314-317. [18]. Nielsen, J. (1994). Heuristic 
Evaluation. In J. Nielsen, &#38; R. Mack, Usability Inspection Methods. New York: Wiley. [19]. Wharton, 
C. E. (1994). The Cognitive Walkthrough Method: A Practitioner s Guide. In J. Nielsen, &#38; R. MACK, 
Usability Inspection Methods. New York: Wiley [20]. Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Engineering. Boston, 
MA: AP Professional. [21]. Daniels J, Fels S, Kushniruk A, Lim J, Ansermino JM. (2007). A Framework for 
Evaluating Usability of Clinical Monitoring Technology. Journal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing, 
323 330 [22]. Kieschnick, T. (2008). User Experience Metrics . Retrieved April 11, 2009, From the World 
Wide Web. http://timiti.blogspot.com/2008/03/user-experience­metrics.html [23]. Pretorius, M. C., Calitz, 
A. P., &#38; van Greunen, D. (2005). The Added Value of Eye Tracking in the Usability Evaluation of a 
Network Management Tool. Proceedings of the 2005 annual research conference of the South African Institute 
of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists (SAICSIT). White River, South Africa. [24]. Rubinoff, 
R. (2004). How to Quantify the User Experience. Available from http://www.sitepoint.com/article/quantify-user­experience; 
accessed on 15 May 2009 [25]. Goddard, P. H. (2009). User Experience Metrics: Connecting the language 
of UI design with the language of business. Human Factors International White Paper. [26]. de Kock, E., 
van Biljon, J.&#38; Pretorius, M., (2009). Usability evaluation methods: mind the gaps. ACM International 
Conference Proceeding Series Proceedings of the 2009 Annual Research Conference of the South African 
Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists (pp. 122-131 ). Vanderbijlpark, Emfuleni, 
South Africa : ACM New York, NY, USA . [27]. Scholtz, B. &#38; Wesson, J. (2008). How learnable are CASE 
tools in diverse user communities? International Federation for Information Processing Digital Library. 
HCIS 6. APPENDICES Appendix A: Existing Metrics Metric Contributing authors Error tolerance: The system 
must help to prevent, diagnose and correct errors [22]; [18]; [23]; [24]. Software-user Interaction: 
During application use the system must keep the user informed of its state [25], [18]; [24]; [26]. System-real 
world match: Does the system match the mental models and expectations of the users. [18]; [26]. Help: 
The system must have a clearly labelled and help function which is easy to use [25]; [22]; [18]; [23]; 
[24]; [26]. Satisfaction: The users must be satisfied of their interaction with the product [25]; [22]; 
[18]; [23]; [24]; [26]. Visual design and aesthetics: A systems UI must be attractive to the users [25]; 
[18]; [24]; [23]; [26]; [27]. Constance: The design of the application must be consistent and must follow 
the conventional design requirements. [18]; [26]. Navigation: Users should get to the parts of the system 
they want to be without facing hindrances [25]; [22]; [18]; [23]; [24]; [26]. Usability : A system must 
be easy to use with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in performing intended goals [18]; [23]; 
[24]; [26]. Value and usefulness: Does the application match its expected value and usefulness [25]; 
[22]; [23]; [24]. Content: The content of the product must be structured in a way that facilitates the 
achievement of the goals of the users. [25]; [23]. Familiarity: UI elements (icons, terms and objects 
used) of the application should match the mental models of the user [27]; [18]; [25]. Appendix B: Participants 
Warm-up Comments  Participant Attractiveness Navigation Icons Participant -1 Not concerned about colours 
used Navigator very user friendly , likes using icons options Could not recognise icons without mouse 
move over text Partcipant-2 Interface is colourful and looks nice Prefers to use icons on the icon bar 
Failed to recognize all icons relating tasks. Emphasised "it s a different version to the one I use". 
Partcipant-3 Acceptable interface, not harsh on eyes. Makes use of icons for navigation Not familiar 
with the graphs, icons are too small and somehow different from my Xpress 2007 version . Partcipant-4 
Quite simple, clear and clean attractive interface Prefers using menu bar navigation option If you know 
the application its quite easy, icons are confusing for first time users . Partcipant-5 Good use of colours, 
attractive and welcoming interface Prefers icons for navigation Likes labelling of icons on move over. 
Partcipant-6 Colours do not matter, what matters is the functionality. Prefers icons for navigation 
Xpress 2009 icons are small . Partcipant-7 Not concerned about colours used Diversity in navigation uses 
keyboard shortcuts, menu list and explorer All icons are ok . Previous versions icons are much better 
, bigger and brighter , prefers such design Partcipant-8 Likes the colours used Uses system navigator, 
it tells who, what and what s within. Icons are clean and neat making it easy to use then in task  
Appendix C: Post Test Subjective Questionnaire User interface attribute Rating 1. Subjective Satisfaction 
 Strongly Agree (1) Strongly Disagree (5) a) Overall, I am satisfied with the ease of completing this 
task 1 2 3 4 5 b) Pastel Accounting system is complicated making it not pleasing to use 1 2 3 4 5 2. 
Consistence a) Pastel Accounting design is confusing making it difficult to do my work 1 2 3 4 5 b) I 
find same function keys to be consistent throughout the system performing similar function 1 2 3 4 5 
3. Attractiveness a) Pastel Accounting user interface is simple and clean 1 2 3 4 5 b) Overall, am pleased 
with the choice of colours used throughout the application 1 2 3 4 5 4. Familiarity a) This system felt 
familiar due to my prior knowledge of other computer based systems. 1 2 3 4 5 b) My background on accounting 
helped me use Pastel accounting easily 1 2 3 4 5 5. Tolerance a) On errors Pastel accounting error messages 
indicate the action I need to take to correct the error 1 2 3 4 5 b) The system always gave me messages 
warning me of possible errors possible 1 2 3 4 5 6. System terminology a) The terms used in Pastel accounting 
commands and objects are common in the accounting field 1 2 3 4 5 b) I fail to understand some of the 
terms used in Pastel accounting menus and objects 1 2 3 4 5 7. Predictability a) While performing the 
tasks I would get results that I predicted and expected 1 2 3 4 5 b) Sometimes when using a Pastel accounting 
things seem to happen and I don t know why 1 2 3 4 5 8. Feedback a) At times the system leaves me wondering 
whether I have successfully completed the task or not 1 2 3 4 5 b) Whenever there is an observable delay 
in the systems response, the system keeps me informed of the processing progress 1 2 3 4 5 9. Help a) 
When stuck I could easily refer to the Pastel accounting help and find my way out 1 2 3 4 5 User interface 
attribute Strongly Agree (1) Strongly Disagree (5) 10. Control and freedom a) Moving between different 
screens and pages in Pastel accounting was easy for me 1 2 3 4 5 b) At times I failed to make the system 
do exactly what I wanted it to do 1 2 3 4 5 c) At times I did not know where to go next to complete a 
given task 1 2 3 4 5    
			