
 Proceedings of the 1993 Winter Simulation Conference G. W. Evans, M. Mollaghasemi, E. C. Russell, W.E. 
Biles (eds.) USING UNIVARIATE BEZIER DISTRIBUTIONS TO MODEL SIMULATION INPUT PROCESSES Mary Ann Flanigan 
Wagner SysTech Software Solutions P.O. Box 413 Annandale, VA 22003, U.S.A. ABSTRACT In this paper we 
describe a graphical, interactive technique for modeling univariate simulation input processes with a 
distribution family based on B6zier curves. This family has an open-ended parame­trization and is capable 
of accurately represent­ing an unlimited variety of distributional shapes. Our input-modeling technique 
is implemented in a self-contained, Windows-based software system called PRIME Probabilistic Input h40deling 
Environment. Several examples illustrate the application of this technique. INTRODUCTION One of the main 
problems in the design and construc­tion of large-scale stochastic simulation experiments is the selection 
of valid input models that is, proba­bility distributions that accurately mimic the behav­ior of the 
stochastic input processes driving the sys­tem. Often the following difficulties arise when us­ing standard 
distribution families for simulation in­put modeling: (a) many real-world input processes exhibit probabilistic 
behavior that cannot be rep­resented faithfully with standard stochastic models; (b) there are a limited 
number of parameters avail­able to control the shape of the fitted distributions; and (c) the parameters 
of these distributions are of­ten difficult to estimate from either sample data or subjective information 
(expert opinion). Moreover, the user has no guarantee of conclusively identifying an appropriate distribution 
family using conventional graphical and statistical goodness-of-fit tests; and the user generally lacks 
a unique, well-formulated crite­rion by which to estimate the parameters of any given distribution family. 
The problem of modeling simula­tion input processes is further complicated if sample data are not available. 
In this case, the selection of a distribution is based arbitrarily on whatever informa- James R. Wilson 
Department of Industrial Engineering North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC 27695-7906, U.S.A. tion 
can be elicited from knowledgeable individuals. In this paper, we present a flexible, interactive, graphical 
methodology for modeling a broad range of input processes that arise in large-scale simula­tion studies. 
We implemented this methodology in a self-contained, Microsoft-Windows-based software system called PRIME 
Probabilistic Input Modeling Environment. PRIME integrates graphical and statis­tical concepts to form 
a tool that helps an analyst select and visualize an appropriate representation of a random input process 
using interactive-subjective, data-driven, and visually-based techniques. We have exploited the properties 
of B6zier curves to develop a flexible univariate distribution family that has an open-ended parameterization 
capable of accurately representing an unlimited number of distributional shapes. The remainder of this 
paper is organized into four sections. In Section 2 we review the current tech­niques used for modeling 
stochastic simu Iat ion input processes. In Section 3 we introduce a methodology for input modeling with 
univariate B6zier distribu­tions, and in Section 4 we describe the implementa­tion of this methodology 
in PRIME. In Section 5 we present some examples to illustrate the application of this methodology. Finally, 
in Section 6 we summa­rize the main contributions of this work. This paper is based on Flanigan (1993). 
2 CONVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES FOR SIMULATION INPUT MODELING 2.1 Subjective Distribution Estimi*tion Subjective 
estimation of a distribution is necessary when the process to be modeled lacks data. The data may be 
nonexistent, as is the case when a new pro­cess is being introduced, or data may be dificult to obtain 
due to cost or time constraints. If data are not available, then the selection of a distribution and 
estimation of its parameters must be based on other 365 Flanigan-Wagner and Wilson characteristics of 
the process. There are several software packages that can be used to display and manipulate probability 
distribu­ tions in the absence of data. The INSIGHT sim­ ulation environment (Roberts 1983) displays 
stan­ dard distributions given user-specified parameters; IMSL (1987) can be used to plot standard distribu­ 
tions; and XCELL+ (Conway et al. 1987) displays the generalized Lambda distribution. All three software 
packages require the user to enter the parameters of the distribution directly, which presupposes detailed 
knowledge of the input process being modeled. Not one of these packages provides a means to edit the 
dis­ played distributionaach program must be restarted if a different parameter set is desired. VISIFIT 
(DeBrota et al. 1989) and VIBES (AbouRizk, Halpin, and Wilson 1991) are designed for subjective estimation 
of bounded Johnson (SB) distributions and generalized beta distributions re­spectively. Both programs 
enable the user to edit graphically the shape of the density, thus altering the corresponding distribution 
parameters, until the fit­ted density is visually and subjectively acceptable. VISIFIT and VIBES have 
the following limitations. (a) Both programs are specifically tailored to dis­tribution families that 
are limited to four parame­ters. (b) Both programs require complicated numer­ical methods for parameter 
estimation. (c) The user must make decisions about the shape of the distri­bution largely from subjective 
information-that is, VISIFIT and VIBES have only limited facilities for superimposing empirical distributions 
onto the view­ing display.  2.2 Data-Driven Distribution Estimation If data are available, a modeler 
is confronted with the problem of selecting a distribution that closely ap­proximates both the underlying 
distribution and the sample data set. A simple distribution-fitting method is to use the empirical distribution 
corresponding to the sample data. The problem with using an empiri­cal distribution is that its mass 
points constitute the entire support of the fitted distribution, and values that are not contained in 
the data set cannot be re­alized (Law and Kelton 1991). Adding exponential tails to an empirical distribu­tion 
is a method for extending the range of realiz­able values of the fitted distribution (Bratley, Fox and 
Schrage 1987). This method overcomes some of the deficiencies of the empirical distribution in modeling 
the tails of the underlying distribution, but it still requires a lot of information to construct an 
input model; and the final fitted distribution may not ad­equately represent the smoothness properties 
of un­derlying distribution. UniFit II (Vincent and Law 1992) is a software package that is used to fit 
data to one of the stan­dard probability distributions plus the more flexible Pearson type V and VI families, 
the Inverse Gaus­sian distribution, the extreme value distributions, and the logistic distribution. The 
program will select the best distribution to represent the data using a (pro­prietary) set of comparison 
and fitting schemes. The only method to tailor, or fine-tune, the chosen distri­bution is to alter the 
data set or to reset the bounds of the fitted distribution. Swain, Venkatraman and Wilson (1988) developed 
FITTR1, a program that attempts to fit data to the entire Johnson system of distributions namely the 
SE (bounded), SU (unbounded), SL (lognormal) and SN (normal) distribution families. FITTR1 incor­porates 
an extensive battery of fitting algorithms to estimate the parameters of the best-fitting Johnson distribution 
for a given data set. However, because each Johnson distribution has at most four param­eters, FITTR1 
is not guaranteed to obtain a glob­ally good fit to an arbitrary data set. Moreover, the parameter-estimation 
schemes in FITTR1 are com­putationally intensive, there are no graphical display capabilities, and methods 
to edit the fitted distribu­tion are ad hoc. Virtually all of the conventional methods for sim­ulation 
input modeling have limited flexibility be­cause they are based on distribution families with a fixed 
number of parameters. Hera (1983) and Avramidis and Wilson (1989, 1993) have introduced methods to extend 
the parameterization of distribu­tion families. Unfortunately neither of these nleth­ods is guaranteed 
to yield a significantly improved fit; and Avramidis and Wilson (1993) show how Hera s method can actually 
yield a fit that is statistically in­ferior or even mathematically illegitimate. Moreover, the additional 
parameters introduced by these meth­ods have no direct, intuitive interpretation in terms of the underlying 
process that is being modeled. In view of the limitations of conventional tech­niques for simulation 
input modeling, there is a need for a parametrically extensible distribution family with the following 
properties: (a) its parameters are meaningful to users and easily estimated from data, and (b) its density 
and distribution function can be readily edited graphically. These considerations mo­t ivated our examination 
of B6zier distributions.  3 BEZIER DISTRIBUTIONS 3.1 Definition of B6zier Curves In computer graphics, 
a B6zier curve is used to ap­proximate a smooth univariate function on a bounded interval by forcing 
the B6zier curve to approximate a gwen set of control poznts {pi S (z~, q ):i= 0, 1,. ... n}. Formally, 
a B6zier curve of degree n with control points {pO, pl, . . . , pn } is given parametrically by P(t) 
= [Pz(t; n,z), P.(t; n, z)] = fiBn,i(t)Pz for t E [0, 1], (1) i=O where z s (Z O, Z1, ..., Zn) and z 
= (.ZO, .Z1, ..., Zn), and where for i = O, 1, . . . ,n, the blending function Bn,i(t) is the well-known 
Bernstein polynomial n! ti(l t)n-i for t G [0, 1]. (2) n,i(t) -~! (n _ i)! B6zier curves have two characteristics 
that are partic­ularly important for graphically-based approximation of functions (Farin 1990): 1. A 
B6zier curve interpolates exactly its first and last control points; this means that the curve will pass 
through these control points. 2. A B6zier curve is edited under global contro~ this means that a change 
in one control point affects the shape of the entire curve.  Although B6zier curves are edited under 
global con­trol, the effect of the ith control point p, on the shape of the curve is greatest when t= 
i/n. As tincreases from O to 1, the effect of the initial control point p. on the current curve coordinates 
P(t) decreases; and the effect of the final control point pn on P(t) increases. In this sense, the control 
points act like magnets , where the magnetic attraction of control point pi is strongest when the independent 
variable t = i/n so that the corresponding point P(t) is in the vicinity of Pi. B6zier curves are used 
extensively in computer graphics because of their ease of implementation, in­tuitive construction, and 
numerical stability. 3.2 The B6zier Distribution Function If X is a continuous random variable with 
bounded support [z*, z*], unknown CDF F xo, and unknown PDF ~x(.), then we can approximate F xo with 
an appropriate B6zier curve of the form (1), where the control points po, pl, . . . ,p~ have been arranged 
so as to ensure the basic requirements of a CDF: (a) f x(x) is monotonically nondecreasing in x; (b) 
FX(X*) = O; and (c) F X(Z*) = 1. By utilizing the B6zier property that control points p. and pm are exactly 
interpolated, we can ensure Fx (c.) = O if we take p. ~ (z,, 0.0), and FX(X*) = 1 if we take pn = (Z*, 
1.0). 3.3 The B6zier Density Function If X is a continuous random variable as defined in ~3.2, then 
we can show that the corresponding density ~xo is given parametrically by -­ P*(t) = [P; (t; n,z), P;(t; 
n,z, z)] , (3) where P~(t; n,z) = PZ(t; n,z), (4) and P2 (t; n,z, z) = . (5) for all t c [0,1]. In Ax 
s (Ado,..., Axl)l) and Az = (A.zo,..., Azn_l), where Ax! = xi+l X, and A*i : .Zi+l -~i (i = 0, 1, . . 
. . n) represent the corresponding first differ­ences of the x-and z-coordinates of the original con­trol 
points {po, pl, . . . . p~ } in the parametric repre­sentation (1) of the distribution function.  3.4 
Moments of the B6zier Distribution The expected value of a B6zier variate ~ is given by Closed-form expressions 
analogous to (6) can be given for the higher-order noncentral moments of a B6zier variate (Flanigan 1993), 
but these expressions are cumbersome to evaluate. An efficient alternative scheme to determine the moments 
of the distribution can be based on the following result E[Xk] = 11 k [PZ(t)]k-l[l Pz(t)]lP;(I!)l dt. 
(7) Jo Equation (7) is valid when ~ is a nonnegative ran­ dom variable. If X has a (finite) negative 
lc)wer bound X*, then equation (7) can be applied to calculate the noncentral moments of the nonnegative 
random variable <, s X z.. It follows immediately that 368 Flanigan-Wagner E[X] = E[<*] + Z.; and the 
remaining central mo­ ments of X coincide with the corresponding central moments of <*. Thus the standard 
deviation, the skewness, and the kurtosis of X are the same as for <.  3.5 Generating B6zier Variates 
by Inversion A B6zier random variable with density (3) can be generated by inversion as follows. Given 
a random number U -Uniform[O, 1], we perform the following steps: (a) find tu E [0, 1] such that n Pz(tu; 
n,z) = ~Bn,i(tu)zi = u; (8) i=O and (b) deliver the variate n x = Pz(tu; n,z) = ~Bn,i(tu)zi . (9) i=o 
The solution to (8) can be found by any root-finding algorithm such as Miiller s, Newton s, or the Bisec­ 
tion method (Conte and de Boor 1980).  4 MODELING BEZIER DISTRIBUTIONS USING PRIME PRIME, Probabilistic 
Input Modeling Environment, is a graphical interactive software system that incor­ porates the methodology 
defined in ~3 to help an ana­ lyst estimate the univariate input processes that arise in large-scale 
simulation studies. PRIME is designed for IBM-compatible microcomputers equipped with a math coprocessor 
and a pointing device such as a mouse. It is written entirely in the C programming language, and it has 
been developed to run under Mi­ crosoft Windows (Microsoft Corporation 1990) ver­ sion 3.0 or later. 
PRIME is designed to be easy and intuitive to use. The construction of a CDF is per­ formed through the 
actions of the mouse, and sev­ eral options are conveniently available through menu selections. Control 
points are represented as small black squares, and each control point is given a unique label corresponding 
to its index i in equation (l). Fig­ ure 1 shows a typical session in PRIME, where the CDF window is 
displayed. In the absence of data, PRIME can be used to describe an input process conceptualized from 
sub­jective information or expertise. The representa­tion of the conceptualized distribution is achieved 
by adding, deleting, and moving the control points via the mouse. As mentioned in ~3.1, each control 
point acts like a magnet pulling the curve in the and Wilson System Menu ,/L Title Bar . M-. -1 PRIME 
\ e File Edit Fit Data Analysis Dkplay Options F(x) 1 ----------­ -­ ..7 T  ControI Point / (. 2 I 
Drawing Area Figure 1: A PRIME Window direction of the control point, where the blending functions, described 
by the Bernstein polynomials, govern the strength of the magnetic attraction of each control point. The 
movement of a control point causes the displayed CDF to be updated (nearly) in­stantaneously. The corresponding 
PDF and the first four moments are (nearly) simultaneously updated in adjacent windows so that the user 
gets immedi­ate feedback on the effects of his movements of the control point. Figures 2 and 3 give some 
indication of the wide variety of distributional shapes that can be achieved with this approach to subjective 
distri­bution estimation. The figures make it clear that the flexibility of this approach greatly exceeds 
that of subjective estimation techniques based on distri­bution families with a fixed number of parameters 
(DeBrota et al. 1989). 4.1 Data-Driven Est imat ion of B6zier Distri­but ions Classical fitting algorithms 
have been employed to fit B6zier distributions to sample data sets. Suppose that a random sample {Xj 
: j = 1,2, . . . . m} has been taken from Fx(.) and that Fro(x) -(number of Xj s < z)/rn denotes the 
corresponding empirical distri­bution function. If Awe define an appropriate distance function d(F m(.), 
Fx(.; n, Z, z)) between the empir­ical CDF f m(.) and the fitted CDF Fx(; n, Z, z) given parametrically 
by (1), then a natural approach to data-based distribution fitting is to use a suitable ting methods. 
 CDF 0.25 1,00 n 5 EXAMPLES 0.20 = 5.1 Distribution Fitting without Data 0,80-- 0.15 010 AbouRizk, 
Halpin and Wilson (1991) described an D.60 application of subjective distribution fitting in the 0,05 
context of construction simulation. To model the 0.40-I 0.00time required to resurface a section of runway 
~< ata 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 1Do small airport, the project engineer assembled the fol­ - .. .~f -.. 020 
lowing information about this activity. CDF Mean 3451 variance 8510 Under the best circumstances, the 
minimum fea- Std k 2917 Skew ... 0704 0.00 sible time to complete the resurfacing is 1 hour. 0.0 2.0 
4.0 6.0 8.0 10,0 K tlmis 2,121 1 Resurfacing must be completed within an 8-hour period at night to avoid 
interfering with airport Figure 2: A Bimodal Distribution operations. In the past, similar resurfacing 
activities have most frequently lasted about 3 hours. CDF 1.00 -s II There is at least a 7590 chance 
that resurfacing will last at most 6 hours. 0.80­ = Using VIBES, the project engineer initially mod­ 
eled the resurfacing time with a beta distribution 0.60­having the characteristics specified above. Unfortu­ 
m nately, the resulting density appeared to be nearly 0.40­ 0.0 20 4.0 6.0 8.0 10,0 uniform on the interval 
between 1 and 8 hours, and this model of the distribution of resurfacing times 0,20-- CDF was judged 
to be unrealistic. Through a series of u.. 4039 Va,,anm 11.368 interactive modifications of the displayed 
beta den-Std Dev 3.372  0.00 sity, the project engineer arrived at a more realis­ 0.0 2.0 4,0 60 80 
10.0 Kurt..,. 1.631 tic model of the distribution of runway resurfacing time. Although the endpoints 
of the distribution were unchanged, the final fitted beta density had a much Figure 3: A Trimodal Distribution 
thinner right tail, with the 75th percentile set at 4.61 hours. We also used PRIME to model the distribution 
of optimization procedure to solve the problem the runway resurfacing time. First we defined the support 
of the distribution by changing the minimum and maximum values on the x-axis to 1 and 8, re­ s. t. F 
Z*(t; n,z, z) ~ O for t G [0, 1] , (lo) spectively. Then we activated the PDF window and 20 = o, %n = 
1, a statistics window showing the first four lmoments of the currently displayed distribution. We moved 
the ~o s ~(l), Xn ~ X(m) / control points from their default positions until the where X(l) ~ X(2) ~ 
. . . s X(m) are the order statis-overall shape of the density was visually acceptable, tics for the 
sample {Xj }. and the mode was approximately 3. Figure 4 shows The classical fitting algorithms that 
have been the final fitted B6zier distribution with the CDF win­incorporated into PRIME include: least-squares 
es-dow on the left and the PDF window on the right. Ta­timation, minimum-L-norm estimation, minimum-ble 
1 displays the corresponding values for the mode, L~-norm estimation, maximum likelihood estima-the 75th 
percentile, the 99th percentile, and the first tion, moment matching, and percentile matching. See four 
moments. In this example, the fitted B6zier dis-Flanigan (1993) for a detailed description of these fit-tribution 
is very similar to the fitted beta distribution 370 Flanigan-Wagner and Wilson ~-;!j3n~:;:::.:::: ,..: 
:; . :,.. : Elc Edit Fit Data Analysis Qisplay Qisplay Qptians f[xl [6.92, 0.99] F(4 1.000 ---------------m 
 0.240 0.800 0.180 0.600 0.120 0.400 0.060 0.200 0.000 K 0.000 :A 1.o 2.4 3.8 5.2 6.; &#38;o 1.0 
2.4 3.8 5.2 6.6 8.0 Figure 4: Subjectively Fitted B6zier Distribution of Runway Resurfacing Time both 
visually and according to the characteristics dis- was taken from two distinct populations. In the cur­ 
played in Table 1. rent context, the production engineers were unable to provide any additional information 
that would enable us to model the lot-size distribution as a mixture of Table 1: Comparison of Subjectively 
Fitted B6zier two simpler distributions; and thus we were forced to and Beta Distributions for Runway 
Resurfacing Time exploit the capabilities of PRIME for modeling multi­modal distributions. B6zier Beta 
Mean 3.614 3.616 Standard Deviation 1.359 1.398 Skewness 0.482 0.368 Kurtosis 2.720 2.415 f[x] 0.007 
Mode 3.0 3.0 99th percentile 6.91 6.92 75th percentile 4.52 4.60 0.006 i Min, Max 1,8 1,8 0.004 \ ... 
J. 5.2 Distribution Fitting with Data 0.003 As an example of distribution fitting with data, we describe 
an application of PRIME in a manufactur­ing simulation study. Surface mount capacitors are 0.001 stored 
in lots of varying sizes in a facility adjacent to the insulation resistance (IR) testing area. To model 
the operation of the IR testing area, we needed to 0.000 -i estimate the distribution of lot sizes 
in the storage --20.0 117.9 255.9 393.8 531.8 ti69.i­facility. Lot-size data were available for 2083 
tested lots. Figure 5 displays a histogram and Figure 6 displays Figure 5: Least-Squares Fit for the 
Lot-Size Data Set the empirical CDF for this data set, where all of the original observations were divided 
by 1000 for sim­plicity. Notice that in the vicinity of 20 and 270 on Once the lot-size data set was 
imported into the new scale (that is, lot sizes expressed in 1000s), PRIME, we moved the control points 
so that the cur­there are pronounced peaks in the histogram. Usually rently displayed B6zier curve approximated 
the em­such a bimodal distribution indicates that the sample pirical CDF. Since the lot-size data set 
is bimodal, 371 A : : ...... : .Wfie;:., . latsallq:jprj,:: f :: /T l* Ele Edit Flt Data Analysis Qisplay 
Qptions I .000 F(x] ... ... ... ... T D.800 / D.600 D.400 / D.200 // 0.000 ~ +o.11 117.9 255.9 393.8 
531.8 669.7 Figure 6: Least-Squares Fit for the Lot-Size Data Set we judged that it would be easier 
to fit the sample data if the B6zier distribution had more than six con­trol points (the default in PRIME); 
hence we created three additional control points. We then requested PRIME to find the least-squares fit 
to the empirical CDF. Figures 5 and 6 respectively display the re­sulting PDF and CDF from the B&#38;zier 
distribution. The sum of the squared deviations of the fitted CDF from the empirical CDF is 0.0329, and 
the largest deviation between the fitted and empirical CDFS is 0.0237. Notice that the fitted PDF and 
CDF closely approximates the shape of the lot-size data set. To demonstrate the advantages of using PRIME 
for fitting a distribution to the lot-size data set, we also obtained fits to this data set using FITTR1 
and Unifit II. The FITTRl-generated PDF and CDF are displayed in Figures 7 and 8 respectively. Clearly 
the Johnson SB distribution obtained with FITTR1 is unacceptable the single mode of the fitted distri­bution 
nearly coincides with the antimode of the em­pirical distribution that lies roughly halfway between the 
two modes mentioned earlier; and the maximum deviation between the fitted and empirical CDFS is 0.0862. 
Although the Johnson SB family includes some bimodal distributions, inherent restrictions on the relative 
placement of these modes effectively pre­clude the use of an SE distribution to represent the lot-size 
data set. Unifit II selected the Weibull distribution as the 0.0045 0.0040 0.0035 1 0.0030 I 4 0.0015 
0.0010 0.0005 /  ,,,,,,,,,, 0.0000 i lW 100 2W 300 4W 5W 600 LotSize (1 OOOS) Figure 7: Minimum-L@ 
-Norm Fit to Lot-Size Data Set Using FITTR1 with an SB Distribution best-fitting distribution for the 
lot-size data set. Fig­ures 9 and 10 respectively display the resulting PDF and CDF. It is evident from 
these iigures that the Weibull distribution selected by Unifit II is also unacceptable the single mode 
of the fitted distribu­tion nearly coincides with the first mode of the em­pirical distribution; and 
the second mode of the em­pirical distribution is largely ignored. The maximum deviation between the 
fitted and the empirical CDFS is 0.0695; and in fact, Unifit II does not recommend the Weibull distribution 
as a satisfactory representa­tion of the data set. 6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS B4zier distribution families 
are extremely flexible. If more degrees of freedom, or parameters, are desired, they may be easily incorporated 
into the formulation of the B6zier distribution. Increasing the number of parameters (control points) 
of a B6zier distribution simply provides more flexibility without changing the form of the distribution, 
which is still B4zier. Distribution fitting using B6zier functions com­bines all available information 
subjective, visual, and empirical in the formulation of the distribution. If data are available, then 
automatic distribution fit­ting via conventional methods (such as least-squares, moment-mat thing, and 
maximum-likelihood estima­tion) is readily performed. 372 Flanigan-Wagner 1.00 0.90 ­  0.80 ­ 0.70­x> 
~ 0.60 : L 0.50 o.d~l LotSize (1000s) Figure 8: Minimum-Lm-Norm Fit to the Lot-Size Data Set Using 
FITTR1 with an SB Distribution 6.1 Univariate Distribution Families If X is a continuous random variable 
having a uni­variate B&#38;zier distribution function Fx (.) as defined in ~3.2, then the distribution 
of X has the following properties: The first control point, PO s [x., .zO], and the last control point, 
pn ~ [Zn, .zn], are exactly interpo­lated. This property ensures that F x(xo) = Z. and Fx (zn) = .zn; 
and when ZO~ O and Zn ~ 1.0, a valid CDF can be constructed.  The density function, fx (.), has a closed-form 
parametric representation as a ratio of two B.4zier curves, as given by (3).  The density function is 
determined from the set of control points, {p., pl, . . . ,pn }, that define the CDF. The result is an 
exact parametric rep­resentation of the density no information is lost or approximated in the conversion. 
 The kth noncentral moment, 13[X~], of a B6zier random variate X has a closed-form solution, and it 
also has a computationally efficient ex­pression given by (7).  6.2 Modeling Simulation Inputs with 
PRIME and Wilson 12ENSITVz H15T06RRflOUERPLOTUITH HODEL1 llNO SRNPLE: ORTR FRIltl LOT5Z3. DRT .15 ll15TRIBUTION 
1-UEIBULL 1n INTERUflL UIOTH 25. EBBB I Figure 9: Unifit II Fit to the Lot-Size Data Set with a Weibull 
Distribution 015TRIBDTIOfiFUNCTIONPLOT OF MIOEL 1 RNO SRNPLE: OflTfl FROMLOT523, ORT 1 DISTRIBUTION 1-UEIBULL 
F u R L u-E 8 . lEEEB H-UflLUE5 545.763 Figure 10: Unifit II Fit to the Lot-Size Data Set with a Weibull 
Distribution methodology is implemented in a graphical environ­ment. From the user s point of view, PRIME 
is an easy­to-use, intuitive, graphical software system. PRIME presents immediate, visual feedback on 
the currently configured distribution. The user can easily alter an inappropriately-configured distribution 
by adding, deleting, or relocating one or more of the control points given in (l). ACKNOWLEDGMENTS PRIME 
implements the methodology discussed in ~3 This work was partially supported by a David Ross so that 
users may construct univariate distributions Grant from the Purdue Research Foundation and by based on 
a family of curves in B6zier form. This NSF Grant No. DMS 8717799. The authors thank Steve Roberts, 
Bruce Schmeiser, and Arnold Sweet for many enlightening discussions on this paper. REFERENCES AbouRlzk, 
S. M., D. W. Halpin, and J. R. Wilson. 1991. Visual interactive fitting of beta distribu­tions. Journal 
of Construction Engineering and Management 117 (4): 589-605. Avramidis, A., and J. R. Wilson. 1989. A 
flexible method for estimating inverse distributions in sim­ulation experiments. In Proceedings of the 
1989 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. A. MacNair, K. J. Musselman, and P. Heidelberger, 428-436. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. Avramidis, A., and J. R. 
Wilson. 1993. A flexible method for estimating inverse distributions in sim­ulation experiments. ORSA 
Journal on Computing to appear. Bratley, P., B. L. Fox, and L. E. Schrage. 1987. A guide to simulation. 
2d ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. Conte, S. D. and C. de Boor. 1980. Elementary nu­merical analysis: 
An algon thmic approach. 3d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. Conway, R., W. L. Maxwell, J. O. McClain, and 
S. L. Worona. 1987. User s guide to XCELL+ factory modeling system. 2d ed. Redwood City, California: 
The Scientific Press. DeBrota, D. J., R. S. Dittus, S. D. Roberts, and J. R. Wilson. 1989. Visual interactive 
fitting of bounded Johnson distributions. Simulation 52 (5): 199-205. Farin, G. 1990. Curves and surfaces 
for computer aided geometn c design: A practical guide. 2d ed. New York: Academic Press. Flanigan, M. 
A. 1993. A flexible, interactive, graph­ical approach to modeling stochastic input pro­cesses. Ph.D. 
diss., School of Industrial Engineer­ing, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana. Hera, S. C. 1983. 
Estimation of the inverse function for random variate generation. Communications of the ACM 26 (8): 590-594. 
International Mathematical and Statistical Library. 1987. IMSL library reference manual. 10th ed. Houston: 
IMSL, Inc. Law, A. M., and W. D. Kelton. 1991. Simulation modeling and analysts. 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Microsoft Corporation. 1990. User s manual for the software development kit. Redmond, Washington: Microsoft 
Corporation. Roberts, S. D. 1983. Simulation modeling and analy­sis with INSIGHT. Indianapolis: Regenstrief 
Insti­tute for Health Care. Swain, J. J., S. Venkatraman, and J. R. Wilson. 1988. Least-squares estimation 
of distribution functions in Johnson s translation system. Journal of Statis­ tical Computation and Simulation 
29:271-297. Vincent, S. G., and W. D. Kelton. 1992. Distribution selection and validation. In Proceedings 
of the 1992 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. J. Swain, D. Goldsman, R. C. Crain, and J. R. Wilscm, 
300-304. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. Vincent, S. G., and 
A. M. Law. 1992. UniFit II: Total support for simulation input modeling. In Proceed­ ings of the 1990 
Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. J. Swain, D. Goldsman, R. C. Crain, and J. R. Wilson, 371-376. Institute 
of Electrical and Elec­tronics Engineers, Piscataway, New Jersey. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MARY ANN FLANIGAN 
WAGNER is cur­rently working at SysTech Software Solutions, located in Annandale, Virginia. Her responsibilities 
include the continuing development and marketing of the sim­ulation language INSIGHT. Her principal interests 
are in simulation development, modeling and anal­ysis. Her undergraduate and graduate degrees are in 
the field of Industrial Engineering, and in May 1993, she received her Ph.D. from Purdue University. 
From 1987 to 1989 she held a research position at the Regenstrief Institute, where she was responsible 
for the development and analysis of simulation models. Dr. Wagner is a member of Alpha Pi Mu, ACM, IIE, 
Omega Rho, ORSA, SIGGRAPH, SIGSIM, and TIMS. JAMES R. WILSON is a Professor in the De­partment of Industrial 
Engineering at North Carolina State University. He received a B.A. degree in math­ematics from Rice University, 
and he received M .S. and Ph.D. degrees in industrial engineering from Pur­due University. His current 
research interests are fo­cused on the design and analysis of simulation exper­iments. He also has an 
active interest in applications of operations research techniques to all areas of in­dustrial engineering. 
From 1988 to 1992, he served as Departmental Editor of Management Science for Simulation. He was Proceedings 
Editor for WSC 86, Associate Program Chair for WSC 91, and Program Chair for WSC 92. He has also held 
various offices in TIMS/College on Simulation. He is a. member of ASA, ACM/SIGSIM, IIE, ORSA, SCS, and 
TIMS.   
			