
 Utilizing Recommender Systems to Support Software Requirements Elicitation Carlos Castro-Herrera and 
Jane Cleland-Huang Systems and Requirements Engineering Center (SAREC) DePaul University Chicago, USA 
 ccastroh@cdm.depaul.edu, jhuang@cs.depaul.edu ABSTRACT Requirements Engineering involves a number of 
human intensive activities designed to help project stakeholders discover, analyze, and specify the functional 
and non-functional needs for a software intensive system. Recommender systems can support several different 
areas of this process including identifying potential subject matter experts for a topic, keeping individual 
stakeholders informed of relevant issues, and even recommending possible features for stakeholders to 
consider and explore. This position paper summarizes an extensive series of experiments that were conducted 
to identify best-of-breed algorithms for recommending forums to stakeholders and recommending unexplored 
topics to project managers.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.1 (Software Engineering): Requirements/Specifications; 
H.3.3 (Information Storage and Retrieval): Information Search and Retrieval.  General Terms Algorithms, 
management, human factors  Keywords Recommender systems, requirements elicitation, stakeholders, subject 
matter experts 1. INTRODUCTION Software development projects are typically initiated through a requirements 
gathering phase in which business analysts work with project stakeholders to elicit the functional and 
behavioral requirements of the system. This is a critical phase of every software project, and numerous 
case studies and surveys have shown that incomplete or incorrect requirements are one of the primary 
causes of project failure and can lead to millions of dollars in lost revenue every year [18]. Traditionally 
the process of requirements elicitation is performed using face-to-face techniques such as interviews, 
brainstorming sessions, and other interactive workshop activities. However, recent advancements in technology 
have led to a growing trend towards using online forums and wikis to facilitate the requirements process 
[10]. In Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. RSSE 10, May 4, 2010, Cape Town, South Africa. Copyright &#38;#169; 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-974-9 
/10/05 $10.00. these forums and wikis, project stakeholders gather in a virtual meeting place, often 
asynchronously, to explore and specify the project requirements. Generally, topic-based discussions take 
place within discussion threads, which are created on demand by the project stakeholders [9]. This paper 
describes several ways in which recommender systems can be used to provide timely and useful recommendations 
to stakeholders, discussion group members, and project managers as they engage in requirements gathering 
activities using wikis or forums. First, recommendations can be made to individual stakeholders to keep 
them informed of pertinent discussion topics so that key stakeholders can engage fully in the requirements 
gathering process. In prior work we have conducted an extensive series of experiments in order to identify 
the best type of recommender system for this task [5,6,7,8]. Section 2 of this paper summarizes our work 
by describing the recommender systems that we found to work best in the requirements domain. The second 
area of recommendation, described in Section 3 of this paper, focuses on the project as a whole. The 
goal is to analyze the project s vision documents and identify proposed features which have not been 
fully discussed by stakeholders in the forum. The recommender system can then suggest ideas for new discussion 
topics. This is an example of a content-based recommender which performs a gap analysis between features 
described in the project s visionary documents and topics that have been discussed in the forums. Our 
approach utilizes a consensus-based requirements clustering algorithm that we developed in prior work 
and validated against data mined from feature request forums [12]. In addition to recommending topics 
to explore, a separate recommender system also identifies stakeholders who might serve as subject matter 
experts for unexplored topics. To address the cold-start problem of introducing a new topic, we propose 
three different approaches for identifying potential stakeholders to invite to the discussion forum [7]. 
 Section 4 of this paper describes our approach. The primary contribution of this paper is to document 
best-of­breed algorithms for areas in which we have conducted extensive evaluations; in addition Section 
5 discusses other possible uses of recommender systems in the requirements elicitation domain.  2. STAKEHOLDER 
RECOMMENDATIONS The first goal of our research was to develop a recommender system for proposing topics 
that might interest an individual stakeholder during the requirements elicitation process [5,6,7]. However, 
the requirements domain presents different challenges Hit Ratio -Student Dataset 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 
50% 40% 30% 20% 10% against four datasets [5,6]. The Student dataset included 370 feature requests 
generated by DePaul graduate students for an Amazon-like student web portal; Sugar included 1000 discussion 
posts mined from the discussion forum of a customer relationship management system named SugarCRM; Secondlife 
represented 1250 posts mined from the discussion forums of the popular Internet-based video game; and 
finally Railway included 1031 simulated feature requests mined from the publication specifications of 
two large scale railway systems. In this position paper we report only the best-of-breed solutions. Our 
experimental results showed that the best recommendation results were obtained through using a K-Nearest 
Neighbor (KNN) collaborative recommender system [17] with an underlying binary representation of users 
interests. It is interesting to note that the matrix factorization approach, which was recently used 
to win the Accumulated % Retrieved 0% Top N recommendations  Hit Ratio -Railway Dataset 100% 90% 80% 
70% 60% 50% 40% 30% Accumulated % Retrieved 20% 10% coveted Netflix prize for movie recommendations, 
was outperformed by the approach presented here. It is therefore not 0% discussed any further in this 
paper. Top N recommendations In the binary KNN approach, a user profile is represented as a binary matrix, 
such that a membership score of 1 means that a Figure 1. Hit ratio graph showing improvements from use 
user is associated with a given requirements topic. More formally, Unlike other forms of user profile 
that capture the degree of interest a user has in a topic, the binary profile simply shows that the user 
has interest. It should be noted also that a 0 only means that we do not know whether a user is interested 
in a topic, and  of binary recommender and inclusion of known data [6]. from the typical recommender 
system domain of E-Commerce. Data in the requirements domain consists of high dimensional textual representations, 
it is sparse, noisy, constantly changing, lacks clean classifications, and has no explicit ratings. Therefore 
techniques that work well for recommending carefully categorized books, or movies with ample ratings, 
will not necessarily work well for recommending discussion topics to stakeholders. should not be misinterpreted 
in a negative way. The similarity between a stakeholder and a potential neighbor is computed using 
the binary equivalent of the Cosine similarity Our work therefore involved an extensive series of experiments 
that evaluated numerous variants of content-based, collaborative metric: where corresponds to the 
 filtering, knowledge based, and matrix factorization techniques, with various different underlying 
representations. Recommendation problems are typically formulated as prediction tasks in which a predictive 
model is built according to prior training data [2,17]. The model is then used in conjunction with the 
dynamic profile of a user to predict the level of interest in a targeted item. Recommender systems have 
traditionally fallen into three categories of content-based systems which make recommendations based 
on semantic content of data, collaborative-filtering systems which make recommendations by examining 
past interactions of a user with the system and identifying other stakeholders with similar interests 
[17], and knowledge-based systems which make recommendations based on knowledge of the user and pre-established 
heuristics. More recently recommender systems research has focused on applying algorithms based on matrix 
factorization. Matrix factorization has been shown to be a highly effective alternative to collaborative 
filtering [19]. The matrix factorization techniques attempt to map both users and items to a joint latent 
factor space, such that a prediction to a user for an item can be computed as an The binary recommender 
system was evaluated against the four datasets, and the inclusion of known data against Student and Railway, 
as these were the only two datasets for which this additional known data was available. All of our experiments 
utilized a standard leave-one-out cross validation technique, in which each individual s interests were 
removed one at a time, and the recommender algorithm then executed. The rank at which the stakeholder 
s removed interest was recommended back was recorded. A hit-ratio graph was then generated to depict 
the number of interests recommended back at the 1st position, 2nd position, etc. of the ranked list. 
Results from these experiments are reported in Figure 1; however due to space constraints we show only 
the Student and Railway datasets, for which both binary and known-data results are available. As depicted 
in Figure 1, both the inclusion of known data and use of binary representations generated quite accurate 
recommendations. For example, in the Railway dataset, approximately 40% of known interests were placed 
into the top 5 recommendations using the binary recommender, and this number increased to just over 65% 
when known data was incorporated. Although not shown here, these methods were found to significantly 
outperform numerous other techniques and variants of the KNN approach that we experimented with. A full 
comparison of techniques is available in other papers [6,7,8].      These experiments show the 
feasibility of using recommender systems to help inform individual stakeholders of topics that might 
be of interest to them during the requirements elicitation process. A concrete example is provided in 
Figure 2, which depicts a recommendation made to a stakeholder to join two different discussion forums 
  3. RECOMMENDING FOCUS AREAS Recommender systems can also be usefully employed during the elicitation 
process to make recommendations to project managers concerning topics that need additional focus. These 
might represent features identified in the project vision document, but not yet discussed in the requirements 
forum, or could represent a stagnant forum in which ideas have been discussed without closure. Our approach 
first clusters the sections in the vision documents, secondly clusters the requirements, and finally 
looks for topics in the vision statements that are not fully covered by the requirements and/or feature 
requests. Feature requests within the forum are clustered as follows. First sentences are preprocessed 
to remove common words (such as this and because ) which are not useful for identifying underlying themes. 
The remaining terms are then stemmed to their roots. Given the final dictionary of terms   , each feature 
request  is represented as a vector over T:  , where  is the weight associated with term   in request 
 . The weights are typically computed using the standard tf-idf approach from information retrieval. 
Specifically, , where represents the number of feature requests, represents the term frequency of  
 in the feature request , and represents the number of feature requests containing . The similarity 
between each pair of request vectors and is then computed using the Cosine similarity measure:   . 
 Based on prior experiments, the clustering framework utilizes a technique proposed by Can [4] to predict 
the appropriate number of clusters for the current dataset. Can s approach considers the degree to which 
each feature request differentiates itself from other requests and the ideal number of clusters K is 
computed as follows: , where is the frequency of term in artifact ,  is the length of the artifact, 
 represents the total occurrence of term , and is the complete set of feature requests. This approach 
has been validated across multiple datasets [5,12]. Following an extensive series of previously conducted 
experiments to evaluate the best clustering technique for feature requests [12], Spherical K-Means (SPK), 
which exhibits fast running-times and returns relatively high-quality results was adopted. A set of 
 centroids are initially selected. The distance between each feature request and each centroid is then 
computed, and each feature request is placed into the cluster associated with its closest centroid. Once 
all feature requests have been assigned to clusters, each of the centroids are repositioned in order 
to increase their average proximity to all their associated feature requests. This process is followed 
by a series of incremental optimizations in which an attempt is made to move a randomly selected feature 
request to the cluster for which it maximizes the overall cohesion gain. The process continues until 
no further optimizations are possible. As the quality of the final clustering is dependent upon a good 
initial choice of centroids, we adopted a consensus clustering technique in which multiple candidate 
clusterings, called an ensemble, are generated and then a voting scheme is used to create the final result. 
There are two primary components in consensus clustering, ensemble generation which describes how the 
ensemble is created, and integration which describes the technique for transforming the clusterings in 
the ensemble into a final result. Our approach adopts sub-sampling SPK and average­link Agglomerative 
Hierarchical Clustering (AHC) as methods for ensemble generation and integration respectively. Sub-sampling 
constructs a clustering ensemble of size  through subset clustering and classifying. In each of  runs, 
a proportion  of the whole dataset is randomly extracted and then partitioned into clusters using SPK. 
Based on prior experiments  was set to 0.8 [12]. The remaining feature requests are then classified 
into their most closely related clusters.    Our ensemble integration is based on the concept of 
a co­association matrix . Let be the set of feature requests to be clustered. A clustering ensemble 
    represents partitionings of where the partitioning  represents a set of clusters such that 
 . Then each element of the co-association matrix represents a voting score between a pair of instances 
 where  is the number of times the instance pair  is assigned to the same cluster over the ensemble. 
The underlying assumption is that pairs of feature requests that truly belong together in a cluster, 
are likely to be placed together in more of the individual clusterings, than pairs that do not belong 
together. The final partitioning is generated from  using hierarchical clustering to cluster over the 
co-association matrix [11]. Although consensus clustering has a relatively long running time, it delivers 
clusters that are consistently of higher quality than the average SPK clustering, and invariably close 
to the optimal quality achievable by an individual SPK clustering. Experiments validating this finding 
for software requirements and feature requests are reported in a prior paper [12]. The sentences in the 
vision document are then clustered in a similar way. The end result is a set of topics extracted from 
the vision document, and another set of topics extracted from the feature requests. The cosine similarity 
formula is then used to compute the similarity between each topic in the vision document with each topic 
from the feature requests. Topics in the vision document with no matching topics in the feature requests 
i.e. no topic that scores over a predefined similarity score, are identified as potentially unexplored 
topics and presented as recommendations to the project manager. Figure 3 depicts all of the topics identified 
in the student domain. The colorings provide a simulated example showing topics not fully covered in 
the discussion forums.  4. RECOMMENDING EXPERTS Once a topic has been recommended to the project manager 
for further attention, a different recommender system can suggest a set of stakeholders who might serve 
as subject matter experts. Our prior work in this area has identified three different types of stakeholders 
[7]. The first group represents stakeholders who have directly contributed ideas to the discussion topic 
(assuming it pre-exists). This group of stakeholders obviously does not exist when an entirely new topic 
is launched. The second group represents stakeholders who have contributed to related topics. These stakeholders 
are identified by using the cosine similarity to compute the similarity between each pair of topics. 
Topics are then represented as a graph, in which each topic is directly connected to other topics that 
exhibit a similarity score over a certain threshold. For example, Figure 4 depicts a graph showing topics 
related to Encryption. Stakeholders associated with all directly related groups, in this case payments, 
security, database, quality, availability, and privacy can be selected. The selection process can either 
use a fixed threshold to select all stakeholders who have contributed to topics with similarities above 
a certain score, or can adopt a weighted approach which takes the similarity of the topic, and the level 
of stakeholder participation into account.  Finally, the third group of stakeholders can be identified 
using the collaborative recommender described in section 2. This discovers stakeholders who, according 
to their user profiles and the interests of their nearest neighbors, might be interested in this topic. 
It is interesting to note that even if the topic initially has no known stakeholders, the use of the 
content-based recommender can circumvent the cold-start problem by creating an initial pool of interested 
people, and this can provide the data needed to run the collaborative recommender and find additional 
stakeholders.  5. RECOMMENDING FEATURES Several researchers have previously pointed out the importance 
of creativity in the requirements process. For example Karlsen et al investigated the use of a searching 
and browsing tool for exploring information, to synthesize creative ideas for a project [14]. In their 
approach, they seeded the combinFormation tool with text from scenarios and then presented the resulting 
images and short textual clips to the user to encourage creative thinking. Gibiec [13] implemented a 
similar tool that took a topic as a search term, utilized GOOGLE and BING search engines to find related 
documents, and then used data-mining techniques to extract topics from the results. His approach returned 
key topics that are potentially related to the initial search term and which can be presented to the 
user to inspire ideas related to the general topic. An initial series of feasibility experiments have 
demonstrated that this tool can often generate useful topics; however additional work is needed to discover 
best-of-breed algorithms. A scenario can be envisioned in which a recommender system, using this information 
can suggest features to the project manager. The project manager can then choose to launch a new discussion 
thread to address this feature.  6. PRIOR WORK The use of recommender systems in the domain of requirements 
engineering is a fairly new concept. Our research group has produced an initial body of work that has 
been summarized in this paper [5,6,7,8]. Maalej and Thurimella have also raised this subject and presented 
a list of possible usages and applications of recommender systems in this domain [16]. While the application 
to the domain is new, the fundamentals of recommender systems have been extensively researched [1,2,3,17,19]. 
Adomavicius provides a good summary of the current state of recommender systems [1]. All of the techniques 
presented in this paper are built on the solid work done in this area. For example, the hybrid combination 
of content and collaborative recommenders discussed in section 4 has been found by Burke to be effective 
in other domains and an appropriate solution to the cold start problem [3]. 7. CONCLUSIONS This paper 
has presented several ideas for integrating recommender systems into the online requirements gathering 
process by recommending topics, areas that need focus, and experts. This is an important area of work, 
as an increasing number of organizations are utilizing wikis and forums to manage feature requests and 
to gather requirements during the elicitation process. While web-based requirements gathering tools can 
facilitate a more inclusive requirements elicitation process, the potential overload of data can decrease 
their effectiveness. Fortunately, the recommender systems described in this paper offer one solution 
for helping to manage online collaborative requirements processes. Although all of the examples in this 
paper have been taken from online forums, we do not believe that the recommender systems described in 
this paper are limited to use in this context. Requirements management tools such as Requisite Pro and 
DOORS also attempt to organize stakeholder and system level requirements by groups, and recommender systems 
could be similarly built into these tools to highlight important and relevant areas to different project 
stakeholders. We are currently incorporating several of the recommender systems described in this paper 
into an application named ReqForum, built using the open source JForum package. This will provide the 
opportunity for evaluating the usefulness of the described recommender systems within an actual project 
where stakeholders can provide realistic feedback concerning the correctness of the recommendations. 
 8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is funded in part by the National Science Foundation under NSF grants # 
CCF-0810924. We thank several DePaul students who have helped build the current forum tool including 
Adam Czauderna and Ming Chang Liu.  9. REFERENCES [1] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin. Toward the Next 
Generation of Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible Extensions. IEEE Trans. 
on Knowl. and Data Eng. 17(6): 734-749, Jun. 2005. [2] C. Basu, H. Hirsh, and W. Cohen. Recommendation 
as classification: using social and content-based information in recommendation. In Conf. on Artificial 
intelligence/ Innovative applications of artificial intelligence (AAAI '98/IAAI '98), pages 714-720, 
Madison, WI, USA, 1998. [3] R. Burke. Hybrid Recommender Systems: Survey and Experiments. User Modeling 
and User-Adapted Interaction 12(4): 331-370, Nov. 2002. [4] F. Can and E. A. Ozkarahan. Concepts and 
effectiveness of the cover-coefficient based clustering methodology for text databases. ACM Trans. On 
Database Systems., 15(4):483­417, 1990. [5] C. Castro-Herrera, J. Cleland-Huang, and B. Mobasher. Enhancing 
stakeholder profiles to improve recommendations in online requirements elicitation. IEEE Conf. on Requirements 
Eng. (RE'09), Atlanta, GA, USA, Aug. 2009. [6] C. Castro-Herrera, C. Duan, J. Cleland-Huang, and B. Mobasher. 
A recommender system for requirements elicitation in large-scale software projects. In ACM Symposium 
on Applied Computing (SAC'09), pages 1419­1426, Honolulu, HI, USA, Mar. 2009. [7] C. Castro-Herrera, 
and J. Cleland-Huang, A Machine Learning Approach for Identifying Expert Stakeholders, 2nd International 
Workshop on Managing Requirements Knowledge, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Sept. 2009. [8] C. Castro-Herrera, 
J. Cleland-Huang, B. Mobasher, A recommender system for dynamically evolving online forums , Recommender 
Systems, 2009, New York, USA, pp. 213-216. [9] J. Cleland-Huang, H. Dumitru, C. Duan, and C. Castro-Herrera. 
Automated support for managing feature requests in open forums. Comm. of the ACM, 52(10): 68-74 (2009). 
[10] Decker, B., Ras, E., Rech, J., Jaubert, P., and Rieth, M. 2007. Wiki-Based Stakeholder Participation 
in Requirements Engineering. IEEE Software. 24, 2 (Mar. 2007), 28-35. [11] I. S. Dhillon and D. S. Modha. 
Concept decompositions for large sparse text data using clustering. Mach. Learn., 42(1/2):143-175, 2001. 
[12] C. Duan, J. Cleland-Huang, and B. Mobasher. A consensus based approach to constrained clustering 
of software requirements. In ACM Conf. on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 1073-1082, Napa Valley, 
CA, USA, 2008. [13] M. Gibiec, A Hierarchical Approach to Mining Topic-based Features , Term Project, 
DePaul University. [14] I. Karlsen, N. A. M. Maiden, A. Kerne, Inventing Requirements with Creativity 
Support Tools , Conf. on Reqs Eng. for Software Quality, Amsterdam, 2009, pp. 162-174. [15] Koren, Y., 
Bell, R., and Volinsky, C. 2009. Matrix Factorization Techniques for Recommender Systems. Computer 42, 
8 (Aug. 2009), 30-37. [16] Maalej, W. and Thurimella, A. Towards a Research Agenda for Recommendation 
Systems in Requirements Engineering, In Proceeding of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Managing Requirements 
Knowledge, Atlanta, GA, USA, Aug. 2009. [17] J. B. Schafer, D. Frankowski, J. Herlocker, and S. Sen. 
Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems. The Adaptive Web: Methods and Strategies of Web Personalization 
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science).Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2007. [18] Standish Chaos Report, 
Standish Research Group, Available at http://www.standish.com [19] G. Takács, I.Pilászy, B. Németh, and 
D. Tikk, Matrixfactorization and neighbor based algorithms for the netflix prize problem. ACM Conf. on 
Recommender Systems Lausanne, Switzerland, October 23 - 25, 2008). 267-274.  
			