
 Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, 
and J. J. Swain VERIFYING AND VALIDATING SIMULATION MODELS* Robert G. Sargent Simulation Research Group 
College of Engineering and Computer Science 439 Link Hall Syracuse University Syracuse, New York 13244 
ABSTRACT This paper discusses verification and validation of simulation models. l%e different approaches 
to deciding model validity are present@ how model verification and validation relate to the model development 
process are discusse@ various validation techniques are define~ conceptual model validity, model verification, 
operational validity, and data validity are deseribtxk ways to document results are given; and a recommended 
pmcedue is presented. 1. INTRODUCTION Simulation models are increasingly being used in problem-solving 
and in decision-making. The developers and users of these models, the deeision-makers using information 
derived from the results of the models, and people effected by decisions based on such models are all 
rightly concerned with whether a model and its results are correct . This concern is addressed through 
model verification and validation. Model validation is usually defined to mean substantiation that a 
computerized model within its domain of applicability possesses a satisfactory range of accuracy consistent 
with the intended application of the model (Schlesinger, et al. 1979) and is the definition used here. 
Model verifkation is often defined as ensuring that the computer program of the computerized model and 
its implementation is correct , and is the definition adopted here. A model sometimes becomes certified 
or accredited which is an official determination that a model is acceptable with respect to a set of 
explicit standards for a specific purpose. A related topic is model acceptability (or credibility), which 
is developing in the (potential) users (e.g., decision-makers) of information (e.g., results) from the 
models sufficient confidence in the information that they are willing to use it. * This paper is a modMied 
version of Verification and Validation of Simulation Models , Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Sitnulotion 
Cor@erence, pp. 77-87. A model should be developed for a specific purpose (or application) and its validity 
determined with respect to that purpose. If the purpose of a model is tai answer a variety of questions, 
the validity of the model netds to be determined with respeet to each question. Several sets of experimental 
conditions me usually tequhed to define the domain of a model s intended applicability. A model may be 
vatid for one set of experimental conditions and be invalid in another. A model is considered valid for 
a set of experimental conditions if the model s accuracy is within its acceptable range of accuracy, 
which is the amount of accuracy required for the model s intended PW*. nis generally requires that the 
model s output variables of interest (i.e., the model variables used to be used in answering the questions 
that (he model is being developed to answer) be identified and that their required amount of accuracy 
be specified. The amount of accuracy required should be specified prior to starting the development of 
the model or very early in the model development process. If the variables of interest are random variables, 
then properties and functions of the random variables such as their means and variances are usually what 
is of primary interest and are what are used in determining model validity. Several versions of a model 
are usually developed prior to obtaining a satisfactory valid model. The substantiation that a model 
is valid, i.e., model verification and validation, is generally considered to be a process and is usually 
part of the mcxlel development process. It is often too costly and time consuming to determine that a 
model is absolutely valicl over the complete domain of its intended applicability. Instead, tests and 
evaluations are conducted until sufficient confidence is obtained that a model can be considered valid 
for its intended application (Sargent 1982, 1984 and Shannon 1975, 1981). The relationships of cost (and 
a similar relationship holds for the amount of time) of performing model validation and the value of 
the model to the user as a function of model confidence are illustrated in Figure 1. The cost of model 
validation is usually quite signifkanc in particul~ when extremely 55 56 Sargent b. VALUE COST O% MODEL 
CONFIDENCE 100% 0 Figtue 1: Model Confidence high confidence is required because of the consequence of 
an invalid model. The remainder of this paper is organized as followx Section 2 discusses the three basic 
approaches used in deciding model validity; Section 3 defines the validation techniques used; Sections 
4, 5, 6, and 7 contain descriptions of data validity, conceptual model validity, computerized model verifkation, 
and operational validity, respectively; Section 8 describes ways of presenting result.y Section 9 contains 
a recommended validation procedur~ and Section 10 gives the conclusions. 2. VALIDATION PROCESS There 
are three basic approaches used in deciding whether a simulation model is valid or invalid. Each of these 
approaches require the model development team to conduct verification and validation as part of the model 
development process and this is discussed below in some detail. The most common approach is for the model 
development team to make the decision whether the model is valid. This decision is a subjective decision 
based on the results of the various tests and evaluations conducted as part of the model development 
process. Another approach, often called independent verification and validation (IV&#38;V), uses a third 
(independent) party to decide whether the model is valid. The third party is independent of both the 
model development team and the model sponsor/user(s). After the model has been developed, the third party 
conducts an evaluation to determine whether the model is valid. Based upon this validation, the third 
party makes a subjective decision on the validity of the model. This approach is usually used when there 
is a large cost associated with the problem the simulation model is being used for and/or to help in 
model acceptability. (A third party is atso usuatly used for model certification or axreditation.) The 
evaluation performed in the IV&#38;V approach ranges from simply reviewing the verification and validation 
conducted by the model development team to a complete veritlcation and validation effort. Wood (1986) 
describes experiences over this range of evaluation by a third party on energy models. One conclusion 
that Wood (1986) makes is that a complete IV&#38;V evaluation is extremely costly and time consuming 
for what is obtained. This author s view is that if a third party is to be used, they should be involved 
during the model development process. If the model has already been developed, this author believes that 
a third party should usually ordy evaluate the veritlcation and validation that has already been performed. 
(Also see Davis (1986) for an approach that simultaneously specifies and validates a model). The last 
approach to determine whether a model is valid is to use a scoring model (see, e.g., Balci 1989, Gass 
1979, and Gass and Joel 1987). Scores (or weights) are determined subjectively when conducting various 
aspects of the validation process. Then these scores are combined to determine category scores and an 
overall score for the simulation model. A simulation model is considered valid if its overall and category 
scores are greater than some passing score(s). This approach is infrequently used in practice. This author 
does not believe in the use of a scoring model for determine validity. One reason is that the subjectiveness 
of this approach tends to be hidden and thus it appears to be objective. A second mason is how are passing 
scores to be determined. A third reason is that a model may receive a passing score and yet have a defect 
that needs corrwtion. A fourth reason is that the score(s) may cause over confidence in a model or be 
used to argue one model is better than another. We now discuss how model verification and validation 
relate to the model development prccess. There are two common ways to view this relationship. One way 
uses a detail model development process and the other uses a simple model development process. Banks, 
Gerstein, and Searles (1988) reviewed work in both of these ways and concluded that the simple way more 
clearly illuminates model verification and validation. This author recommends the use of the simple way 
(see e.g., Sargent 1982) and is the way presented here. Consider the simplified version of the modelling 
process in Figure 2. The problem entity is the system (real or proposed), idea, situation, policy, or 
phenomena to be modelled; the conceptual model is the mathematical/logical/verbal representation (mimic) 
of the problem entity developed for a particular study; and the computerized model is the conceptual 
model implemented on a computer. The conceptual model is developed through an analysis and modelling 
phase, the computerized model is developed through a computer programming and implementation phase, and 
inferences about the problem entity are obtained by conducting computer experiments on the computerized 
model in the experimentation phase. We will now relate model validation and verification to this simplified 
version of the modelling process (See Figure 2). Conceptual model validity is defined as determining 
that the theories and assumptions underlying the conceptual model are correct and that the model II PROBLEM 
ENTITY t \ ANAl_~SIS OPERATIONAL VALIDITY MODELLING _­ / MCOEL xpER!MmTAmmDATA VALICWYI / VAUCHY / 
 %...s AND IMPLEMENTATION I\ COMPUTERIZED MODEL / \ VERIFICATION Figure2 Simplified Version of the 
Modelling Process rtmresentationof the Droblem entity is reasonable for th~ intended purpose if the model. 
Computerized model verification is defined as ensuring that the computer programming and implementation 
of the conceptual model is correct. Operational validity is defined as determining that the model s output 
behavior has suftlcient accuracy for the model s intended purpose over the domain of the model s intended 
applicability. Data validity is defined as ensuring that the data necessary for model building, model 
evaluation and testing, and conducting the model experiments to solve the problem are adequate and correct. 
Several versions of a model are usually developed in the modelling process prior to obtaining a satisfactory 
valid model. During each model iteration, model verification and validation are performed (Sargent 1984). 
A variety of (validation) techniques are used, which are described below. No algorithm or procedure exists 
to select which techniques to use. Some attributes that effect which techniques to use are discussed 
in Sargent (1984). 3. VALIDATION TECHNIQUES This section describes various validation techniques (and 
tests) used in model verification and validation. Most of the techniques described here are found in 
the literature (see Balci and Sargent (1984a) for a detailed bibliography), although some may be described 
slightly different. They caD be used either subjectively or objectively. By objectively, we mean using 
some type of statistical test or mathematical procedure, e.g., hypothesis tests and confidence intervals. 
A combination of techniques is generally used. These techniques are used for validating and verifying 
the submodels and overall model. Simulation Models Anima(ion: The model s operational behavior is displayed 
graphically as the model moves through time. For example, the movements of parts through a factory during 
a simulation are shown graphically. Comparison to Other ModelK Various results (e.g., outputs) of the 
simulation model being valil&#38;ted are compared to results of other (valid) models. IExamples are (i) 
simple cases of a simulation model may be compared to known results of analytic models, and (ii) the 
simulation model may be compared to other simulation models that have been vali&#38;ted. (Sometimes the 
simulation model being validated requires modification to allow comparisons to be made.) Degenerate Tests: 
The degeneracy of the model s behavior is tested by removing portions of the model or by appropriate 
selection of values of the input and internal parameters. For example, does the average number in the 
queue of a single server co]ntinue to increase with respect to time when the arrival rate is larger than 
the service rate. Event Validity: The events of occurrences of the simulation model are comtwed to those 
of the real system to determine if they ;e the same. An example of events are deaths in a fwe department 
simulation. Extreme-Condition Tests: The model structure and output should be plausible for any extreme 
ancl unlikely combination of levels of factors in the system; e.g., if in-process inventories are zero, 
production output should be zero. Face Validity: Face validity is asking people knowledgeable about the 
system whether the model and/or its behavior are reasonable. This technique can be used in determining 
if the logic in the conceptual model is correct and if a model s input-output relationships are reasonable. 
Fixed Values: Fixed values (e.g., conslants) are used for all model input and internal variables. This 
should allow checking the model results against values easily calculated. Historical Data Validation: 
If historical data exist (or if data is collected on a system for building or testing the model), part 
of the data is used to build the model and the remaining data is used to determine (test) if lle model 
behaves as the system does. (This testing is conducted by driving the simulation model with either Distributions 
or Traces (Balci and Sargent 1982a, 1982b, 1984b).) Historical Me(hods: The three historical methods 
of validation are Rationalism, Empiricism, and Positive Economics. Rationalism assumes that everyone 
knows whether the underlying assumptions of a model are true. Then logic deductions are used from these 
assumptions to develop the correct (valid) model. Empiricisnn requires every assumption and outcome to 
be empirically validated. Positive Economics requires only that the model be able to predict the future 
and is not concerned with a model s assumptions or structure (causal relationships or mechanisms). Internal 
Validity: Several replications (runs) of a stochastic model are made to determine the amount of (internal) 
stochastic variability in the model. A high amount of variability (kick of consistency) may cause the 
model s results to be questionable, and, if typical of the problem entity, may question the appropriateness 
of the policy or system being investigated. Multistage Valial.ation: Naylor and Finger (1%7) proposed 
combining the three historical methods of Rationalism, Empiricism, and Positive Economics into a multistage 
process of validation. This validation method consists of (1) developing the model s assumptions on theory, 
observations, general knowledge, and function, (2) validating the model s assumptions where possible 
by empirically testing them, and (3) comparing (testing) the input-output relationships of the model 
to the real system. Operational Graphics: Various performance measures, e.g., number in queue and percentage 
of servers busy, are shown graphically as the model moves through timq i.e., the dynamic behavior of 
performance indicators are visually displayed as the simulation model moves through time. Parameter Variability 
-Sensitivity Analysis: This technique consists of changing the values of the input and internal parameters 
of a model to determine the effect upon the model behavior and its output. The same relationships should 
occur in the model as in the real system. Those parameters that are sensitive, i.e., cause significant 
changes in the model s behavior or output, should be made sufficiently accurate prior to using the model. 
(This may require iterations in model developmen~) Predictive Validation: The model is used to predict 
(forecast) the system behavior and then comparisons are made between the system behavior and the model 
s forecast to determine if they are the same. The system data may come from an operational system or 
from experiments performed on the system, e.g., field tests. Traces. The behavior of different types 
of specific entities in the model are traced (followed) through the model to determine if the model s 
logic is correct and if rhe necewary accuracy is obtained. Turing Tests People who are knowledgeable 
about the operations of a system are asked if they can discriminate between system and model outputs. 
(Schruben (1980) contains statistical tests for use with Turing tests.) 4. DATA VALIDITY Even though 
data validity is usually not considered part of model validation, we discuss it because it is usually 
difficult, time consuming, and costly to obtain sufficien~ accurate and appropriate &#38;ta, and is frequently 
the reason that attempts to validate a model fail. Data are needed for three purposes for building the 
conceptual model, for validating the model, and for performing Sargent experiments with the validated 
model. In model validation, we are concerned only with the fht two types of data. To build a conceptual 
model, we must have sufficient data on the problem entity to develop theories that can be used in building 
the model, to develop the mathematical and logical relationships in the model for it to adequately represent 
the problem entity for its intended purpose, and to test the model s underlying assumptions. In addition, 
behavior data is needed on the problem entity to be used in the operational validity step of comparing 
the problem entity s behavior with the model s behavior. (Usually, these data are system input/output 
data.) If these data are not available, high model confidence usually cannot be obtained because sufficient 
operational validity cannot be achieved. The concern with data is that appropriate, accurate, and sufficient 
data are available, and if any data transformations are made, such as disaggregation, they are correctly 
performed. Unfortunately, there is not much that can be done to ensure that the data are correct. The 
best that can be done is to develop good procedures for collecting and maintaining data, test the collected 
data using techniques such as internal consistency checks, and screen for outliers and determine if they 
are correct. If the amount of data is large, a data base should be developed and maintained.  5. CONCEPTUAL 
MODEL VALIDATION Conceptual model validity is determining that (i) the theories and assumptions underlying 
the conceptual model are correct and (ii) the model representation of the problem entity and the model 
s structure, logic, and mathematical and causal relationships are reasonable for the intended purpose 
of the model. The theories and assumptions underlying the model should be tested using mathematical analysis 
and statistical methods on problem entity data. Examples of theories and assumptions are linearity, independence, 
stationary, and Poisson arrivals. Examples of applicable statistical methods are fitting distributions 
to data, estimating parameter values from the data, and plotting the data to determine if they are stationary. 
In addition, all theories used should be reviewed to ensure they were applied correctly; for example, 
if a Markov chain is used, does the system have the Markov property and are the states and transition 
probabilities correct. Next, each submodel and the overall model must be evaluated to determine if they 
are reasonable and correct for the intended purpose of the model. This should include determining if 
the appropriate detail and aggregate relationships have been used for the model s intended purpose, and 
if the appropriate structure, logic, and mathematical and causal relationships have been used. The primary 
validation techniques used for these evaluations arc face validation and traces. Face validation is having 
experts on the problem entity evaluate the conceptual model to determine if they believe it is correct 
and reasonable for its purpose. This usually requires examinh tg the flowchart or graphical model, or 
the set of model equations. The use of traces is the tracking of entities through each submodel and the 
overall model to determine if the logic is correct and the necessary accuracy is maintained. If any errors 
are found in the conceptual model, it must be revised and conceptual model validation petfonned again. 
 6. COMPUTERIZED MODEL VERIFICATION Computerized model verification is ensuring that the computer programming 
and implementation of the conceptual model is correct. To help ensure that a correct computer program 
is obtained, program design and development procedures found in the field of Software Engineering should 
be used in developing and implementing the computer program. These include such techniques as top-down 
design, structured programming, and program modularity. A separate program module should be used for 
each submodel, the overall model, and for each simulation function (e.g., time-flow mechanism, random 
number and random variate generators, and integration routines) when using general purpose higher order 
languages, e.g., FORTRAN, PASCAL or C, and where possible when using simulation languages (Chattergy 
and Pooch 1977). (See Whitner and Balci (1989) for a more detailed discussion on model veritlcation. 
) One should be aware that the type of computer language used effects the probability of having a correct 
program. The use of a special purpose simulation language, if appropriate, generally will result in having 
less errors than if a general purpose simulation language is used, and using a general purpose simulation 
language will generally result in having less errors than if a general purpose higher order language 
is used. Not only does the use of simulation languages increase the probability of having a correct program, 
they usually reduce programming time significantly. (However, flexibility is usually reduced.) After 
the computer program has been developed, implemented, and hopefully most of the programming bugs removed, 
the program must be tested for correctness and accuracy. Firsg the simulation functions should be tested 
to see if they are correct. Usually straightforward tests can be used hereto determine if they are working 
properly. Next, each submodel and the overall model should be tested to see if they are correct. Here 
the testing is more difficult. There are two basic approaches to testing: static and dynamic testing 
(analysis) (l%irley 1976). In static testing the computer program of the computerized model is analyzed 
to determine if it is correct by using such techniques as correctness proofs, structured walk-through, 
and examining the structure properties of the program. The commonly used structured walk-through technique 
consists of each program developer explaining their computer program code statement by statement to other 
members of the modelling team tmtil all are convinced it is correct (or incorrect). In dynamic testing, 
the computerized model is executed under different conditions, and the resulting values obtained are 
used to determine if the. computer program and its implementations tie correct. This includes both the 
values obtained during the program execution and the final values obtained There are three different 
strategies used in dynamic testing: bottom-up testing which means, e.g., testing the submodels first 
and then the overall model; top-down testing which means, e.g., testing the overall model first using 
programming stubs (sets of data) for each of the submodels and then testing the submodels; and mixed 
testing, which is using a combination of bottom-up and top-down testing (Fairley 1976). The techniques 
commonly used in dynamic testing are traces, investigations of input-output relations using different 
validation techniques, internal consistency clhecks, and reprogramming critical components to determine 
if the same results are obtained. If there area large number of variables, one might aggregate to reduce 
the number of tests needed or use certain types of design of e~penments (Kleijnen 1987), e.g., use factor 
screening experiments (Smith and Mauro 1982) to identify the key variables, in order to reduce the number 
of experimental conditions that need to be tested. One must continuously be aware while checking the 
correctness of the computer program and its implementation that errors may be caused b:y the data, the 
conceptual model, the computer program. or the computer implementation. 7. OPERATIONAL VALIDITY Operational 
validity is primarily concerned with determining that the model s output behavior has the accuracy required 
for the model s intended purpose over the domain of its intended applicability. This is where most of 
the validation testing and evaluation takes place. The computerized model is used in operational validity 
and thus any deficiencies found may be due to an inadequate conceptual model, an improperly programmed 
or implemented conceptual model (e.g., due to programming errors or insufficient numerical accuracy), 
or due to invalid data. All of the validation techniques discussed i)n Section 3 are applicable to operational 
validity. Which techniques and whether to use them objectively or subjectively must be decided by the 
model development team and other interested parties. The majc}r attribute effecting operational validity 
is whether the problem entity (or system) is observable or no~ where observable means it is possible 
to collect data on the operational behavior of the program entity. Figure 3 gives a classification of 
the wili&#38;tion approaches for c)perational 60 Sargent OBSERVABLE SYSTEM sua~ * COMPARISON USING EXPLORE 
APPROACH GRAPHICALDISPLAYS MODEL BEHAVIOR EXPLORE MODEL COMPARISON TO BEHAVIOR OTHSR MODELS OBJECtlVE 
* COMPARISON * COMPARISON APPROACH USING TO ~R STATI~CAL MODELS USING TEsTs AND STATISTICAL PROCEDURES 
TESTS AND PROCEDURES Figure 3: Operational Validity Classification validity. Comparison means comparingjtesting 
the model and system input-output behaviors, and explore model behavior means to examine the output behavior 
of the model using appropriate validation techniques and usually includes parameter variability-sensitivity 
analysis. Various sets of experimental conditions from the domain of the model s intended applicability 
should be used for both comparison and exploring model behavior. To obtain a high degree of eontldenm 
in a model and its results, comparison of the model s and system s input output behaviors for at least 
two different sets of experimental conditions is usually required. There are three basic comparison approaches 
used: (i) graphs of the model and system behavior data, (ii) confidence inter­vals, and (iii) hypothesis 
tests. Graphs are the most commonly used approach and confidence intervals are next. 7.1 Graphical Comparison 
of Data The model s and system s behavior data are graphed for various sets of experimental conditions 
to determine if the model s output behavior has sufficient aeeuracy for its intended purpose. Three types 
of graphs are used: Histograms, Box (and Whisker) Plots (Johnson 1994), and Behavior Graphs. (See Sargent 
(1996) for a thorough discussion on the use of these for model validation.) An example of a box plot 
is given in Figure 120 system Model T 100 80 60 I Figure 4: Box Plot 4 and examples of behavior graphs 
are shown in Figures 5 and 6. A variety of gmphs using different types of measures and relationships 
are required such as (i) means, variances, maximums, distributions, and time series of each output variable, 
(ii) relationships between parameters of each output variable, e.g., means and variances, and (iii) relationships 
belween different output variables. It is important that appropriate measures and relationships be used 
in validating a model and that they be determined with respect to the model s intended purpose. See Anderson 
and Sargent (1974) for an example of a set of graphs used in the validation of a simulation model. These 
graphs can be used in model validation in three ways. First, the model development team can use the graphs 
in the model development process to make a subjective judgement on whether the model does or does not 
possess sufficient accuracy for its intended purpose. Secondly, they can be used in the face validity 
technique where experts are asked to make subjective judgments on whether a model does or does not possess 
sufficient accuracy for its intended purpose. The third way the graphs can be used is in Turing Tests. 
9.0 I i4Ax. OBSERVATION (REAJ_ SYSTEM) X W&#38;. 08WRVATION (SIJMOUJ.~l;N ~ x W&#38; VALUE (REAL SYSTEMI 
o x  8.0 hvG. VALUE (SIWL:I;N A o x 70 %0x o Om 6.0 x o oxxx ; 5.0 0 z X6 w Xo x i= o z 4.0 z Oxoxx 
0 i= v Xo a o w c o Xx$ 3.0 20 x 0 x 1.0 x (lo 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 NUMBER OF OISK ACCESSES Figure 
5: Disk Access REAL SYSTEM -0 SIMULATION MODEL fl 0 1I tI  0.5 Lo 1.5 2.0 AVERAGE VALUE OFREACTIONTIME 
(SECONOS) Figure 6 Reaction Time Confidence Intervals Confidence intervals (c.i.), simultaneous confidence 
intervats (s.c.i.), and joint confidence regions (j.c.r.) can be obtained for the differences between 
the population parameters (e.g., means and variances) and disrnbutions of the model and system output 
variables for each set of experimental conditions. These c.i., s.c.i., and j.c.r. can be used as the 
model range of accuracy for model validation. To construct the model range of accuracy, a statistical 
procedure containing a statistical technique and a method of data collection must be developed for each 
set of experimental conditions and for each parameter of interest. The statistical techniques used can 
be divided into two groups: (A) univariate statistical techniques and (B) multivariate statistical techniques. 
The univariate techniques can be used to develop c.i. and with the use of the Bonferroni inequality (Law 
and Kelton 1991) s.c.i. The multivariate techniques can be used to develop s.c.i. and j.c.r. Both parametric 
and nonpararnetric techniques Can beused The method of data collection must satisfy the underlying assumptions 
of the statistical technique behg used. The standard statistical techniques and data collection methods 
used in simulation output analysis (Banks, Carson and Nelson 1996, Law and Kelton 1991) can be used for 
developing the model range of accuracy; namely (1) replication, (2) batch means, (3) regenerative, (4) 
spectrat, (5) time series, (6) standardized time series, and (7) overlapping batch means. It is usually 
desirable to construct the model range of accuracy with the lengths of the c.i. and s.c.i. and the sizes 
of the j.c.r. as small as possible. The shorter the lengths or the smaller the sizes, the more useful 
and meaningful the model range of accuracy will usually be. Simulation Models The lengths and the sizes 
(i) are affected by the values of confidence levels, variances of the model and system response variables, 
and sample sizes and (ii) can be made smatler by decreasing the confidence levels or increasing the sample 
sizes. (Variance reduction teehniqpes (Law and Kelton 1991) can be used when collecting data from a simulation 
model to decrease the variability of an estimate and thus obtain a smaller c.i., s.c.i., or j.c.r.) A 
tradeoff needs to be made among the sample sizes, confidence levels, and estimate s of the length c~rsizes 
of the model range of accuracy, i.e., c.i., s.c.i., or j.c.r. Tradeoff curves can be constructed to 
aid in the tradeoff anal ysis. Details on the use of c.i., s.c.i. and j.c.r. for operational validity, 
including a general methodology, are contained in Balci and Sargent ( 1984 b). A brief discussion on 
the use of c.i. for model validation is also contained in Law and Kelton (1991).  7.3. Hypothesis Tests 
Hypothesis tests can be used in the comparison of parameters, distributions, and time series of the output 
data of a model and a system for each set of experimental conditions to determine if the model s output 
behavior has an acceptable range of accuracy. An acceptable range of accuracy is the amount of accuracy 
that is xequired of a model to be valid for its intended purpose. The first step in hypothesis testing 
is to state the hypotheses to be tested HO Model is valid for the acceptable range of accuracy under 
the set of experimental conditions. (1) Hl: Model is invalid for the acceptable range of accuracy under 
the set of experimental conditions. Two types of errors are possible in testing the hypotheses in (l). 
The first or type I error is rejecting the vrdidity of a valid model; the second or type II error is 
accepting the validity of an invalid model. The probability of a type error I is called model budder 
s risk, a, and the probability of type II error is called model user s risk, ~ (Batci and Sargent 1981). 
In model vali­dation, model user s risk is extremely important and must be kept small. Thus both type 
I and type II errors must be carefully considered in using hypothesis testing for model validation. The 
amount of agreement between a model and a system can be measured by a validity measure. The validity 
measure is chosen such that the model accuracy or the amount of agreement between the model and the system 
decreases as the value of the validity measure increases. The acceptable range of accuracy can be used 
to determine an acceptable validity range, 0<1, S L*. The probability of acceptance of a model being 
valid, Pa, can be examined as a function of tlw validity measure by using an Operating Characteristic 
Curve (Johnson 1994). Figure 7 contains three different operating characteristic curves to illustrate 
how the sample size of observations affect Pa as a function of L Sargent 1.00 FUOB. OF ACCEPTING THE 
MOOEL AS VALID (Pa ) o .* u A VALIDITY MEASURE (A) Figure7: Operating Characteristic Curves As can be 
seen, an inaccurate model has a high probability of being accepted if a small sample size of observations 
are used and an accurate model has a low probability of being accepted if a large sample size of observations 
are used. The location and shape of the operating characteristic curves is a function of the statistical 
technique being USCXI,the value of et chosen for L = O, i.e., et*, and the sample size of observations. 
Once the operating characteristic curves are constructed, the intervals for the model user s risk ~(k) 
and the model builder s risk u can be determined for a given k as follows ~ < mode] builder s risk ~ 
< (1 -(j*) (2) O < model user s risk ~(h) < ~*. Thus, there is a direct relationship among builder s 
risk, model user s risk, acceptable validity range, and sample size of observations. A tradeoff among 
these must be made in using hypothesis tests in model validation. Details of the methodology of using 
Hypothesis Tests in comparing model s and system s output data for model validations are given in Balci 
and Sargent (1981). Examples of the application of this methodology in the testing of output means for 
model validation are given in Balci and Sargent (1982a, 1982b, 1983). Also see Banks, Carson, and Nelson 
(1996). 8. DOCUMENTATION Documentation on model verification and validation is usually critical in convincing 
users of the correctness of a model and its results, and should be included in the simulation model documentation 
(For a general discussion on documentation of computer-based models, see Gass (1984).) Both detailed 
and summary documentation is desired. The detailed documentation should include specifies on the tests, 
evaluations made, &#38;t@ results, etc. The summary documentation should contain a separate evaluation 
table for data validity, conceptual model validity, computer model verification, operational validity, 
and an overatl summary. See Figure 8 for the evaluation table of computer model verification as an example 
of the fust four tables. (See Sargent (1994) for examples of evaluation tables of conceptual model validity 
and overall summary.) The columns of the table are self explanatory except for the last column which 
refers to the confidence the evaluators have in the results or conclusions and this is often expressed 
as low, medium, or high. 9. RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE This author recommends tha~ as a minimum, the following 
steps be performed in model validation: (1) An agreement be made between (i) the model development team 
and (ii) the model sponsors and users (if possible) on the basic validation approach and on a minimum 
set of specific validation techniques to be used in the validation process prwr to developing the model. 
 (2) The amount of accuracy required of the model s output variables of interest for the model s intended 
application be specified prior to starting the development of the model or very early in the model development 
process. (3) The assumptions and theories underlying the model be tested, when possible. (4) In each 
model iteration, at least face validity be performed on the conceptual model. (5) In each model iteration, 
explore the model s behavior using the computerized model, (6) In at least the last model iteration, 
comparisons be made between the model and system behavior (output) data for at least two sets of experimental 
conditions, when possible. (7) Validation documentation be included in the model documentation. (8) 
If the model is to be used over a period of time, a schedule for periodic review (and possible revalidation) 
of it be made and followed.  Models occasionally are developed to be used more than once. A procedure 
for reviewing the validity of these models over their life cycles needs to be developed as specified 
by step (8). No general procedure can be given as each situation is different. For example, if no data 
were available on the problem entity (e.g., a system) when the model was initially developed and validated, 
then revalidations of it should take place prior to each time the model is used if additional data or 
system understanding has cccurred since its last validation. 10. SUMMARY Model verification and validation 
are critical in the development of a simulation model. Unfortunately, there are no set of specific tests 
that can be easily applied to determine the correctness of the model. Furthermore, no algorithm exists 
to determine what techniques or procedures to use. Every new simulation project presents a new and unique 
challenge. There is considerable literature on verification and validation. (See the following UHL on 
the WWW for a Catogorymoal lwrrilluo(s) Juamcarlon for Rcforonoe to R6suIU Confldoncc F tcchnlquo used 
wpporttng roporl concluden [n rasult . Gwuowssof Swk resung ~~ . Ojnunb tesfhg Cavdwssd Strengths Weaknesses 
Overall evaluation for owl-all Computer Model Verification sondudon Figure 8: Evaluation Table recent 
bibliography: http://manta.cs.vt. edu/biblio/.) Articles given in the limited bibliography can be used 
as a starting point for furthering your knowledge on model verifbtion and validation. LIMITED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Anderson, H.A. and R.G. Sargent. 1974. An Investigation into Scheduling for an Interactive Computer System, 
IBM Journal of Research and Development, 18,2, pp. 125-137. Balci, O. 1989. How to Assess the acceptability 
and Credibility of Simulation Results, Proceedings of the 1989 Winter Simulation Conference, Washington, 
D.C. pp. 62-71. Balci, O. and R.G. Sargent. 1981. A Methodology for Cost-Risk Analysis in the Statistical 
Validation of Simulation Models, Comm. of the ACM, 24,4, pp. 190-197. Balci, O. and R.G. Sargent. 1982a. 
Validation of Multivariate Response Simulation Models by Using Hotelling s Two-Sample T2 Test, Simulation, 
Vol. 39, No. 6, pp. 185-192. Balci, O. and R.G. Sargent. 1982b. Some Examples of Simulation Model Validation 
Using Hypothesis Testing, Proceedings of the 1982 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 620-629. Balci, O. 
and R.G. Sargent. 1983. Validation of Multivariate Response Trace-Driven Simulation Models, Performance 
83, edited by Agrawada and Tripathi, North Holland, pp. 309-323. Balci, O. and R.G. Sargent. 1984a. A 
Bibliography on the Credibility Assessment and Vali&#38;tion of Simulation and Mathematical Models, Simuletter, 
15, 3, pp. 15-27. JuMiitbn for Contidenco sondusion in conclusion for Computer Model Verification Balci, 
O. and R,G. Sargent. 1984b. Validation of Simulation Models via Simultaneous Confidence Intervals, American 
Journal of Mathematical and Management Science, pp. 375-406. Banks, J., J.S. Carson II, and B.L. Nelson. 
1996. Discrete-Event System Simulation, 2nd Edition Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Banks, J., 
D. Gerstein, and S.P. Searles. 1988. Modeling Processes, Validation, and Verification of Complex Simulations: 
A Survey, Methodology and Validation, Simulation Series, Vol. 19, Nc). 1, The Society for Computer Simulation, 
pp. 13-18. Chattergy, R. and V.W. Pooch. 1977. Integrated Design and Verification of Simulation Programs, 
Computer, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 40-46. Davis, E.A. 1986. Use of Seminar Gaming to Specify and Validate 
Simulation Models, Proceedings of the 1986 Winter Simulation Conference, Wa~shington, D.C., pp. 242-247. 
DOD Simulations: Improved Assessment Procedures Would Increase the Credibility of Results 1987. United 
States General Accounting Office, PEMD-88-3. Fairley, R.E. 1976. Dynamic Testing of Simulation Software, 
Proceedings of the 1976 Summer Computer Simulation Conference, Washington, D.C., IPp. 40-46. Gass, S.1. 
1977. A Procedure for Evaluation of Complex Models, Proceedings of the First International Conference 
on Mathematical Modeling, University of Missouri, pp. 247-257. Gass, S.1. 1983. Decision-Aiding Models: 
Validation, Assessment, and Related Issues for Policy Analysis, Operations Research, 31,4, pp. 601-663. 
Gass, S.1. 1984. Documenting a Computer-Based Model, Interfaces, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 84-93. Sargent Gass, 
S.1. and L. Joel. 1987. Concepts of Model Confidence, Computers and Operations Research, 8,4, pp. 341-346. 
Gass, S.1. and B.W. Thompson. 1980. Guidelines for Model Evaluation An Abridged Version of the U.S. General 
Accounting Office Exposure Draf4 Operations Research, 28,2, pp. 431-479. Johnson, R.A. 1994. Miller and 
Freund s Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 5th edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 
Kleijnen, J.P.C. 1987. Statistical Tools for Simulation Practitioners, Marcel Dekker, New York. Kleindorfer, 
G.B. and R. Ganeshan. 1993. The Philosophy of Science and Validation in Simulation, Proceedings of 1993 
Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 50-57. Law, A.M. and W.D. Kelton. 1991. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 
2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. Naylor, T.H. and J.M. Finger. 1967. Verification of Computer Simulation 
Models, Management Science, 14,2, pp. B92-B101. Oren, T. 1981. Concepts and Criteria to Assess Acceptability 
of Simulation Studies: A Frame of R__~8~ Communications of the ACM, 24,4, pp. -, Rae, M.J. and R.G. Sargent. 
1988. An Advisory System for Operational Validity, Art#icial Intelligence and Simulation: The Diversity 
of Applications, edited by T. Hensen, Society for Computer Simulation, San Diego, CA, pp. 245-250. !%rgen~ 
R.G-1979. Validation of Simulation Models, Proceedings of the 1979 Winter Simulation Conference, edited 
by Highland, H.J., et al., San Diego, California, pp. 497-503. Sargent, R.G. 1981. An Assessment Procedure 
and a Set of Criteria for Use in the Evaluation of Computerized Models and Computer-Based Modelling Tools, 
Final Technical Report RADC-TR-80-409. Sargent, R.G. 1982. Verification and Validation of Simulation 
Models, Chapter IX in Progress in Modelling and Simulation, edited by F.E. Cellier, Academic Press, London, 
pp. 159-169. Sargent, R.G. 1984. Simulation Model Validation, Simulation and Model-Based Methodologies: 
An Integrative View, edited by Oren, et al., Springer-Verktg. !%rgen~ R.G. 1985. An Expository on Verification 
and Validation of Simulation Models, Proceedings of the 198S Winter Simulation Conference, Dallas, Texas, 
pp. 15-22, Sargent, R.G. 1986. The Use of Graphic Models in Model Validation, Proceedings of the 1986 
Winter Simulation Conference, Washington, D.C., pp. 237­ 241. Sargent, R.G. 1988. A Tutorial on Validation 
and Verification of Simulation Models, Proceedings of 1988 Winter Simulation Conference, San Diego, CA, 
pp. 33-39. Sargenq R.G. 1990. Validation of Mathematical Models, Proceedings of GEOVAL-90: Symposium 
on Validation of Geosphere Flow and Transport Mo&#38;ls, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 571-579. Sargent, R.G. 
1991. Simulation Model Verification and Validation, Proceedings of 1991 Winter Simulation Conference, 
Phoenix, AZ, pp. 3747. Sargent, R.G. 1992. Validation and Verification of Simulation Models, Proceedings 
of 1992 Winter Simulatwn Conference, Arlington, VA, pp. 104-114. Sargent, R.G. 1994. Verification and 
Validation of Simulation Models, Proceedings of 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, Lake Buena Vista, 
FL, pp. 77-87. Sargent, R.G. 1996. Some Subjective Validation Methods Using Graphical Displays of Data, 
Proceedings of 1996 Winter Simulation Conference. Schlesinger, et al. 1979. Terminology for Model Credibility, 
Simulation, 32,3, pp. 103-104. Schruben, L.W. 1980. Establishing the Credibility of Simulations, Simulation, 
34,3, pp. 101-105. Shannon, R.E. 1975. Systems Simulation: The Art and the Science, Prentice-Hall. Shannon, 
R.E. 1981. Tests for the Verification and Validation of Computer Simulation Models, Proceedings of the 
Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 573-577. Smith, D,E. and C.A. Mauro. 1982. Factor Screening in Computer 
Simulation, Simulation, 38, 2, pp. 49­ 54. Whitner, R.B. and O. Balci. 1989. Guidelines for Selecting 
and Using Simulation Model Verification Techniques, Proceedings of 1989 Winter Simulation Conference, 
Washington, D. C., pp. 559-568. Wood, D.O. 1986. MIT Model Analysis Program: What We Have Learned About 
Policy Model Review, Proceedings of the 1986 Winter Simulation Conference, Washington, D.C., pp. 248-252. 
Zeigler, B.P. 1976. Theory of Modelling and Simulation, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY 
ROBERT G. SARGENT is a Professor at Syracuse University. He received his education at the University 
of Michigan. Dr. Sargent has served his profession in numerous ways and has been awarded the TIMS College 
on Simulation Distinguished Service Award for long­standing exceptional service to the Simulation Community. 
His research interests include the methodology areas of modeling and discrete event simulation, model 
validation, and performance evaluation. Professor Sargent is listed in Who s Who in America.  
			