
 Viable Wikis Struggle for Life in the Wikisphere Camille Roth * CRESS / Department of Sociology, University 
of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK c.roth@surrey.ac.uk Abstract Wikis are collaborative platforms enabling 
collective elabo­ration of knowledge, the most famous and possibly the most successful thereof being 
the Wikipedia. There are currently plenty of other active open-access wikis, with varying suc­cess: some 
recruit many users and achieve sustainability, while others strive to attract suf.cient active contributors, 
ir­respective of the topic of the wiki. We make an exploratory investigation of some factors likely to 
account for these var­ious destinies (such as distinct policies, norms, user incen­tives, technical and 
structural features), examining the de­mographics of a portion of the wikisphere. We underline the intertwining 
of population and content dynamics and empha­size the existence of different periods of development of 
a wiki-based community, from bootstrapping by founders with a pre-established set of rules, to more stable 
regimes where constant enrollment and training of new users balances out the occasional departure of 
more advanced users. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.3.3, H.3.4 [Infor­mation storage and retrieval]: 
systems and software, online information services; K.4.3 [Computers and society]: col­laborative work 
General Terms Human Factors, Management, Reliability Keywords Wikis, online communities, viability, wikisphere, 
collaborative work, user incentives, Wikipedia. 1. Introduction Wikis are websites whose content can 
be elaborated by gen­erally any user in a collective and collaborative fashion the most famous and possibly 
the most successful of these plat­forms being Wikipedia, a multi-lingual encyclopedia which also attracted 
a substantial academic interest recently [1 * I am grateful for enlightening talk with Julien Levrel, 
and discussions with Nigel Gilbert, Chris Goldspink, Bastien Guerry, Dario Taraborelli and Lu Yang. Research 
partly funded by EC project PATRES , contract #043268. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all 
or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. WikiSym 07, October 21 23, 2007, Montréal, Québec, Canada. Copyright 
c &#38;#169; 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-861-9/07/0010. . . $5.00 13].1 There are currently, however, plenty 
of other active wikis, with varying success: some recruit many users, achiev­ing sustainability with 
established role distributions, frequent updating and ef.cient .ght against vandalism, while others strive 
to attract contributors. These many projects either have distinct policies or scope but are still sustainable, 
or have identical policies but die; all endeavoring to survive within what may be called the wikisphere 
. Examples include top­ical wikis, such as ExampleProblems, a repository of math example problems, or 
geographical wikis, such as DavisWiki which aims at creating Davis, CA-related content. In this paper, 
we make an exploratory investigation of some factors likely to account for these various destinies, in 
terms of policies, norms, user incentives, as well as techni­cal and structural features, so as to describe 
the pillars of the viability of wiki-based communities. Viability should be un­derstood as dynamic stability 
of both population and quality content: in other words, a viable wiki should be able to sur­vive large 
variations in the stock of users and articles so that the whole content can be maintained by a suf.cient 
number of users. As our main interest is in online communities, we do not wish to consider wikis primarily 
supported by (and whose viability is thus linked to) pre-existing of.ine work­groups, where casual visitors 
would be unable to join as (full) contributors. We thus focus on communities emanating from the wiki 
platform, even if boundaries become relatively fuzzy when non-wiki groups open a wiki and let online 
visitors contribute (e.g., open-source developers of iPodLinux open­ing their documentation-writing process 
on a wiki) or when wiki groups partially transform into real-life communities (e.g., Wikipedians attending 
WikiMania conferences). We .rst examine the current state of the wikisphere and (dis)similarities between 
wikis, supported by quantitative analysis of their demographics. In a second part, we qual­itatively 
describe several processes which may account for their dynamics and survivability, and eventually outline 
some basic ingredients of a model of a viable wiki community. 2. Many wikis... many communities In this 
section, we empirically investigate how homogeneous and heteregeneous the wikisphere may be, focusing 
on two sets of wiki communities: (I) for a qualitative insight on the 1 Online collaborative knowledge 
creation is not a brand-new phenomenon: discussion forums with experts tutoring novices, open-source 
software development groups are of the same sort. By contrast, sharp computer-related skills are not 
needed to participate in most wikis, whose ease of use have pulled in a larger range of users. name 
platform license language scope from users pages governance main website Wikipedia MediaWiki GFDL multi 
all-purpose 2001 4,540k 9,047k admins wikipedia.org EnciclopediaLibre MediaWiki GFDL Spanish all-purpose 
2002 <2k 56k admins enciclopedia.us.es Citizendium MediaWiki GFDL multi all-purpose 2006 31k 18k RR, 
moderated en.citizendium.org Ekopedia MediaWiki L.A.L. multi topical 2004 <2k 6k admins ekopedia.org 
WikiIndex.org MediaWiki CC multi topical 2005 <2k 12k admins wikiindex.org iPodLinux MediaWiki GFDL English 
topical 2004 7k 3k RR, admins ipodlinux.org ExampleProblems MediaWiki pd English topical 2005 <2k 27k 
RR, admins exampleproblems.com Wikinfo MediaWiki GFDL multi all-purpose 2003 <2k 52k admins internet-encyclopedia.org 
WikiTravel MediaWiki CC multi topical 2003 16k 43k admins wikitravel.org World66 proprietary CC English 
topical 2001 n.a. 131k admins world66.com WikiWikiWeb proprietary pd English topical 1995 n.a. 32k no 
admins http://c2.com/cgi/wiki DavisWiki proprietary CC English topical 2004 4k 10k RR, no admins daviswiki.org 
 Table 1. Some features of a few wikis. Platform: in this small sample, at least, MediaWiki is predominant. 
License: CC stands for Creative Commons , GFDL Gnu Free Document License , L.A.L. License Art Libre , 
pd public domain . Language: set of languages in use (actual or tentative), multi means multi-lingual 
(in which case statistics correspond to the main/most important language). Governance: RR means Registration 
Required to contribute ; admins denotes the enforcement of community decisions by administrators, while 
moderated means that editions will be reviewed before being published. Data retrieved in May 2007. wikisphere, 
we use an arbitrary selection of a dozen wikis; we gather some very basic features for these sites on 
Tab. 1 (although this random set may seem rather partial, we deem it suf.ciently large and diverse to 
provide an intuition of both similarity and variety among wikis) (II) for a quantitative insight, we 
use a larger set of 7649 wikis selected from s23.org, a website providing statistics on MediaWiki-based 
wikis2 see Sec. 2.3 for detailed statistics. 2.1 Functional regularity Some features are shared by many 
wikis: tautologically, these communities are all based on wiki platforms software that generally allows 
modi.cation of content by anyone, to at least some extent: despite a large variety of wiki interfaces3, 
key functional features enabling easy col­lective and collaborative content edition are eventually quite 
homogenous, including notably the possibility of creating an account and online identity, immediate inline 
content edition, comprehensive revision history and, often, discus­sion or talk pages [9]. Also determinant 
is the licensing mode of contributed content: regardless of the profusion of licenses in use on wikis, 
from the GNU Free Documentation License to Creative Commons and Licence Art Libre, inter alia, their 
function is essentially identical allowing con­tributions from everyone while providing some protection 
on the content for future use, without the rigidity of clas­sical copyrighted work. In some instances, 
no license at all is used and contributions enter in the public domain (e.g., WikiWikiWeb or ExampleProblems). 
From a structural point of view, a technical study of article networks in Wikipedias in several languages 
[11] suggested that wiki sites share some topological features with WWW networks, notably identical distributions 
of local patterns, scale-free degree distribution, unassortative linking (highly linked pages are connected 
to weakly linked articles) and high clustering/transitivity.4 2 Retrieved on 5/5/07. wikia wikis were 
excluded as artifacts, with roughly the same number of users (~135k) and very few pages (=10), suggesting 
an automatic process. 3 The Wikipedia page on wikis denombrates at least 60 of them. Among them, MediaWiki 
appears to be prominent, possibly because of its exemplar use in Wikipedia it also makes the large majority 
of our arbitrary selection (Tab. 1) and supports our quantitative case study, with several thousands 
of wikis based on it. To our knowledge, there is however no easy way to assess its exact usage. 4 The 
fact that article networks in wikis and WWW are similar should not be surprising per se, yet other networks 
could be de.ned in wikis (such as social and socio-semantic 2.2 Organizational variety In contrast to 
this functional homogeneity, several semantic and organizational dimensions strongly differentiate wikis. 
Foremost is the scope: there are all-purpose projects aiming at building broad encyclopedias, vs. topical 
projects based on narrower matters, e.g. precise technical or geographical ar­eas, particular political 
.avors. Scope includes language(s), as wikis may aim at building multi-language content. In this case, 
language may or may not de.ne distinct communi­ties, depending on the existence of bridges between various 
language sub-wikis, possibly typical of distinct culturally­biased behaviors or representing various 
instances of a same system at distinct development stages, the latter being more a matter of knowledge 
diffusion than cultural relativism. Editing content within the scope of the wiki project and using its 
prescribed language(s) may be among the most ba­sic policies a benevolent user has to respect. Wikis 
gener­ally obey to several other types of policies [3, 7, 9], which may be explicit (rules, usually presented 
in dedicated meta­articles) or implicit (norms), some of the latter potentially becoming explicit as 
crystalized norms all such policies depending on the particular, historical development of each wiki. 
For instance, the so-called rule of Neutral of Point of View (NPOV) in encyclopedia projects such as 
Wikipedia or Citizendium is indeed not common to all wikis: it does not exist in some topical wikis focused 
on travel (such as WikiTravel or World66), environmental or alternative is­sues (like Ekopedia), and 
even in some encyclopedia projects such as for instance Wikinfo which precisely encourages di­verse points 
of views for a same article. Traditional rules include editorial scope policies or be­havioral prescriptions, 
determining e.g. how to deal with con.icts. Some wikis have policy pages, enabling users to themselves 
evolve the wiki rules. On the same level, some rules essentially relate to governance issues and have 
a di­rect in.uence on how the wiki is managed: non-open and/or asynchronous encyclopedia such as Citizendium 
obviously require a different institutional structure and administration than more anarchic wikis, such 
as WikiWikiWeb. networks: interactions between authors or around articles) and conceivably reveal patterns 
typical of stable wikis or functionally helpful towards their viability. Eventually, policy variations 
extend to strict technical policies, directly opposed to the low-level technical similar­ities emphasized 
in Sec. 2.1. In particular, some criteria rel­evant for appraising technical policies in other types 
of col­laborative online systems (such as tagging systems [14]) and pertaining to contributor rights, 
access rights to other users information and social interaction opportunities, inter alia, may be valid 
for wikis as well. Drawing a comprehensive typology of technical divergences between wikis could start 
with questions such as: who can contribute? (anonymous vis­itors; registered users; approved contributors), 
how are in­teraction and social identity building concretely organized? (user pages; discussion pages; 
off-wiki media such as IRC channels or mailing-lists), what kind of technical features are available? 
(existence of special pages such as category, project, policy pages; possibility of uploading multimedia 
content). In turn, these diverse features are likely to funda­mentally in.uence wiki viability, plausibly 
providing large­scale levers to shape their evolution. Figure 1. Cumulative numbers of wikis having 
at least P pages (W>P , left) and U users (W>U , right).  2.3 Demographics To shed some light on how 
this diversity translates in quan­titative terms, we examine basic statistical and demographic parameters 
on the above-mentionned dataset of 7,649 Media-Wiki wikis: (i) population size, or number of registered 
users U; (ii) content size, or number of so-called good pages P (i.e. excluding technical pages such 
as redirection and talk pages); (iii) activity measures, or number of edits E. First, distributions of 
wiki populations and content sizes are very heterogeneous, with many wikis being weakly pop­ulated or 
having few pages, and a handful of wikis having a large number of users or articles the cumulative distribu­tions, 
presented on Fig. 1, exhibit power-law shapes. How­ever, this statistical parameter hides the much deeper 
diver­sity of the wikisphere, which displays a rather unclear rela­tionship between the number of articles 
and the population size. Indeed, for the 95% least populated wikis (U = 898), content sizes appear to 
be spread over several orders of mag­nitude (roughly, P is essentially included in [1; 2.103]), with 
best linear .ts being generally weakly accurate and without any obvious scale for any of these variables, 
as the density plot emphasizes (Fig. 3, top and left). Most of these relatively weakly populated wikis, 
with less than a thousand users and thus perhaps generally younger, may correspond to diverse growth 
stages with signi.cantly varied success. Conversely, for larger numbers of users and, more precisely, 
for the .rst percentile of population size (U = 8111), the spectrum is narrower with a more monotonous 
relationship between both variables (Fig. 3, right). Figure 2. Left: activity, or number of edits E 
as a function of good pages P . Right: scatterplot of P vs. number of users U. Each dot is a wiki, the 
thick line shows the best linear .t. Figure 3. Density plot of P vs. U (top), and scatterplots, as on 
Fig.2-right, but plotted for the 95% least populated wikis only (left) and the 1% most populated ones 
only (right). A plausible interpretation of the fat area on Fig. 3 could be that it captures both starting 
wikis (few users, few to many pages) and prospering wikis (more users, more pages) with all intermediate 
con.gurations possible and apparently equally likely. Nonetheless, activity exhibits a much more regular 
pattern and appears to be roughly proportional to the number of pages (Fig. 2): hence, activity directly 
scales with content size, whereas users do not seem to. 3. Life and death of wikis In this context, what 
makes a wiki a lively, or at least viable, community? Technically, it consists of just two things: (i) 
a group of users, which may or may not become an active com­munity, and (ii) a set of pages or articles, 
which may or may not become esteemed content. The growth and dynamic sta­bility of a wiki community should 
thus helpfully be measured through two variables, the number of users U and of articles P . These variables, 
in turn, are linked in a subtle way: if more users allow for more articles to be created and cared of, 
more articles both require more users to maintain them and attract more users because of a better content. 
In short, population is dependent on content, and vice versa. The viability of a wiki is thus a dual 
issue, in terms of population dynamics (recruitment, retention, and exclusion or leave) and content dynamics 
(growth as well as stabilization, with quality arti­cles), which co-evolve. We hereafter review various 
factors that may impact one or both of these dynamics. 3.1 Bootstrapping and founding principles Founders 
usually design both the wiki purpose and initial policies, determinant for bootstrapping the community 
and attracting its pioneer contributors. Sanger [15] notes that designing Wikipedia s founding principles 
had been a cen­tralized process only applying them has later been de­centralized, through administrators 
. Further, the birth of a new wiki may precisely be triggered by the desire of in­troducing mutations 
on the core set of rules governing an already-existing wiki, and therefore experiment the effect of new 
bootstrapping rules [16]. The myriad of encyclopedia projects inspired by Wikipedia are all such instances: 
for ex­ample, while Citizendium removed the possibility of imme­diately editing articles, Wikinfo introduced 
the SPOV. Various policies, as a result, have various authoritative­ness: while some of the founding 
principles appear to be non-negotiable they make the core spirit of the wiki, if not part of their purpose 
 other rules are more permissive and prone to discussion. In particular, if the rule that there should 
not be any copyrighted material on the site is gener­ally unchallenged on the Wikipedia, on the other 
hand, the NPOV rule is rather open and often re-interpreted. Old poli­cies can generally be modi.ed, 
while new rules can also be proposed, such as categories and related pages which only emerged in 2004 
in the Wikipedia [9, esp. Fig. 5]. As such, various policies also obey to various timescales: while some 
rules are discussed often and are potentially mod­i.able by new users, founding principles are much more 
sta­ble. Wikipedia, again, makes a distinction between policies and guidelines 5; in this sense, rules 
may have distinct le­gal statuses, with the core set of policies playing the role of a constitution [16]. 
Still, any Wikipedia policy page has the following banner: When editing this page, please ensure that 
your revision re.ects consensus. When in doubt, discuss .rst on the talk page suggesting indeed that 
all policies are modi.able, including the most fundamental ones like NPOV they may just have a very 
long-lasting effect and thereby provide the impression that they are absolutely irremovable and/or con­trolled 
by a small set of etablished users. 3.2 Population dynamics Enabling user incentives. While bootstrapping 
policies de.ne a context of primary incentives, there are more broadly general incentives for participation 
in online or open com­munities, which are likely to apply to wikis as well. Several previous works have 
proposed typologies of the ingredients making such communities attractive, including studies on the Wikipedia 
[3, 5], tagging systems (e.g. Flickr, CiteYouLike, etc.) [14] or open-source software development [17], 
or re­views of past literature on web-based community survivabil­ity [18], to cite a few. On the whole, 
these studies may offer 5 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Policies_and_guidelines a relevant guide 
for analyzing wikis in the general case; for instance and in particular, users may generally be interested 
in building one s own identity, elaborating a common good useful to oneself or to others, improving and 
displaying one s creativity, inter alia. Not all users should display sensibility to incentives of some 
kind, nor be driven by only a certain kind of incentives. Broadly speaking, however, it seems to be possible 
to distinguish three classes of incentives: altruistic , by benevolently contributing to a public good 
(ensured by the type of licenses used by wikis);  socially concerned , such as in.uencing others or 
a broader, less visible audience; sharing with others, be­longing to a community, meeting/interacting 
with people, being seen by others and building an online reputation and identity to climb an online social 
hierarchy;  sel.sh , such as improving one s skills, or enabling the future retrieval of information 
for one s own usage.  The variety of combinations of participation, edition and technical policies creates 
diverse incentive landscapes, plau­sibly determinant for the viability pro.le of each wiki. Of course, 
a minimal requirement would be that at least the topic is appealing to some users possibly providing 
an advan­tage to broad, all-purpose projects such as the Wikipedia, where anyone could think of being 
an expert in something. Enrollment and leadership. Incentives are, especially at the beginning, crucial 
ingredients for retaining contributors and recruiting new users. Bryant et al. [3] carried one of the 
.rst ethnographic inquiries on a wiki-based community by describing the whole involvement process and 
distribution of labor on the Wikipedia, from initial discovery of the wiki and its rules, to .rst contributions 
such as correcting typos, account creation, up to becoming administrators. Eventually, this process compares 
with how apprentices progressively in­tegrate into a community of practice, being granted knowl­edge 
and use of more and more skills, with older members lenient towards newbies. As for an explicit distribution 
of roles, hierarchies in wikis often reduce to a simple dichotomy between contributors as suppliers of 
content and administra­tors as enforcers of community decisions. Still, this rudimen­tary institution 
not only gives administrators legal and actual power over less established users, but also broadly relates 
to periphery center roles. Kittur et al. [6] exhibit quantitative differences between Wikipedia administrators 
and users: the former are often among the most active contributors; they in­formally owe their status 
to remarkable involvement. In ad­dition, their edits themselves seem to be essentially differ­ent. Normal 
users indeed appear to make less changes than administrators, deleting more words than they add, thus 
sug­gesting that elite users contribute more to the wiki growth. As a result, administrators in general 
do not disinguish themselves only on formal powers: they also build their infor­mal authority through 
humble and sustained efforts towards the project [8], such as being concerned with explaining poli­cies 
and transmitting norms to newbies [3]. In turn, respected members are likely to gain some command when 
crises arise. In an alleged egalitarian wikipedia, and very probably in wikis in general as it does in 
other virtual communities [17], implicit authority commands: as such, leadership substanti­ates one aspect 
of user incentives virtual identity building is not vain and shed light on wiki viability in spite 
of a purported decentralized decision process, leaders may exert some limited centralized power to sustain 
a wiki.6 Growth and decline. As shown in Sec. 2.3, wiki population mildly correlates with content size. 
The exponential growth of the Wikipedia in terms of both articles and users suggests that successful 
wikis follow a virtuous demographic path, with content and contributors co-evolving and most likely positive 
feedbacks between both. In the present study we did not gather dynamic data and could not elaborate fur­ther 
on potential development regimes which could be ob­served in the larger wikisphere. Nevertheless, the 
dichotomy between simple contributors and more involved administra­tors appears to induce distinct population 
dynamics [6]: after a .rst period where expert users are the largest contributors in terms of edits, 
and where their in.uence grows, a second step exhibits a larger overall activity from small contributors. 
Initially, thus, a small group of people becomes involved with an embryo of content, bootstraps and establishes 
the founda­tions of the wiki, as said above; then the wiki should ideally evolve towards a phase of recruitment 
of more users and/or content of better quality. While there does not seem to be a clear-cut transition 
between the two modes, one may dis­tinguish the gestation period from the cruising mode. This process 
may support the explanation of the wide area at the lower-left of the scatterplot of Fig. 3, with wikis 
bootstrap­ping and wikis at a more advanced stage altogether. Open questions relate to which wiki-related 
reasons may make people leave. As Levrel [16] notes, holding contrib­utors in an open project is a challenge 
in itself, notably when the project grows and requires more and more super­vising and strongly involved 
users: in the French-language Wikipedia for example, some administrators required their number to be 
increased under the threat of leaving the project, as they were at some point too few to maintain the 
ever-growing content. Another dreadful threat lies in forks, i.e. concurrent wikis emerging from a given 
project while re-using the same content as a seed, dividing communi­ties and signi.cantly lowering the 
available workforce for each fork, possibly increasing confusion between them. On the bright side, yet, 
the open-licensing system makes coups d état pointless, as anyone can create a fork whenever the project 
appears to be monopolized by a small club. For in­stance Enciclopedia Libre, a fork of the Spanish-language 
Wikipedia, appeared at the very .rst rumor that advertising could be used to sustain maintenance costs 
 the project going private would suppress one fundamental user incen­tive, the contribution to a common 
good. 3.3 Content dynamics Some factors underlying population growth are directly linked to content 
characteristics. Quality content, attesting a successful collaborative project, is likely to have a posi­tive 
impact on population dynamics. Content growth, on the 6 See Wikipedia s founder, Jim Wales, who could 
willingly play the role of a British monarch [19, 8]. other hand, has a more ambiguous effect, by both 
improv­ing the completeness of the project (hence the quality) and the number of users needed to maintain 
it. In particular, the upper-left wikis on Fig. 3, with a de.cit in users com­pared to content size, 
are likely to experience a higher threat of abandon, relinquishment or vandalism than other wikis. Given 
these constraints, how to ensure sustainability? Content stabilization. First, content disasters [5] 
are im­possible on wikis: the effortless reversibility discourages mass vandalism. More interesting are 
regular threats towards content consistency, including inaccurate contributions, oc­casional vandalism, 
more or less ostensible rule-breaking and edit wars. Whereas the grossest vandalism does not require 
more than an appropriate number of users watchdogging wiki contents7, fact falsi.cation or disputes among 
editors, e.g., induce more subtle regulation and arbitration procedures. Con.ict-solving mechanisms are 
in this case well-develo­ped, talk pages being a prominent means to achieve this [9], in particular in 
relation with (self-organized) policies which are interactively set up by Wikipedians, precisely through 
talk pages themselves such as, for instance, the 3-revert rule on Wikipedia,8 which in turn induces 
a certain robust­ness to vandalism of various kinds. Later, discussion pages are also the place where 
such policies may be enforced, and eventually, as such, the locus of the coevolution of disputes and 
policies; Viegas et al. [9] emphasize more broadly that a conventional organization could emerge on wikis 
from ac­tivity patterns in talk pages, rather than from a top-down im­position of norms by some agents. 
It is therefore a crucial instrument on which contributors may act to restore the via­bility of a wiki, 
either at a local level, e.g. introducing page protection to avoid vandalism, or at a more global level, 
e.g. by de.ning new ways of dealing with con.icts9. Finally of­.ine , i.e. off-wiki, social networks 
offer immediate assis­tance to more serious con.icts [6], as informal places where a smaller and more 
involved part of the community as a real social network discusses and acts in common outside of the wiki, 
including IRC channels and mailing-lists, notably. Here, it is likely that wikis without a governance 
struc­ture (i.e., administrators) would have more trouble dealing with con.icts and achieve viability. 
As a whole, these vari­ous kinds of stabilization mechanisms suggest that viability can be enforced by 
various kinds of actors, from very local, bottom-up interactions to global, top-down constraints im­posed 
by a small group of experts . To another extent, pol­icy evolutions have a meta-impact on the content 
by modify­ing the landscape of user incentives, inducing a modi.cation on the longer-term dynamics as 
such a method to adapt to evolutions in user demand and sustain a wiki. Quality evaluation. A last feature 
of content stabilization relates to its quality, as a key criterion to attract users [3]; and 7 On Wikipedia 
for example the Recent Changes patrol , a self-organized group, checks recently-modi.ed pages for vandalized 
content. 8 Any user making 3 successive reversions of others modi.cations of an article is banned from 
further editing this article for some time. 9 For instance, to avoid expelling worthy contributors having 
an occasional issue on some article, Wikipedians replaced their policy for dealing with editor-with­problems 
with relationship-between-two-people-with-problems , thus without fo­cusing on a single person [20]. 
indeed content-stabilizing policies intertwine quality poli­cies: on Wikipedia for instance, Stvilia 
et al. [12] show that the notion of featured article sets a quality target, while articles for deletion 
are a permanent threat establishing a minimal quality threshold. Apart from strict vandalism (dele­tion, 
corruption, obvious non-respect of rules) quality re­mains hard to appraise with objective criteria, 
some criterias may nonetheless be induced and operationalized from stud­ies focused on content quality 
on one side, and user qual­ity on the other side. As for content quality, Lih [1] has es­tablished criteria 
correlating quality to the number of edits ( rigor ) and editors ( diversity ), while a correlation has 
recently been established by Wilkinson &#38; Huberman [10] between Google s PageRank and edit activity; 
meanwhile, a hand-made comparison of Wikipedia articles with Encyclo­pedia Britannica unsuccessfully 
looked for signi.cant differ­ences [13]. As for user quality, Anthony et al. [2] measure the survivability 
of edits made by Wikipedians and identify two categories of worthwhile actors: registered users producing 
many edits (experts) and anonymous users making few edits (passers-by, who are more and more [6]), the 
importance of this last category being counter-intuitive (esp. with respect to [3]), as novices-with-respect-to-a-wiki 
appear in this case to produce better content than a whole class of registered users. 4. Conclusion We 
exhibited both the current state of the wikisphere in terms of resembling and differentiating features 
and properties, and a few key mechanisms likely to be determinant in explaining diverse destinies of 
wiki-based communities: bootstrapping settings, initial recruitment processes, incentives to stay in 
the community and relationships between contributor and content dynamics. From this, we may now sketch 
out some of the most salient patterns for modeling wiki viability: Population dynamics: (1) Agents: 
growth is directly co­evolving with content size (Sec. 3.2); a proportion of users leave, partially depending 
on the overall quality. (2) Status: registered users improve over time; a small subset of most active 
users is granted administrator status, mak­ing better edits, lowering vandalism; some anonymous visitors 
are better than recently-registered users [2].  Content dynamics: (1) Articles: their growth is linked 
to population size and existing articles; quality could be as­sessed through the number of editors and 
edits [1], the lat­ter proportional to previous edits [10]. (2) Meta-content: recreating the ecology 
of policies would be limited by ontological uncertainty [21], unless one reproduces ob­served or prede.ned 
norms histories; yet, policies could still be independent variables in order to compare devel­opment 
paths induced by various policy sets.  Such population and content dynamics might be suf.cient to describe 
and perhaps predict the viability and history of wiki communities. In this respect, the present paper 
could be seen as a position paper. Since existing work on wikis is essentially focused on the Wikipedia, 
it could be instructive to carry additional qualitative research on behaviors in other wikis. Besides, 
further research should endeavor at observing the growth and perhaps decline of a large set of wikis, 
instead of focusing on their structure at some static timepoint, so as to distinguish a variety of development 
paths. References [1] A. Lih. Wikipedia as participatory journalism: Reliable sources? Metrics for evaluating 
collaborative media as a news resource. In 5th Intl Symp on Online Journalism, Austin, TX, USA, April 
16 17 2004. [2] D. Anthony, S. Smith, and T. Williamson. Explaining quality in internet collective goods: 
Zealots and good samaritans in the case of wikipedia. 2005. [3] S. Bryant, A. Forte, and A. Bruckman. 
Becoming wikipedian: Transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In Group 
05, Sanibel Island, FL, Nov 2005. [4] A. Capocci, V. D. P. Servedio, F. Colaiori, L. S. Buriol, D. Donato, 
S. Leonardi, and G. Caldarelli. Preferential attachment in the growth of social networks: The internet 
encyclopedia wikipedia. Phys. Rev. E, 74(3):036116, 2006. [5] A. Ciffolilli. Phantom authority, self-selective 
recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of wikipedia. First Monday, 8(12), 
2003. [6] A. Kittur, E. Chi, B. Pendleton, B. Suh, and T. Mytkowicz. Power of the few vs. wisdom of the 
crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. [7] J. Levrel. Wikipédia, un dispositif médiatique 
de publics participants. Réseaux, 24(138):185 218, 2006. [8] J. M. Reagle. Do as I do: leadership in 
the Wikipedia. http://reagle.org/joseph/2005/ethno/leadership.html, 2005. [9] F. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, 
J. Kriss, and F. van Ham. Talk before you type: Coordination in Wikipedia. In Proc 40th Hawaii Intl Conf 
on System Sciences, 2007. [10] D. Wilkinson and B. Huberman. Assessing the value of cooperation in Wikipedia. 
First Monday, 12(4), 2007. [11] V. Zlatic, M. Bozicevic, H. Stefancic, and M. Domazet. Wikipedias: Collaborative 
web-based encyclopedias as complex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 74(1):016115, 2006. [12] B. Stvilia, M. Twidale, 
L. Smith, and L. Gasser. Information quality work organization in Wikipedia. 2007. [13] J. Giles. Internet 
encyclopaedias go head to head. Nature, 438(7070):900 901, 2005. [14] C. Marlow, M. Naaman, d. boyd, 
and M. Davis. Position paper, tagging, taxonomy, .ickr, article, toread. In Proc of Collaborative Web 
Tagging Workshop, WWW 06, 2006. [15] L. Sanger. The early history of nupedia and wikipedia: A memoir. 
http://features.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid= 05/04/18/164213, 2005. [16] J. Levrel. Le développement 
des contenus libres sur Internet -Wikipedia. Technical report, FT R&#38;D TECH/SUSI, 2005. [17] A. Mockus, 
R. Fielding, and J. Herbsleb. Two case studies of open source software development: Apache and Mozilla. 
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodol­ogy, 11(3):309 346, 2002. [18] L. Gallant, G. Boone, 
and A. Heap. Five heuristics for designing and evaluating web-based communities. First Monday, 12(3), 
2007. [19] T. McNicho. Wikipedia founder hunts for gold. Business 2.0, CNN, February 27, 2007. [20] J. 
Levrel. Personal communication, 2007. [21] D. Lane and R. Max.eld. Ontological uncertainty and innovation. 
J. Evolutionary Econ., 15(1):3 50, 2005.   
			