
 Copyright and Reprint Permission: Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are 
permitted to photocopy beyond the limit of U.S. copyright law for private use of patrons those articles 
in this volume that carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated 
in the code is paid through Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For other 
copying, reprint or republication permission, write to IEEE Copyrights Manager, IEEE Service Center, 
445 Hoes Lane, P.O. Box 1331, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331. All rights reserved. Copyright 2001 by the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. All rights reserved.Copyright 2001 IEEE. Personal use of 
this material is permitted. However, permission to reprint/republish this material for advertising or 
promotional purposes or for creating new collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or 
lists, or to reuse any copyrighted component of this work in other works must be obtained from the IEEE. 
Visualizing DIII-D Tokamak Magnetic Field Lines Greg Schussman Kwan-Liu Ma David Schissel Todd Evans 
University of California, Davis* General Atomics Abstract We demonstrate the use of a combination of 
perceptually e.ective techniques for visualizing magnetic .eld data from the DIII-D Tokamak. These techniques 
can be implemented to run very e.ciently on machines with hardware support for OpenGL. Interactive speeds 
facilitate clear communica­tion of magnetic .eld structure, enhancing fusion scientists understanding 
of their data, and thereby accelerating their research. Keywords: Graphics hardware, haloed lines, illumi­nated 
lines, interactive visualization, magnetic .eld, plasma physics, tokamak 1 INTRODUCTION Fusion is the 
power source of the sun and other stars. It occurs when forms of the lightest atom, hydrogen, are com­bined 
to make helium in a very hot (100 million degrees centigrade) ionized gas or plasma. In this process 
a small amount of matter involved in the reaction is converted to a large amount of energy. On earth, 
fusion could provide a safe, environmentally attractive and a.ordable long-term energy source. One technique 
scientists have been using to contain this hot plasma on earth is called magnetic con.nement. One implementation 
of this concept, called a tokamak, employs magnetic .elds in a doughnut shaped con.guration to con­.ne 
the plasma [7]. Experiments on tokamaks have involved plasma pulses where the hot plasma exists for tens 
of sec­onds and the pulse is repeated with a tens of minutes cycle time. Fundamental to this type of 
research is the detailed knowledge of the magnetic .eld topology since the tokamak magnetic .eld is generated 
in part from currents .owing in the hot plasma. This analysis is important in between pulses to guide 
the research and is also to be performed in more detail at the conclusion of experimental operation for 
com­ General Atomics, 3550 General Atomics Court, San Diego, prehensive analysis of the results. *Center 
for Image Processing and puting (CIPIC), Department of Compversity of California, Davis, CA Email:{schussma, 
ma}@cs.ucdavis.edu Integrated uter Science, 95616-8562, Com-Uni-USA; CA 92121-1194, USA; Email:{schissel, 
evans}@fusion.gat.com The DIII-D tokamak (a National Fusion Facility, http://fusion.gat.com) was designed 
and built in the late 1970s by General Atomics. Color Plate 1 shows the exterior of the DIII-D tokamak, 
with a cutaway exposing the interior. General Atomics, with main facilities in San Diego, Cali­fornia, 
specializes in diversi.ed research and development in energy, defense, and other advanced technologies. 
The Fusion Group is a division of General Atomics, which con­ducts both experimental and computational 
fusion plasma research using the DIII-D. The scienti.c and engineering ad­vances in the study of complex 
plasma physics are increas­ingly dependent on new approaches to computing, informa­tion handling, and 
communication[5]. Scientists at General Atomics are conducting studies that grow rather quickly in both 
scale and complexity. Consequently, gleaning under­standing from the results becomes increasingly problematic 
with traditional two-dimensional data analysis routines. Visualization transforms raw data into graphical 
repre­sentations that utilize the high-bandwidth channel of the human visual system, exploiting the brain 
s remarkable abil­ity to detect patterns and draw inferences. Interactive three­dimensional visualization 
techniques would o.er scientists at General Atomics much richer and more natural approaches to the exploration 
and analysis of their data. Their data analysis throughput will be increased, as well as their ca­pability 
to communicate their .ndings. The resulting im­proved productivity will therefore accelerate the develop­ment 
of many key technologies at the Fusion Group, and sig­ni.cantly advance General Atomics work in plasma 
physics. In this case study, we describe the visualization technology we have developed in close collaboration 
with members of the Fusion Group at General Atomics. Speci.cally, interac­tive 3D visualization techniques 
and interfacing mechanisms have been developed for following magnetic .eld lines around a tokamak and 
examining the e.ect of small random varia­tions in toroidal .eld coil placement on the vacuum magnetic 
topology. A mechanism has also been developed to aid sci­entists in identifying and learning about the 
formation of magnetic islands . These islands form within the magnetic .eld that con.nes a plasma undergoing 
nuclear fusion in a tokamak and are detrimental to fusion con.nement. In ad­dition, the interactive 3D 
visualization capability allows the scientists to arbitrarily cut through the 3D surface to create a 
2D plot, to rotate the 3D image, to animate any of the .eld lines, and to see the .eld lines from any 
perspective. 2 RELATED WORK Vector .eld visualization has been a hot topic of computer science research. 
The problem of displaying streamlines in .uid .ow is similar to displaying magnetic .eld lines. Di.er­ent 
visualization strategies must be developed for di.erent purposes such as presentation, exploratory analysis, 
and re­mote visualization. However, the ability to identify features at di.erent scales must be uniformly 
supported. Traditionally, on graphics workstations, .eld lines have been rendered as .at-shaded line 
segments, or as polygonal tubes. Figure 1a illustrates how .at-shaded line segments impair the spatial 
perception of an image. Displaying .eld lines as polygonal tubes severely limits the number of lines 
that can be displayed in a scene, for several reasons. First, when the density of a collection of .eld 
lines approaches the radius of the tubes, the tubes intersect one another and no longer appear distinct. 
Second, rendering several polygons in place of a single line segment is much more expensive in terms 
of memory requirements and rendering speed. An accurate shading of line primitives can signi.cantly improve 
spatial perception of structure of the lines. It has been shown that good illuminated lines can be displayed 
at interactive rates by utilizing texture mapping hardware [6, 8]. The idea is to color thin lines in 
a way that mimics the way we see thin .bers in the real world. For example, when looking at the hair 
on someone s head, most people do not see individual hairs. However, because of the way light re.ects 
o. of hair as it curves, producing highlights, it is easy to discern the overall structure of someone 
s haircut. Figure 1b was generated using this illumination technique. Other perceptual issues such as 
halo and self-shadowing to derive highly informative visualization results have also been discussed [1, 
2, 4]. It is common practice, when sketch­ing 3D wireframe objects by hand, to break a line as it passes 
underneath a line that should be on top. From the stand­point of computer graphics, it is convenient 
to think of the lines as having a dark halo around them. When the lines and their halos are rendered, 
the halos obstruct the view of any lines passing behind them. Figure 1c shows an example of haloing, 
and how it conveys the relative depths of crossing lines. (a) (b) (c) Figure 1: (a) Flat Shaded lines 
are di.cult to understand. (b) Illuminated lines provide a better sense of shape. (c) Haloed lines show 
which line is in front.  3 DIII-D FIELD LINE VISUALIZATION 3.1 The Data Numerical simulations using 
the tokamak geometry calculate the magnetic .eld line topology inside the high temperature fusion plasma. 
The magnetic .eld strength at the outer boundary of the plasma is then compared to experimental measurements 
to ensure the accuracy of the calculation[3]. Simulated low energy charged particles are placed at seed 
locations inside the plasma on a magnetic .eld line. In the simulation, the charged seed particles stick 
to the magnetic .eld lines. Therefore, seed particle paths correspond to the locations of conceptual 
magnetic .eld lines within the toka­mak. Each magnetic .eld line path is calculated for 200 revo­lutions 
going the long way (toroidally) around the tokamak. The magnetic .eld line also twists the short way 
around (poloidally) as it makes those revolutions which results in a helical path for the .eld. The end 
of the magnetic .eld line after one revolution typically does not have the same location as the original 
starting point. Therefore, after 200 revolutions, the magnetic .eld line can be thought of as be­ing 
spread out over an imaginary surface, usually shaped like a torus. Each seed point generates a separate 
.eld line, which indi­cates a separate surface. These surfaces never intersect one another, and, ideally, 
they nest neatly one within another, similar to the layers of an onion. This idea is illustrated in the 
cutaway drawing in Color Plate 1. 3.2 The3Dview To produce a 3D view, we combined haloing and illumina­tion, 
providing a better overall sense of shape than either techique alone, as shown in Figure 2. Our system 
achieved interactive frame rates by exploiting hardware texturing and display lists. Only two display 
lists are used to draw any given scene. One display list contains all halo line segments, and another 
contains all correspond­ing textured line segments. For the illuminated .eld lines, we used a 128 by 
128 pixel texture. This texture can be recalculated at interactive rates, in response to a user adjusting 
lighting parameters. In [6], light intensity at each point in a scene was given by a slightly modi.ed 
version of the popular Phong illumination equation: I = Iambient + Idiffuse + Ispecular = ka + kd(L · 
N)p + ks(V · R)n Where the dot product terms are replaced with approxima­tions corresponding to lines 
instead of to surfaces. To com­pensate for the resulting excess brightness, the exponent p is added, 
improving spatial perception by reducing bright­ness and increasing contrast. For the pictures in this 
paper, we used the illumination parameters ka =0.10, kd =0.90, ks =0.90, n = 78, and p = 4, which are 
di.erent from those used in [6]. These parameter values emphasize the surface shapes. The halo widths 
are 6 pixels, and the line widths are 1.5 pixels, antialiased. Although the 3D picture can become too 
cluttered when displaying more than one .eld line at at time, we allow the user to quickly change from 
viewing one .eld line to the next. This can be done one at a time, or by means of an animation. The net 
result is to provide the user with a good sense of where these surfaces are with respect to one another. 
We permit the user to look at the .eld line from any angle or distance, including looking at the inside 
of the torus, as shown in Color Plate 3.  3.3 The2Dview The magnetic islands are of primary interest 
to the scien­tists. Although the three dimensional view of the .eld lines easily indicate the presence 
of a magnetic island, it does not readily produce a good sense of the shape of the island s cross section. 
If the torus were sliced like a pizza, the in­tersection of the .eld line with each slicing plane produces 
a poloidal plot. This plot shows 200 points per .eld line, one point indicating where each revolution 
of the .eld line intesected the slicing plane. Magnetic islands can be on the order of millimeters, whereas 
the DIII-D tokamak data covers an area about 4.3  (a) (c)  (b) (d) Figure 2: Haloing and illumination 
enhance visual perception of the magnetic .eld line. (a) Constant color (.at shaded) lines make the image 
confusing. (b) Illumination clari.es the overall shape. (c) Haloing de.nitely shows the poloidal twist 
of the .eld line, but leaves the image looking two-dimensional. (d) Combined haloing and illumination 
conveys detailed .eld line structure as well as overall three-dimensional shape. meters across. Therefore, 
we allow the user to interactively pan and zoom the poloidal plot. Color Plate 4 shows a se­quence of 
views, progressively zoomed in on the edge of a magnetic island. We increased the point size as the user 
zooms, but impose an upper limit. This allows very close points to become distinct under greater magni.cation. 
The three dimensional view can become too cluttered when displaying more than one .eld line. The poloidal 
plot, however, can show the cross section of many .eld lines simul­taneously because they form nice, 
distinct layers, as seen in Color Plate 4b. When constructing a poloidal plot for more than one .eld 
line, we assign di.erent colors to the points to indicate which .eld line they come from.  4 RESULTS 
Figure 3 shows a sequence of .eld lines. The .rst surface is contained within the second, and so on. 
The last picture corresponds to the outermost shell of the data. Each shell is contained within the next, 
with the exception of magnetic islands. Figure 3, Sample 0 shows a well behaved surface. Figure 3, Sample 
11 shows the surface corresponding to one magnetic island. Figure 3, sample 42 shows a di.erent island. 
In the case of a magnetic island, the surface does not form a torus shaped surface. Rather, it is squashed 
between layers When a magnetic .eld line indicates a surface that is not a torus, we see a magnetic island. 
Color Plate 3 shows a yellow island squeezed between well-behaved green and violet layers. The islands 
are very .at, so they appear as ribbons in the three dimensional view. It is most useful to see both 
a 3D view and a 2D poloidal plot together. Color Plate 2a shows a blue circle in the 3D view, which indicates 
where the cutting plane is for the poloidal plot. In Color Plate 2b, the same blue circe is shown in 
the poloidal plot, along with the white points of an island. A challenge to working with tokamak magnetic 
.eld lines is that there is no guarantee that they will trace out a nice surface. It is possible for 
the lines to spread out over the surface in a uniform way, as in Figure 3, Samples 0 and 11. It is also 
possible for the .eld line to cluster in dense groups in some areas while leaving gaps in others. The 
dense groups can almost look like ribbons. Figure 3, Samples 15, 37, 40, and 42 show these surfaces. 
 5 CONCLUSIONS Magnetic islands are detrimental to the energy con.nement of high temperature plasmas 
contained within a tokamak. Visualizing the magnetic .elds within the DIII-D tokamak can help scientists 
understand and combat magnetic islands. We have constructed software to interactively present sci­entists 
with three dimensional views of tokamak magnetic .elds. The .eld lines are rendered using techiques to 
en­hance perception of their spatial structure. In addition, an interactive two dimensional plot of a 
cross section of the three dimensional .eld lines is available to the scientists. The combination of 
these two views enable scientists to in­teract more naturally and quickly with their data. The seed particles 
described earlier are low energy and trace out the magnetic .eld lines. However, to increase the number 
of fusion reactions that occur within the plasma, the temperature of the plasma must be very high. The 
plasma temperature is raised either by injecting very energetic parti­cles or by using Radio Frequency 
heating to raise the energy of particles that are in the plasma. Such high energy par­ticles have very 
complex orbits that do not trace out the magnetic .eld lines. Understanding these complex orbits by utilizing 
better visualization techniques would be very helpful to the fusion research program. The visualization 
techniques described in this paper should be directly appli­cable to visualizing high energy particle 
orbits. Future work will address this issue. Finally, the ability to interactively  Sample 0 Sample 
37   run these simulations while visualizing these orbits would greatly enhance the e.ciency of the 
scienti.c research.  6 ACKNOWEDGEMENTS This work has been supported by General Atomics, UC Dig­ital 
Media Innovation Program (DiMI), and the National Science Foundation.  References [1] A. Appel, F. J. 
Rohlf, and A. J. Stein. The haloed line e.ect for hidden line elimination. volume 13, pages 151 157, 
August 1979. [2] David Blythe. Siggraph 99 Course notes: Lighting and Shading Techniques for Interactive 
Applications. August 1999. [3] Evans, T.E. Statistical properties of intrinsic topological noise in tokamaks. 
In Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics, volume 15C, pages 
11 65, Berlin, Germany, 1991. [4] Victoria Interrante and Chester Grosch. Visualizing 3D .ow. IEEE Computer 
Graphics &#38; Applications, 18(4), July August 1998. ISSN 0272-1716. [5] Schissel, D.P., et al. Enhanced 
computational infras­tructure for data analysis at the DIII-D national fusion facility. In Proceedings 
of the 26th European Conference on Controlled Fusion and Plasma Physics, volume 23J, page 1225, Maastricht, 
Netherlands, 1999. [6] Detlev Stalling, Malte Z¨ockler, and Hans-Christian Hege. Fast Display of Illuminated 
Field Lines. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 3(2):118 128, April 1997. [7] 
John Wesson. Tokamaks. Oxford University Press, 1987. [8] Malte Z¨ockler, Detlev Stalling, and Hans-Christian 
Hege. Interactive Visualization of 3D-Vector Fields Using Illu­minated Streamlines. In Proceedings of 
IEEE Visualiza­tion 96, San Francisco, pages 107 113, October 1996.  Color Plate 1: The DIII-D tokamak 
exterior, with a cutaway Color Plate 3: The yellow .eld line is part of an island showing nested magnetic 
surfaces con.ning hot plasma trapped between the green and violet layers.  (a) (b)  (c) (d) Color Plate 
4: The user can pan and zoom the poloidal plot interactively to inspect magnetic islands.  
			