
 Visual Signatures for Financial Time Series Su Te Lei The University of Texas at Dallas Richardson, 
TX 75080-3021, USA 1-972-883 2414 sute@acm.org ABSTRACT Information visualization techniques have been 
applied to many research fields in recent years. This paper introduces the concept of visual signature 
for financial time series. Unlike other information visualization, visual signatures are designed to 
more proactively reveal visual patterns of market data. Previous research on visualizing financial time 
series is discussed and compared. This paper shows how the concept of visual signature helps professional 
analysts obtain instant and useful visual messages from it. Categories and Subject Descriptors H.1.2 
[Information Systems]: User/Machine Systems human information processing. General Terms Design, Human 
Factors. Keywords Information Visualization, Visual Analytics, Financial Time Series. 1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper introduces the concept of visual signature for financial time series. The word, signature, 
is defined as something (as a tune, style or logo) that serves to set apart or identify; a characteristic 
mark in the online version of Merriam Webster dictionary. In terms of financial time series, we want 
to present market data in the form of a signature from which we can easily identify the dynamics of the 
market. What a visual signature brings to us is a unique pictorial presentation. The concept is similar 
to giving an identity to an entity, such as the logo of a company, the symbol for an event. Conceptually 
a visual signature differs from information visualization in its ultimate purpose. The task of information 
visualization is to present data in a readable visual form which may or may not be unique, whereas a 
visual signature arranges data in a unique visual form conveying a message to the user. The goal is to 
communicate with the user through unique visual patterns. The notion of visual signature was conceived 
during the course of our research project in analyzing financial time series. Our research interest in 
the project was in applying visual approach to assist data analysis, as opposed to textual statistical 
analysis. In order to elicit the core issues in visual analysis of financial time Permission to make 
digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers 
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. VINCI 11, August 4 5, 2011, 
Hong Kong, China. Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0875-5/11/08 $10.00. Kang Zhang The University of Texas 
at Dallas Richardson, TX 75080-3021, USA 1-972-883 6351 kzhang@utdallas.edu series, we first investigated 
the characteristics of financial time series by collecting analysis reports from various reliable sources. 
We then walked through the key scenarios that financial analysts pay attention to. We formalized the 
visual design issues by creating a list of requirements based on these scenarios. The requirements served 
as a guideline for reviewing current visual methods and previous related work. We found that there is 
a gap between currently available visual tools and analysts needs. Most current visual tools fulfill 
partial needs of the financial analysts. We thus were motivated to investigate further by examining visualization 
components against the identified requirements and developed a set of visualizations for financial time 
series. The outcome of our research is a working visualization environment for exploring financial time 
series. Owing to space limitation, this paper presents the partial result of our research - the concept 
of visual signature. Our contributions are x We created a visual signature for the main market index 
using the structure of Fermat s Spiral. It enables investors to visually define daily market overall 
performance according to the dynamics of market trading activities. x We created a visual signature method 
for displaying single stock data using the Tai Chi symbol. Based on this visual signature, investors 
will be able to group stocks with similar short-term trading activities. We will begin our discussion 
by firstly reviewing the related work in information visualization in Section 2. Section 3 describes 
the motivation of our work. In Section 4, we proposed the galaxy visualization for the main market index 
and Section 5 presents the Tai-Chi visualization for displaying single stock data. Section 6 discusses 
the evaluation on these visual signatures from investors and we conclude the paper in Section 7. 2. 
RELATED WORK Information visualization techniques have been applied to many research fields in recent 
years. There are a number of methods to visualize information, such as area-based, pixel-based, tree­structure, 
geometrical shapes, and node-links. Since our research theme is on financial time series data, we will 
focus our discussion within financial and temporal related visualizations. The following subsections 
will review previous work related to our research. 2.1 Area-based visualizations Several previous researches 
used area-based visualization techniques to display information. Alsakran et al. [2] applied visual technique 
to examine the relation between mutual fund performance and fund characteristics such as asset size, 
cash holding, loads, expense rations and turnover. They used a weighted density-based distribution map 
to plot fund distributions on a colored map. Instead of using evenly distributed cells, they assigned 
each cell in the display space with a weighted value. Data cells with higher density are given with more 
weight so as to fully utilize the available display space. This method basically uses variable scaling 
to display data. It is similar to the fisheye technique that uses a fisheye lens to zoom in on the display 
space to obtain further details. Although the display space is visually distorted, it offers a way to 
focus on more relevant data. Lin et al [12] also used the fisheye technique to provide a context and 
focus feature for currency exchange data plotted on a two­dimensional line chart. FinVis developed by 
Rudolph et al. [17] is a visual analytics tool that helps the individual improve decision making by visualizing 
aggregate risk alongside a traditional wealth-time plot in a casual context for personal finance data. 
Its main visual display was inspired by ThemeRiverTM [7]. Instead of visualizing theme magnitude, FinVis 
shows risk magnitude for financial decisions. This type of visualization presents data with larger values 
using more aggregated space areas against timeline. Different color shadings are used to show various 
types of data. In terms of financial time series data, this method may be applied to display daily performance 
of stock sectors, but it is not suitable for displaying the performance of a single stock due to the 
number of stocks is usually a large number. Plotting the entire data set is not logical as the system 
will eventually run out of available color shadings to differentiate data. The Treemap visualization 
[18] is a widely used visual technique in financial markets. The website Smartmoney.com provides an interactive 
Treemap views (Market Map) on the most current stock market data. It visualizes the most active and inactive 
market sectors in a single view. Huang et al. extended Treemap visualization from a 2D to 3D display 
for fraud detection [9]. They used 3D Treemap to monitor the real-time stock market performance and to 
identify a particular stock with an unusual trading pattern. When a suspected pattern is found, they 
used social network visualization to conduct behavior-driven visual analysis. The Treemap visualization 
is close related to our work. It is a great tool for visualizing the overall performance of stock market 
data. Two types of color shadings clearly show the sectors with most positive or negative performance, 
and the size of the display area indicates the capital size of the stock. During the course of our research, 
we inquired of professional stock analysts about the usefulness of Treemap. They pointed out that it 
is not easy to compare stock sectors with mixed performance. When two color shadings are mingled within 
the same stock sector area, it is difficult to tell the performance of the sector. Visualizing performance 
simply by color shading might not be the best solution as a blurring effect appears after staring at 
the market map for a longer period of time, which makes the comparison of stocks difficult. 2.2 Pixel-based 
visualization Pixel-based visualization technique has recently gained more attention due to its ability 
in displaying a large set of data within a limited display space area. Ziegler et al. [25] developed 
the Performance Matrix visualization to apply visual analytics on the financial market. The performance 
matrix is arranged as rectangular box with x and y axes where x-axis represents time scale and y-axis 
represents holding period. Each point in the x and y coordinate is colored according to its growth rate. 
The resulting representation clearly shows the overall performance of the defined period by its color 
variation. The Groove visualization is a pixel based visualization proposed by Lammarsch et al [13]. 
It provides a calendar view with color and opacity overlay to visualize temporal patterns. The Circle 
view proposed by Keim et al. [11] uses pixel based method to cluster stock data with similar performance. 
On the same display, it provides stocks prices at different time granularity. Through the use of different 
color shadings, segments of similar data values can be easily shown. One noticeable issue with the Circle 
view is its scalability. The number of displayable data elements is limited by the display space. It 
is more suitable for visualizing small amounts of data. Hao et al. [8] used a pixel based visualization 
to display a large set of time series data. Their visualization provides multi-resolution data displays. 
Their method can be viewed as a hierarchical Heatmap visualization. Heatmap is a visualization that simultaneously 
reveals row and column hierarchical structure in a data matrix. The earliest publication on the Heatmap 
method can be dated to Loua s work in 1873 [15, 23]. One of its advantages is that it allows data rearrangement 
and clustering by means of permuting the data matrix. For example, the Circle view discussed earlier 
used a clustering technique to group stock prices. Our observation on pixel-based visualization is that 
it possesses at least two advantages: x It is able to visualize a large set of data within a limited 
space. x It enables a full utilization of color shading method to pin point hot spot data areas. In terms 
of financial time series data, pixel-based visualization is suitable for visualizing historical stock 
prices over a long period of time. It should be able to enhance analyses on stock trading patterns. 
2.3 Geometry-based visualization Geometrical objects have always been used for visualization, for example, 
line charts, bar charts and radar charts are the visualization methods we often encountered in our daily 
life. Extending the idea on geometrical objects is the use of mathematical curves. Weber et al. [22] 
used spirals to visualize time series. They plotted stock data on spiral curves using different color 
shadings to show possible trading patterns. Chin et al. [4] also developed the dynamic spiral timeline 
visualization to show cell phone call data. Visualizing data using spiral curves is surely a good method 
for displaying temporal data. We will show quite a different way of utilizing spirals to visualize stock 
data in Section 4. The TimeWheel visualization [20] displays temporal data using circular axes. The basic 
idea is to present the axis of time in the center of the display, and to circularly arrange the dependant 
axes around it. The surrounding dependant axes hold the values of data variables. Basically, the TimeWheel 
visualization is a type of node-link visualization. The advantage of using node-link is that it enables 
tracing of data values. In addition to using different color shadings, length and direction can also 
be used for data representation. One other node-link type visualization is the ActiviTree [21] that provides 
an interactive exploration environment for the systematic identification of sequences in social science 
activity diary data. It allows the user to interactively select interested activities and study further 
on other linked activities. In our opinion, this type of visualization is suitable for data analyses 
requiring more user interactions. One more geometry-based visualization worth mentioning is the VisAlert 
sysem [6]. The VisAlert visualization is developed to visualize problems related to computer network 
systems. It uses multiple circles to indicate temporal attributes and connects them to topological data 
with links. One issue we noticed is that the VisAlert system is a good tool for visualizing correlation 
of limited amount of network alerts. It, however, might not be suitable for a large set of data as the 
issue of visual clutter will appear when more links are drawn. 2.4 Multidimensional visualization Multidimensional 
visualization is an alternate way of visualizing data. Dwyer and Gallagher [5] proposed a two-and-a-half 
dimension method to visualize changes in stock portfolio datasets. Their system provides different two-dimensional 
views to show data movements and data changes. Their columns and worms metaphor maps stock sectors to 
columns and worm-like connectors to show fund transfers in a given time period. This method is suitable 
for capturing the movement of data but it might not be an efficient tool for daily investment monitoring. 
In our view, the movement of data can be more effectively performed using just a two dimensional display. 
Thakur and Hanson [19] proposed a three dimensional visualization. Their method stacks temporal data 
using a column of discs to show geographical related information. It clearly displays the variation of 
data values thorough different color shadings and disc sizes. Their method, in our opinion, can also 
be applied to financial time series but it will require more user interactions to make it efficient. 
The Market Topology visualization is a commercial product that uses a three dimensional tree-like visualization 
to show stock data [10]. It groups related stocks in tree branches and uses red and green color to indicate 
the performance of stocks. Its main advantage is the ability to cluster related stocks in a tree branch, 
but it also creates visual clutter. 2.5 Summary Information visualization has recently gained more attention 
in the form of visual analytics by researchers. Many research papers have been published in the last 
few years. In this section, we limited our discussion on visualizing financial and temporal related data. 
More reviews on visualizing time-oriented data can be found in the review by Aigner et al. [1]. Each 
proposed visualization technique was developed for a particular purpose or serves to solve a specific 
problem. Our work differs from them in the aspect of viewing purpose. We present information in the form 
of visual patterns based on the given data. The following section will explain the idea of our work. 
3. MOTIVATION A signature is a distinctive mark that serves to set apart. Our idea is to develop a visual 
system that enables the user to set a characteristic mark for market data. The concept is similar to 
creating a logo of for a company, a signature of a person, or a symbol for a particular aggregation of 
things. Visual signs have long been used for communication since the ancient times. One of the earliest 
visual symbols was developed by the people living in Mesopotamia around 3100 B.C. They used the barley 
signs as shown in Figure 1 to keep track of how much barley was taken away. Another example is the Phaistos 
Disc which is a disk of fired clay from the Minoan palace of Phaistos on the Greek island of Crete, possibly 
dating to the second millennium B.C. As shown in Figure 2, there are a total of 241 tokens on the disc, 
comprising 45 unique signs. Many of these 45 signs represent easily identifiable daily used objects and 
things.  Figure 2. The Phaistos Disc. The method of using visual sings to describe an idea is still 
a popular means of visual communication even in the present day. Figure 3 shows the set of pictograms 
used in the 2008 Beijing Olympics. From the set of pictograms, we can clearly see the visual sign resembling 
a person is the key figure. Each pictogram represents a sport activity by mimicking a person s body movement 
accompanied with a sport symbol. It is simple but effectively conveys the underlying message. Referring 
back to financial time series, it would be desirable to have such pictograms to show market performance 
so that we can easily detect visual patterns in the market movements. However, unlike visualizing sport 
activities, what we are dealing with are numerical data values rather than an identifiable entity. In 
Section 2, we reviewed the related work for displaying financial or time-oriented data. They were designed 
to enable visualizing data which may or may not have a specific visual pattern. For example, in Figure 
4 we show two rings visualizations for two different market days. The rings visualization was developed 
in our previous project [14]. The ring filled with black color is the market index. The mark index performance 
on both days was about 1.7%. One noticeable difference between the two rings visualizations is that more 
stocks performed better than the main market index in the upper rings visualization. In the lower rings 
visualization, the main market index has a larger ring than most of the stocks, which means it performed 
better than most of the stocks. Although the rings visualization provides a good interactivity for exploring 
data, it is not easy to detect any pattern from these displays. Let s take another example from the 
treemap visualization for the US stock markets. Figure 5 shows two treemap visualizations for the US 
stock market generated from finviz.com. The main index performance on both days was about 1%. The most 
obvious difference on the two displays is few stocks with large capitalization size performed differently 
on both days. It is difficult to spot any visual pattern from the displays. Figure 5. Comparison of 
two Treemap visualizations with identical market index performance. Figure 6. Using drawing techniques 
to create different visual meanings. Different drawing techniques can often create different visual meanings 
of the same object. In Figure 6, we depict a figure of a human body using slightly different center lines. 
The left drawing shows a person who is in a walking motion. On the right, we tilt the center line to 
the right, and swing the hands and one leg upward to match the natural body movement. The drawing result 
shows the person is in a running motion. Applying the idea of drawing techniques to information visualization, 
we may create different visual meanings from the same set of data. In the next two sections, we will 
show our method to reveal visual patterns by means of a visual signature. We developed two levels of 
visual signatures one for the overall stock market performance and another for individual stocks. Our 
work is close to the work in the field of semiotics where signs are studied and analyzed in terms of 
their semantics, syntactics and pragmatics [3]. The idea of visual signature is about communication through 
visual displays whereas the field of semiotics is on the study of signs and their relations. 4. THE GALAXY 
VISUALIZATION The basic approach for making a visual signature is that the visualization should follow 
a traceable drawing rule through which we may set unique visual display for different sets of data. In 
geometry, sophisticated shapes are drawn based on some mathematical equations. We reviewed a large number 
of geometric shapes and selected Fermat s spiral as the basic form in our design. The basic form of Fermat 
s spiral is shown in Figure 7. We will explain the reason of using it in detail below. Figure 7. Fermat 
s spiral. The polar equation of Fermat s Spiral is rc u T , where r is the radial distance, c is the 
angle from the zero-degree line, and T determines how tightly wound is the spiral. Helmut Vogel [24] 
introduced an angular divergence factor to the equation. The modified polar equation is rc u n,T n uD 
, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , nmax , where r : is the distance between the origin of the polar coordinate system 
and the nth node. c: is a spacing constant describing the placement of nodes. n: is the ordered number 
of nodes counting outward from the center. T : is the angle between a reference direction and the position 
vector of the nth node in the polar coordinates. The origin of the polar coordinate system is at the 
center of the spiral pattern. D : is the angular constant for the spiral pattern. By varying the value 
of D, we may obtain a rich set of different floral patterns. Figure 8 shows four unique spiral patterns 
with D = 8, 21,103, and 137. This interesting property makes the Fermat s Spiral as our ideal way of 
creating the visual signature for stock market data. The most important factor is that we may create 
a different visualization by simply changing the angular value D. Figure 8. Fermat s spirals with four 
different patterns. Leading stocks and leading sectors provide some clues on the current market focus. 
Professional investors observe leading stocks and sectors in a number of ways. The market index of a 
stock market is composed of a set of stocks with different weight contributions. If, for example, a stock 
with more weight distribution is among the leading stocks or belongs to the leading sectors, and the 
trend of the leading sectors is going up in the near term. It is highly possible that the index will 
rise in the near term. By observing the movement of leading stocks, we may get a hint on the next market 
movement. The usual case is that market performance often lies on few leading stock sectors. Thus, making 
a visual signature for stock market performance through visualizing the leading market sectors is an 
ideal approach. We studied the Fermat s spiral carefully by adjusting the angular D value, and found 
interesting results. The drawing of the Fermat s spiral is from the center drawing outward. Setting the 
angular D value to 5, 191, 233, and 273, we got a set of spiral patterns with one, two, three, and four 
outward lines respectively. Figure 9 displays the four spiral patterns. In Figure 10, we set the angular 
D value to 358, 179, 239 and 271. We obtained a different set of spiral patterns with varying outward 
lines. The patterns in Figure 9 are more close to floral patterns, whereas the patterns in Figure 10 
are simple spirals. Floral patterns naturally give an impression of cheerfulness. They are well-suited 
to represent positive market performance. The simple spiral patterns can be used to represent negative 
market performance. We developed a visualization called the galaxy visualization as a visual signature 
for overall market performance based on the floral spiral idea.  Figure 11 shows an implementation of 
the galaxy visualization. The center depicts a positive market performance with three leading sectors. 
The data points are arranged by their capitalization sizes. We used different size of dots to represent 
large, medium and small capitalization sizes. The outer rings display the market data in non-leading 
sectors. Data points on the outer rings are arranged according to their performance. The rings emulate 
the Milky Way galaxy. Our implementation allows the user to set viewing angle, size of data point, the 
value range for determining leading sectors and the angular D values for the matching numbers of leading 
market sectors. The viewing angle in the figure is about 40 degree looking down to the center. Figure 
12 shows a display with the viewing angle at 10 degrees. The user may check the performance detail of 
each stock by moving the mouse pointer to the data point as shown in Figure 13. Figure 14 shows a negative 
market performance with six leading market sectors. As the implementation allows the user to set the 
angular D values, they may define a customized set of visual signatures for different market performance. 
 Figure 12. The galaxy visualization with a viewing angle at 10 degrees. In Section 3, we discussed 
the difference of visual signature and other visualization methods. Let s illustrate the concept again 
by comparing the galaxy visualization with the rings visualizations in Figure 4 and the treemap visualizations 
in Figure 5. As discussed previously, the market index performance on both days was about 1.7%. From 
these displays, we are unable to see any visual pattern on both days except the performance comparison. 
We plotted the same set of data using the galaxy visualization in Figure 15. We can clearly see that 
Figure 15.(a) shows eight leading market sectors on that day. And Figure 15.(b) indicates only three 
leading market sectors. The image displayed in the galaxy visualization presents much more direct message. 
  (b) Although the galaxy visualization is designed to reveal visual patterns through leading sectors, 
it does not lose information on the stock data of non-leading sectors. We may follow the out rings to 
find the performance of the stock in the non-leading sectors. In our current implementation, we arranged 
the stock data of non­leading sectors by their performance. We may revise the implementation by grouping 
stock data in sectors. The visualization method is flexible in terms of displaying market data. Comparing 
to the rings and treemap visualization, the galaxy visualization more proactively displays visual patterns 
of the market data. The goal of visual signature is to present data in a unique form. As we described 
in the introduction, visual signature differs from other information visualization in its visual design 
purpose. What we demonstrated here is one way of presenting financial time series in the form of visual 
signature. In our view, more visual signatures can be created as long as the design goal is properly 
focused. The construction of the galaxy visualization involves three steps. We first need to obtain the 
overall sector performance with the following calculation: Sector performance Ps = sum(Pn * Vn/Vsector_total), 
where n: is the stock code Pn: is the percentage of one day movement for stock n. Vn: is the trading 
volume for stock n. Vsector_total: is the total trading volume of the sector. The next step is to determine 
the number of leading sectors according to the value range specified by the user. The performance of 
the main stock market index decides what type of pattern to be drawn. If it is positive, the visual signature 
should be drawn as a floral pattern. Based on the number of leading sectors calculated, we look up the 
matching angular Dvalue defined by the user. If the market index is negative, we look up the D value 
on the negative value definition table. As the drawing of the spiral is starting outward from the center, 
we need to arrange the drawing sequence of data points from different sectors. Figure 16 shows the center 
of a spiral with three outward lines. We number the drawing sequence to show how the spiral is formed. 
It starts from the center where it is marked the number 0 . It then draws the second data point at the 
number 1 , and it continues to draw at the number 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , and so on. Suppose that we have 
three leading sectors. Each outward line is to be formed by stocks of the same sector. The drawing sequence 
is taking data from each sector in rotation. In our implementation, we sort the data by its capital size 
within the same sector and place the data into a queue. The program picks data from each queue in rotation 
and draws the data point on the screen. The placement of the data point is using the following parametric 
equation of the Fermat s spiral: v uc u yn n usin n uD , 1dv d1 c u xn n ucos n uD where c, n, D are 
as described in the polar equation above, and v is an added parameter for setting the viewing angle. 
If the value of v is set to 1, the viewing angle is directly from the top. The value of v is set to 0, 
the viewing angle is from the side, and we should see a cluster of data points aggregated on the horizontal 
line. The third step is to draw the outer part. In order to set the outer rings of data points on the 
same plane where the inner part lies, we applied the same parametric equation with a fixed D value. That 
is, we draw a second Fermat s spiral on the outer part. We set the angular D value to 249 as it yields 
more widespread data points. We arrange the remaining data from non-leading sectors in the order of the 
percentage change in stock price. These data are then placed onto the screen from the outmost location 
back to the inner part. The outmost location number is the sum of the total number of inner points plus 
the total number of outer points. This number is large enough to avoid overlapping the two spiral patterns. 
5. THE TAI-CHI VISUALIZATION Many different factors can affect stock prices. The price of a healthy stock 
sometimes fluctuates with the market trading movement despite of its solid fundamental financial record. 
In our observation, any of the stock markets around the globe has its own pace. If the price of a stock 
rises up sharply in a very short period of time, a profit-taking action will soon follow. If the price 
of a stock drops steeply, a rebound of purchasing action will come after. The Hong Kong Hang Seng stock 
market allows investors to perform short selling actions. Short selling is an investment option that 
investors can borrow shares of a stock from a security trading company and return them back at a mutually 
agreed date. Usually, short selling is betting on the decline of the price of a stock in the near term. 
When the investor borrows shares, he/she sells out immediately. At the time of returning date, the investor 
repurchases an equal amount of shares and returns them back to the security trading company. If the price 
of the stock declines by 10%, the investor gains 10% profit. Short selling provides investors a way of 
betting on negative performance of the market. Our view is that the performance of a stock market is 
the tug of war between the forces of regular stock purchasing and short selling. Regular stock purchasing 
bets on the positive side, whereas short selling bets on the negative side. Based on this concept, we 
developed the Tai-Chi visualization to visualize the forces of Yin and Yang (negative and positive). 
Figure 17 shows an example of the Tai-Chi visualization. Data points are placed along the middle curve 
line based on their performance. The left side is negative and the right side is positive. The middle 
curve line holds data points with zero change in price. Data points with more changes are farther away 
from the center line. We divide the chart into upper and lower parts from the circle center. Data points 
on the lower part are more recent. Within each part, we connect data points with red or green lines. 
Data points on the positive side are connected if there are more points on the positive side. In Figure 
18, the upper part has more data points on the positive side, a red line is drawn to connect data points 
on this side. This line we name it as the Tai-Chi line. It highlights the overall performance of a stock. 
The Tai-Chi visualization is designed to creating a visual signature of a stock. It serves as a symbol 
for a stock. By looking at the Tai-Chi line, we can identify the recent performance of a stock. Our implementation 
allows the user to check the detail information of each data point by moving mouse point onto it. We 
also developed an analysis feature for grouping stock with similar performance based on the Tai-Chi chart. 
 The grouping process starts by firstly classifying stock data with the color of their Tai-Chi lines. 
Four types of Tai-Chi lines are possible green-green, green-red, red-green and red-red. Within each 
type, we use the Euclidean distance to compare the similarity of two stocks. It is calculated using the 
following: E p,q ¦ n (qi pi )2 i 1 where n is the number of trading days, qi is the price of the stock 
q on day i, and pi is the price of the stock p on day i. The user may specify the value of E. Within 
the value of E, the movements of two stocks are considered to be similar. Figure 18 shows a sample result 
of our grouping implementation. We list three lines of stocks and stocks on the same line belong to the 
same group.  The Tai-chi visualization is constructed by drawing one big circle and two small inner 
circles. The upper inner circle is used for drawing data points from the first half of the user specified 
date period, and the lower inner circle is used for the second half of the data period. As shown in Figure 
19, we used different radiuses to place the data points. The drawing process starts by calculating daily 
percentage of price movement. We get the positive price change range D+ and negative price change range 
D-. On both sides, we define four equal intervals of price change. The value of each interval on the 
positive side is the value of D+ divided by four. Likewise, the value of each interval on the negative 
side is the value of D- divided by four. We set the initial radius to r which is the radius of the middle 
line. The radius of the data point on day i is calculated by D if pi > 0, and ri r pi modu c 4 D if 
pi < 0, ri r pi modu c 4 where r is the radius of the middle line, pi is the price change on day i, 
and c is a constant value for setting the interval distance. The angle of a data point is calculated 
as T 180 0 N , where N is the total number of trading days in the upper or lower part. 6. EVALUATION 
In order to evaluate our method, we ran a tutorial of our system to a group of five professional analysts. 
We then gave them a questionnaire to fill in. The reason for using a questionnaire as a way of evaluation 
is because professional analysts always know what features they need. As discussed in the introduction, 
we developed a set of visualizations for financial time series. The galaxy and Tai-Chi visualizations 
are among the set of visualizations in our system. The survey was conducted to evaluate the entire set. 
This paper shows the partial results related to the two visualizations discussed. For the purpose of 
comparison, the evaluation on the rings visualization is included. The questionnaire is based on the 
work by Arnold M. Lund [16] which we have used for our software development for many years and it has 
been used by many companies around the world. It includes four areas of interests usefulness, ease of 
use, ease of learning, and satisfaction. Each area has a list of questions which are listed below: 1. 
Usefulness 1.1. It helps me be more effective. 1.2. It helps me be more productive. 1.3. It gives me 
more control over the activities in my life. 1.4. It makes the things I want to accomplish easier to 
get done. 1.5. It saves me time when I use it. 1.6. It meets my needs. 2. Ease of Use 2.1. It is easy 
to use. 2.2. It requires the fewest steps possible to accomplish what I want to do with it. 2.3. It is 
flexible. 2.4. Using it is effortless. 2.5. I can use it without written instructions. 2.6. Both occasional 
and regular users would like it. 3. Ease of Learning 3.1. I learned to use it quickly. 3.2. I easily 
remember how to use it. 3.3. It is easy to learn to use it. 3.4. I quickly became skillful with it. 
4. Satisfaction  4.1. I am satisfied with it. 4.2. I would recommend it to a friend. 4.3. It works the 
way I want it to work. 4.4. I feel I need to have it. The participants were asked to give a score of 
1 to 5 for each question. A score of 5 is granted as the best score. We calculated the average scores 
and show the results in the following table: Questions Rings Galaxy Taichi A.1 3.6 3.4 2.8 A.2 3.8 3.4 
2.8 A.3 3.6 3.0 3.0 A.4 3.4 3.2 3.2 A.5 3.8 3.0 3.0 A.6 3.2 3.0 3.2 Average Score 3.57 3.17 3.00 B.1 
4.2 3.8 4.0 B.2 4.2 3.6 3.4 B.3 4.0 3.8 3.0 B.4 4.2 3.8 3.2 B.5 2.8 2.4 2.6 B.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 Average 3.93 
3.57 3.37 Score C.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 C.2 3.2 3.4 3.8 C.3 3.8 3.8 3.6 C.4 3.0 4.0 4.0 Average Score 3.25 3.55 
3.6 D.1 3.4 3.8 3.2 D.2 3.8 3.2 3.0 D.3 3.2 3.0 2.8 D.4 3.8 3.0 2.8 Average Score 3.55 3.25 2.95 Total 
Average 3.61 3.38 3.22 We are more concerned with the usefulness and satisfaction categories as they 
are directly related to the design of our visualization. The ease of use and ease of learning categories 
are more related to the design of user interface which can be improved at a later stage. The galaxy visualization 
received moderate scores comparing to the rings visualization. The participants told us that the visual 
signature idea was interesting. They were pleased with the design of the visualization as it helps them 
immediately see the market performance, and they would use it as an overall performance display. The 
Tai-chi visualization received lower scores on the usefulness and satisfaction categories. As the participants 
were all professional analysts, they are quite familiar with the background of most actively-traded stocks. 
The Tai-chi visualization becomes less important. The rings visualization [14] was designed to provide 
an interactive visual exploration on daily market data. The participants found it useful in their daily 
work. Despite of the scores of the two visual signatures being lower than the rings visualization, both 
visualizations still received a total average score above 3. We are encouraged and will continue our 
work in this path and improve them based on their feedback in the future. 7. CONCLUSION This paper has 
discussed the concept of visual signature. Comparing to other information visualization methods, visual 
signatures are designed to more proactively reveal visual patterns of market data. Two visual signatures 
were proposed. The galaxy visualization, based on the Fermet s spiral, displays the overall market performance. 
The Tai-Chi visualization presents single stock data over a period of time. We evaluated our concept 
by taking a questionnaire from professional analysts. The result was close to what we expected. The participants 
would use the galaxy visualization as a way of viewing the overall market performance. Our future work 
will be taking the concept to other areas of study. 8. REFERENCES [1] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. Muller, 
H. Schumann, and C. Tominski, "Visual Methods for Analyzing Time-Oriented Data", IEEE Transaction on 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 14, No.1. 2008, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 47-60. [2] Jamal 
Alsakran, Ye Zhao, Xinlei Zhao , "Visual Analysis of Mutual Fund Performance", Proceedings of the 2009 
13th International Conference Information Visualisation, Barcelona, Spain, July 15 - 17, 2009, IEEE Computer 
Society, pp. 252-259. [3] D. Chandler, Semiotics: The Basics , Second Edtion, Routledge Press, March, 
2007. [4] G. Chin Jr., M. Singhal, G. Nakamura, V. Gurumoorthi and N. Freeman-Cadoret, "Visual analysis 
of dynamic data streams", Journal of Information Visualization, Vol. 8, No. 3, June 2009, Palgrave Macmillan, 
pp. 212 229. [5] T. Dwyer and D. Gallagher, Visualising changes in fund manager holdings in two and a 
half-dimensions , Information Visualization, Vol. 3, No. 4, 2004, Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 227-244. [6] 
S. Foresti, J. Agutter, Y. Livnat, S. Moon and R. Erbacher, "Visual correlation of network alerts", IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2006, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 48-59. [7] S. Havre, 
E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. ThemeRiver: Visualizaing Thematic Changes in Large Document Collections", 
IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2002, IEEE Computer Society, 
pp. 9-20. [8] M. Hao, U. Dayal, D. Keim and T. Schreck, "Multi-Resolution Techniques for Visual Exploration 
of Large Time-Series Data", Eurographics/IEEE VGTC Symposium on Visualization, Norrköping, Sweden, 23-25 
May 2007, Eurographics Association, pp. 27-34. [9] M. L. Huang, J. Liang and Q. V. Nguyen, A Visualization 
Approach for Frauds Detection in Financial Market , Proceedings of the 13th International Conference 
Information Visualisation, Barcelona, Spain, July 15-17, 2009, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 197-202. [10] 
The Impactopia Services. http://www.market-topology.com/ [11] D. A. Keim, J. Schneidewind and M. Sips, 
"CircleView: a new approach for visualizing time-related multidimensional data sets", Proceedings of 
the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces (AVI'04), Gallipoli (Lecce), Italy, May 25-28, 2004, 
ACM Press, pp. 179-182. [12] L. Lin, L. Cao and C. Zhang, "The fish-eye visualization of foreign currency 
exchange data streams", Proceedings of the 2005 Asia-Pacific symposium on Information visualisation, 
Sydney, Australia, January 27-29, 2005, Australian Computer Society, Inc., pp. 91-96. [13] T. Lammarsch, 
W. Aigner, A. Bertone, J. Gartner,E. Mayr,S. Miksch and M. Smuc, "Hierarchical Temporal Patterns and 
Interactive Aggregated Views for Pixel-Based Visualizations", Proceedings of the 2009 13th International 
Conference Information Visualisation, Barcelona, Spain, July 15-17, 2009 , IEEE Computer Society, pp. 
44-50. [14] S. Lei and K. Zhang, A Visual Analytics System for Financial Time Series Data , Proceedings 
of the 3rd International Symposium on Visual Information Communication (VINCE 10), Beijing, China, September 
28­29, 2010, ACM Press, pp. 114-122. [15] T. Loua, "Atlas statistique de la population de Paris", J. 
Dejey, Paris. [16] Lund A. M, Measuring Usability with the USE Questionnaire , The Usability SIG Newsletter, 
Vol. 8, No. 2, October 2001, STC Usability &#38; User Experience Community. [17] S. Rudolph, A. Savikhin, 
and D. Ebert, FinVis: Applied Visual Analytics for Personal Financial Planning , IEEE Symposium on Visual 
Analytics Science and Technology, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA, Oct 11-16, 2009, IEEE Computer Society, 
pp. 195-202. [18] B. Shneiderman, "Discovering Business Intelligence Using Treemap Visualizations", B-EYE-Network 
- Boulder, CO, USA, April 11, 2006, http://www.b-eye­network.com/view/2673 [19] S. Thakur and A. J. Hanson, 
"A 3D Visualization of Multiple Time Series on Maps", Proceedings of 14th International Conference on 
Information Visualisation, London, UK, July 26-29, 2010, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 336-343. [20] C. 
Tominski, J. Abello and H. Schumann, "Axes-Based Visualizations with Radial Layouts", Proceedings of 
the 2004 ACM symposium on Applied computing, Nicosia, Cyprus, March 14 17, 2004, ACM Press, pp.1242-1247. 
[21] K. Vrotsou, J. Johansson, and M. Cooper, ActiviTree: Interactive Visual Exploration of Sequences 
in Event-Based Data Using Graph Similarity , IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer Graphis, 
Vol. 15, No. 6, 2009, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 945-952. [22] M. Weber, M. Alexa and W. Muller, "Visualizing 
time-series on spirals", Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001, San Diego, 
California, USA, 22-23 Oct. 2001, IEEE Computer Society, pp.7-13. [23] L. Wilkinson and M. Friendly, 
The History of the Cluster Heat Map , The American Statistician, Vol. 62, No 2, 2008, American Statistical 
Association, pp. 179-184. [24] H. Vogel, A better way to construct the sunflower head , Mathematical 
Biosciences ,Vol. 44, No. 3-4, June 1979, Elsevier B.V. , pp. 179-189. [25] H. Ziegler, T. Nietzschmann, 
and D. A. Keim, Visual Analytics on the Financial Market: Pixel-based Analysis and Comparison of Long-Term 
Investments , Proceedings of the 2008 12th International Conference Information Visualization, London, 
UK, July 09-11, 2008, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 287-295. [26] M. X. Zhou and S. K. Feiner, "Visual Task 
Characterization for Automated Visual Discourse Synthesis," Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, Los Angeles, California, USA, April 18 - 23, 1998, ACM Press, pp. 392-399. 
  
			