
 Web-GIS Technology for Dynamic Data Analysis Pavel Metrikov 1. Northeastern University, 2.IITP RAS 
Alexander Derendyaev IITP RAS Valeri Gitis IITP RAS 360 Huntington Ave, 202 WVH B. Karetnyi Lane 19 B. 
Karetnyi Lane 19 Boston, MA 02115, USA Moscow, GSP-4, 127994, Russia Moscow, GSP-4, 127994, Russia metpavel@ccs.neu.edu 
wintsa@gmail.com gitis@iitp.ru ABSTRACT In this paper we give an overview of a web-based geographical 
information system called GeoTime 2.0. Despite being light­weight, it possesses the features essential 
for conducting research into complex processes which involve large amounts of data. These features include 
(i) network access to distributed geographical information (ii) modern methods of knowledge acquisition 
from spatial and spatio-temporal data, (iii) high interactivity and clarity of visualization leading 
to boost the decision-making efficiency. Even though the main application of this system is the seismic 
hazard research, it can also be effectively applied for modeling various dynamic processes which we demonstrate 
on the example of modeling the process of pollution distribution associated with the water surface-flow. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors H.2.8 [Database applications]: Spatial databases and GIS; J.2 [Physical 
Sciences and Engineering]: Earth and atmospheric sciences; I.6.5 [Model Development]: Modeling methodologies 
General Terms Algorithms, Design, Experimentation, Theory Keywords Geoinformation technology, spatio-temporal 
data analysis, web-GIS, computer simulation 1. INTRODUCTION Geoinformation technologies have been widely 
applied for years to natural hazard analysis and forecast ([4]). They are based on methods of intelligent 
data processing and knowledge acquisition ([21], [3], [18], [20], [15], [9]; [24]). Dating back to the 
1980 s, they came into the world as desktop GIS s, supporting data processing of vector and raster types. 
The first generation of GIS s was represented by Arc/Info (version 2-6, ESRI, USA), IDRISI (Clark university, 
USA, http://www.clarklabs.org), ILWIS (ITC, the Netherlands, http://www.itc.nl/ilwis), GEO and GeoTime 
(IITP RAS, http://cool.iitp.ru/projects/geo/index.html, [7], [12], [23], [13]). In the 90 s the rapid 
growth of Internet information space led to Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior specific permission and/or a fee. ACM QUeST'11, November 1, 2011, Chicago, IL, USA (c) 2011 ACM 
ISBN 978-1-4503-1037-6...$10.00 integration of network tools for geographical information (GI) storage 
and search into web-server based solutions ([16]). Web­based GIS s such as ArcIMS ESRI, GeoMedia WebMap 
Intergraph, MapGuide Autodesk, MapXtreme, MapInfo have become largely widespread. However, client-side 
user interface of these systems, as a rule, lacked interactivity. For instance, a number of important 
operations like visualizing raster maps in WMS format, vector-based layers overlapping or reading their 
attribute values, were very limited or even not implemented at all. Analytical operations and visualization 
primitives (scale change, shift, palette change etc.) demanded extensive interaction with the server 
that practically hampered the interactive data research. Thereby it has become critical for GIS s oriented 
on scientific research to provide interactivity of the data analysis. The analytical operations have 
to be accompanied by visual exploration. Putting together methods of analytical and visual research constitutes 
the foundation of spatial and spatio-temporal cognitive modeling. It significantly simplifies the understanding 
of the problem under research and enhances the efficiency of the problem solutions. Therefore we believe 
that the network technologies realized within client-server architecture are more promising for scientific 
research. They usually take advantage of Java framework, e.g. GeoProcessor ([8], [6]), Lava Magma (the 
Netherlands, [2]), CommonGIS (Fraunhofer, Germany, [1]), GeoTime 2.0, (http://www.geo.iitp.ru/geotime/index.htm, 
IITP RAS, [14]), GIS UPC (http://www.unidata.ucar.edu, Unidata Program Center, USA). The aim of this 
paper is to present a web-based geographical information system GeoTime 2.0 and outline the wide domain 
of its possible practical applications ranging from seismic hazard research to the simulation of complex 
dynamic processes. Several sample GIS-Projects for a number of geographical regions are available online 
at http://www.geo.iitp.ru/geotime/index.htm. The paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we summarize 
the most essential requirements to be met by modern GIS s aimed to facilitate natural hazard analysis 
and forecast. In section 3 we introduce GeoTime 2.0, a web-based geographical information system, discuss 
its properties and go over the list of its major features readily available to the user. To demonstrate 
the potential of the system and the rich research facilities it provides, we dwell on three case studies. 
Two of them are related to the main application domain of the system, namely the seismic hazard research. 
In the first case study we conduct a spatio-temporal analysis of the noise in an earthquake catalogue. 
The second embodies our method for detection of earthquake precursors. The last case study is the simulation 
of the process of pollution transportation associated with the water surface-flow. It demonstrates how 
GeoTime can be effectively applied for modeling various dynamic processes. We conclude with the section 
5.  2. METHODS OF GEOINFORMATION RESEARCH Let us consider the most essential requirements to the modern 
GIS technologies for natural hazard analysis and forecast: 1. Integrated approach to the data analysis. 
There are four arguments in favor of integrated data analysis: in many cases we have to study (A) several 
concurrent interacting processes, (B) when their key characteristics can not be measured directly, (C) 
given the insufficient number of observations (D) in the presence of noise. Complexity of the problems 
increases further when instrumental measurements of some parameters are impossible to be done or require 
informal interpretation. These data are often replaced by expert evaluations or complemented with expert 
decisions. Therefore, in order to achieve a reliable solution, one should utilize methods analyzing all 
multidisciplinary data and expert knowledge that are available. 2. Ability to analyze simultaneously 
the data distributed both on network servers and on the user s computer. This sort of flexibility is 
particularly important when certain copyright restrictions on data access are imposed by the owner. 
3. Ability to customize the basic GIS functionality and expand it with some application-specific operations 
to match particular research problem needs. Consequently, web-GIS should have an open architecture and 
capability to accept specialized plug-ins which, likewise the data, may be distributed both on servers 
and on the user s computer. 4. Ability to save the results, comprising both the data calculated in the 
form of geoinformation layers and the GIS­project metadata. 5. Importance of interactive GI presentation. 
 6. Compatibility with existing GIS data formats.  Three methods of GI research are widely used in the 
geoinformation analysis: visual exploration, analytical conversions and plausible inference. Among the 
goals of visual exploration we could name the following: (i) detection of spatial and spatio-temporal 
patterns, (ii) cartographical measurements and (iii) GI properties estimation. The goal of analytical 
conversions is to compute some new thematic and spatio-temporal GI properties employing several pre-defined 
operators. The following conversions are the most important for spatial and spatio-temporal data analysis: 
(1) Grid­based layers l Grid-based layer , (2) Grid-based and vector­based layers l Vector-based layer 
attribute , (3) Vector-based layer l Grid-based layer , (4) Grid-based layer l Vector-based layer . The 
methods of plausible inference enable user to search for a priori unknown operators of analytical conversions, 
to outline the connection between the properties of some phenomena being analyzed and its nature, to 
detect the goal objects, and to predict unknown spatial properties and spatio-temporal processes. The 
techniques of multidimensional statistical analysis and pattern recognition, simulation and artificial 
intelligence are widely utilized in geoinformation research. 3. GIS GeoTime Web-GIS GeoTime 2.0 develops 
the ideas of the former desktop version ([13]). The system is oriented on visual representation, simulation 
and forecasting of spatio-temporal processes which are described by the models with local interaction 
such as seismotectonic interactions, propagation of surface flow and pollution distribution, preparation 
of natural disasters and some of the social and economic processes. 3.1 Architecture GIS GeoTime is implemented 
as a Java application. It is loaded via Java Web Start technology which has evolved from Java Applet. 
As a Java Web Start application, GeoTime benefits both from the important positive aspects of the Java 
Applet technology (e.g. easy distribution of the application over the Internet and a guarantee of using 
the latest available version of the application), and advantage of starting the system outside the web 
browser. GeoTime can dynamically load distributed data and plug-ins, and store the user output. It also 
supports parallel multithreaded data processing on multiprocessor/multicore front-end computers. 3.2 
Data Types GeoTime supports operations with grid-based data, raster images and vector-based data (polygons, 
polylines, and points). GeoTime can jointly handle 2D, 3D and 4D multitype spatial and spatio-temporal 
data: 2D and 3D polygons, 2D lines, 4D earthquake catalogues, 2D, 3D and 4D the grid-based layers, 2D 
and 3D vector fields, the geographically localized time sequences, and raster images.  3.3 Operations 
Operations in GIS GeoTime can be divided into four major groups: input/output operations, visual exploration, 
analytical conversions and plausible inference. Analytical operations are accompanied by interactive 
and high-quality graphics. 3.3.1 Input/Output I/O operations include dynamic loading of the data located 
on user PC or distributed over the network, and saving the results of the work. GeoTime handles several 
widespread formats: SHP­format for vector data, WMS for images. The external format of the grid-based 
data is a very close analogue of the ASCII format GRID (ESRI).  3.3.2 Visual Exploration This group 
of operations is intended to simplify the visual perception of the geographical information and provide 
a concise and descriptive data representation in response to a user s information need. It deals with 
managing display parameters, constructing illumination model of the surface, plotting the cross­section 
of any grid-based layer along a user-defined profile, browsing through the values of any grid-based layer, 
retrieving subsets of vector objects via SQL-like request, reading attributes of any vector-based object, 
etc. It is also worthwhile mentioning multidimensional analysis of several grid-based fields with respect 
to similarity to precedents. There are two classes of similarity functions one can chose from: based 
on distance similarity and based on preference similarity. As result, the similarity function is computed 
depending on a set of grid-based layers (features) and a set of points (precedents) picked by the user. 
This kind of interactive multidimensional analysis by means of similarity functions simulates a widely 
used expert method of reasoning on analogy to precedents. Therefore it is very important for better understanding 
of the processes under research.  One can visualize 3D grid-based layer as animated 2D projections on 
three standard planes. Visualization of spatio-temporal layers can be done in the following planes: XY 
(the longitude-latitude plane, time varies as a discrete parameter and the step is consistent with the 
corresponding grid step), XT (the longitude­time plane, the latitude is a parameter) and YT (the latitude-time 
scale, the longitude is a parameter). Similar operations are supported for spatial 3D grid-based layers 
in projections XY, XZ and YZ. Vector data can be visually differentiated by color, line thickness, size 
of the point objects, type of the icons, and text formats. Often in seismological applications a layer 
of points represents an earthquake catalogue, in which the points are usually described by four co-ordinates. 
Animated visual exploration of this data can be done in all possible basic projections XY, XZ, XT, YZ, 
YT, ZT. For example, when visualizing the seismic process in the projection XY it is possible to fix 
some depth interval .Z and move interval .T uniformly. As result we will observe animated development 
of the seismic process within the depth interval .Z. The movie can be saved as GIF-file or AVI-file. 
 3.3.3 Analytical Conversions The exploration of complex processes is naturally coupled with processing 
large amounts of raw data. No reliable conclusion can be drawn without employing various methods of transforming 
the raw data into the form that is more appropriate for subsequent analysis. The analytical conversions 
tackling this issue in GeoTime are aimed to extract new properties of spatial and spatio-temporal data. 
They can be carried out for both grid-based and vector-based layers. The first family of operations comprises 
procedures of spatial filtering, in which any grid-based layer can be transformed by applying one of 
pre-defined functionals on the layer values in the moving window. These functionals include: calculation 
of average, median, standard deviation, local anomalies, minimal and maximal value, gradient absolute 
value and its direction, correlation coefficients between two grid-based layers. The second class of 
operations is designated to produce a new grid­based layer as a function of several input grid-based 
layers. In this case the function of transformation is designed by the user as a composition of elementary 
functions involving algebraic and logic operations. If the underlying grids of input layers do not coincide, 
the layer values will be automatically interpolated to fit in with the most detailed grid. GeoTime supports 
data transformation from vector-based layers into grid-based layers, such as calculating objects density 
(e.g., density of points or lines) and distance to an object from every node on the grid. These operations 
enable the user to estimate spatial properties of a vector-based layer numerically. Let us mention two 
other quite important analytical conversions producing new vector layer of attributes. The first one 
applies some aggregation function for a subset of vector objects with respect to particular attribute. 
Arithmetic operations and the majority of standard functions from SQL language can be used for this purpose. 
The second conversion takes as input one vector­based and one grid-based layer. For each vector object 
there is an associated buffer zone surrounding it. Similarly, some aggregate function can be applied 
to the values of input grid-based layer at nodes falling inside the object buffer zone. The result is 
stored as vector object s new attribute value. These functions can be: average, standard deviation, minimum 
or maximum values. When there are one vector-based and two grid-based layers at the input, one can compute 
correlation coefficient between the values of the grid-based layers within the object buffer zone. Besides, 
in GeoTime there are other helpful analytical conversions like isoline curvatures and filtering with 
user defined kernel function. Sometimes it might also be handy to represent 2D and 3D grid-based layers 
as a bunch of isolines or, alternatively, in the form of arrows aligned with the gradient. By combining 
analytical conversions into a sequence, one can perform a wide range of complicated grid-based transformations. 
 3.4 Methods of Seismic Hazard Research The current version of GIS GeoTime is basically oriented on 
solving problems related to seismo-tectonic processes analysis, particularly to earthquake precursor 
analysis ([14], [25]). Detection of earthquake precursors in GeoTime technology relies on the assumption 
that the geological environment is inhomogeneous in space and has a stationary dynamics in the normal 
state, which is violated during the preparation of a geological disaster. The system includes the following 
three groups of methods ([11]): 3.4.1 Characteristics of Seismic Processes This group of operations is 
aimed to evaluate the major characteristics of seismic process in space and in time: the minimum representative 
magnitudes ([10]), b-value, seismic activity, and RTL criterion. 3.4.2 Anomaly Detection GeoTime provides 
a number of methods for non-stationarity (anomaly) detection. The problem is approached by analyzing 
time-series of 3D fields. In order to detect the non-stationarity, the current observation interval is 
divided into two consecutive sub­intervals. The duration of both sub-intervals is determined by the researcher. 
The mean value within the back interval over the time characterizes a quasi-stationary background. The 
back interval duration T1 is selected big enough for more exact estimate. The values within the front 
interval T2 can be either thought to be alike those in the background or attributed to an anomaly. As 
a part of the process of detecting an anomaly, a statistics equal to the difference between the means 
divided on its standard deviation is estimated. In the absence of anomaly in the front interval the value 
of statistics will fluctuate with zero mean and unit variance. In the presence of abnormal values in 
the front interval one can expect significant positive or negative deviations. GeoTime provides three 
methods of anomaly detection: for the model with independent Gaussian sequences, for the Markov process, 
and the method of empirical estimation.  3.4.3 Expected Earthquake Parameters Estimation This group 
of methods is used to estimate the parameters of an expected catastrophe (earthquake) by 3D grid-based 
field of spatio-temporal anomalies. The anomaly amplitude is assumed maximal in the centre of the seismic 
source preparation zone and is exponentially decreasing in space towards the edges. For each moment in 
time (a cut in 3-dimensional raster) GeoTime estimates the location and the spatial span of an anomaly, 
its amplitude and the degree of confidence associated with it. This is done by finding a Gaussian that 
approximates the anomaly in the best possible way (exploiting FFT as an optimization). Then the estimated 
parameters are plotted against the time, and one can accept only those anomalies with degree of confidence 
exceeding some desired threshold.   3.5 Extensions Users may extend the basic GeoTime functionality 
by means of connecting the problem-oriented subsystems realized in the form of plug-ins according to 
GeoTime API. We can provide references to two of them: the subsystem for detection of earthquake clusters 
in seismic flow ([5]) and the subsystem for modeling the surface flow dynamics ([19]).  4. GIS GEOTIME 
CASE STUDIES 4.1 Analyzing Noise in Earthquake Catalogue The histogram of number of earthquakes over 
the day time at the Western Turkey within the time-range from 01/01/1990 to 12/31/1999 is plotted on 
the Figure 1. It is possible to see an essential increase in number of events within interval td from 
7 to 15 GMT. The interval covering the rest of the day we denote as tn=T - td, T=24. Let a number of 
events in a vicinity of some node of the 2D grid is equal to Nd for the interval td, and Nn for the interval 
tn. We will assume for hypothesis H0 that the number of the events related to the node of the grid, has 
binomial tn distribution with probabilities p , q 1 p . As an T alternative hypothesis H1 we will assume 
q !1 p. We use Nd Nq statistics Q , which has standard normal distribution if Npq the hypotheses H0 holds. 
 Figure 1. The histogram of the earthquakes with m <3.1 over GMT time, 2082 events from 1990 to 1999. 
 Figure 2. Four areas for which hypothesis H0 is rejected with at least 1% significance level. Four areas 
for which hypothesis H0 is rejected with at least 1% significance level are shown by yellow and brown 
hues against the relief of the Western Turkey on the Figure 2. Thus, with a high degree of confidence 
we can assert that anomalously high values on the histogram for the interval td are caused by the events 
occurred within the selected areas. Most likely, these events have an anthropogenic origin.  4.2 Detection 
of Earthquake Precursors Earthquake prediction relies on the fact that earthquake preparation process 
is accompanied by spatio-temporal anomalies in the geological environment in the vicinity of the future 
event. The principal idea behind the analysis offered in GeoTime is to complement the traditional analysis 
of separate time series with the analysis of 3D grid-based fields having two spatial and one temporal 
co-ordinates ([6]). Thus, for each point of a spatial slice of the 3D field there is a corresponding 
time series. 3D spatio­temporal fields are calculated from earthquake catalogues or time series provided 
by geophysical, hydro-geological, geochemical and geodetic monitoring stations. Data presentation in 
the form of spatio-temporal rasters enables the user to observe the processes developing in time and 
in space, in a more comprehensive way. 4.2.1 Tangshan Earthquake Precursors Let us consider the case 
study of spatio-temporal analysis of Tangshan earthquake precursors. Tangshan earthquake with magnitude 
M=7.8 occurred at North-Eastern China on July 28, 1976. The input data comprise 10 daily time series 
of geophysical and hydro-geological measurements from 01/01/1972 to 07/27/1976 ([22]). On the first step 
the time series have been normalized and standardized. Thereafter the time series were interpreted uniformly: 
as a response to the change of geological environment tension. On the second step the time series were 
interpolated and spatio-temporal 3D grid-based field z(O,M, t) was calculated using the method of inverse 
distances: N ¦u(n, t)U2(n) , (1) z(O,M,t) n 1 N ¦U2(n) n 1 where N the number of stations, u(n,t) the 
observation at the station n at the moment t, U(n) - Euclidean distance between the station n and some 
point (O,M) . On the third step 3D grid­ based field of anomalies u(O,M,t) was estimated: G(O,M, t) u(O,M,t) 
, (2) 2V(O,M,t) where G(O,M,t) m2(O,M,t) m1(O,M,t), 1 T , m1(O,M,t) ¦1 z(O,M,t T1 T2 n)T1 n 1 1 T , m 
(O,M,t) ¦2 z(O,M,t T2 n) 2 T2 n 1 T1= 365 days, T2= 30 days. The variance V2(O,M,t) is assumed changing 
slowly in time, and is equal within intervals T1 . T2. Then for an estimation of V we may take the upper 
bound on the standard deviation of the random variable G(O,M,t) , which is equal to 2V(O,M,t) , where 
 T 21 2. V (O,M, t) ¦1(Z (O,M, t T1 T2 n) m1(O,M, t))T1 1 n 1 Apparently, for a stationary process the 
statistics u(O,M, t) has zero mean and a standard deviation less than 1. If the statistics deviates from 
zero by (2 y V , it attests to the presence of an anomaly. The slices representing the anomaly before 
of the Tangshan earthquake in projections to planes XY, XT, YT are shown by the orange color on the Figure 
3. Stations of geo-monitoring are shown as white circles. The red circles denote the earthquake epicenters 
with M . 6.8. Along with the anomaly immediately preceding the Tangshan earthquake, on projections XT, 
YT also shown are the regional anomalies caused by seasonal cycles. Figure 3. The main window of GeoTime 
with the pattern of Tangshan earthquake precursor in XY, XT, YT projections (the orange area close to 
Tangshan earthquake epicenter). White circles denote stations of geo-monitoring. Red circles denote earthquakes 
with M . 6.8. Besides the Tangshan earthquake precursor, the regional seasonal anomalies are visible 
on XT and YT planes. Tangshan earthquake was one of the strongest earthquakes ever happened in China. 
It is intuitively reasonable to compare seismic flow dynamics in the vicinity of Tangshan earthquake 
epicenter with seismicity in the rest of Northeast China. The earthquake catalogue prepared by the Institute 
of Earthquake Science, China Earthquake Administration was cleaned up from aftershocks and accepted for 
analysis. The catalogue containing 101447 events from 1970 to 2007 is statistically representative for 
magnitudes . . 2.0. The analysis was carried out for 3D grid­based model of the density of earthquake 
epicenters. Density values are proportional to the number of epicenters falling into the cylinder with 
radius 100 km within 200 days. Similarity function was estimated as correlation between the time series 
of density of earthquakes close to Tangshan earthquake epicenter and for the rest of points in the region. 
The result is presented on Figure 4. Here you can see yellow circles denoting earthquake epicenters on 
top of the elevation model. The areas with similarity exceeding 0.4 are highlighted in red. Two plots 
are shown on the right side of the figure: the upper plot is time series of earthquake density at the 
Tangshan earthquake epicenter, the lower plot is time series of earthquake density at the point (x=124.082, 
y=39.902) located approximately 100 km to the South-East from the strong earthquake epicenter with magnitude 
M=7.4. The correlation coefficient between plotted time series is equal to 0.59. Our analysis shows that 
the seismic process in the neighborhood of the discovered point resembles the one in the neighborhood 
of Tangshan earthquake epicenter. This fact is the subject for a special investigation. Figure 4. GeoTime 
main window with spatial areas where the seismic processes are similar in terms of their dynamics to 
the Tangshan epicenter point (white circle). The areas with similarity exceeding 0.4 are highlighted 
in red.  4.2.2 Suusamyr Earthquake Precursors Let us consider the case study of detection of Suusamyr 
earthquake precursors. Suusamyr earthquake occurred on 08/19/1992. The energy class of the earthquake 
was K=17 (it corresponds to the earthquake magnitude M=7.2), the epicenter co-ordinates are O=73.63°E 
and M=42.06°N. For the analysis we used the catalogues that had been cleaned up from aftershocks. The 
catalogue spans over the region from 40.4°N to 44°N and from 71°E to 81°E and corresponds to the time 
period from 1980 to 2001. In the catalogue there are 16329 events of energy class K from 7 to 17. For 
research of the Suusamyr earthquake precursors we used the sub-catalogue with cut-off at the day before 
the earthquake occurred. Again, we applied earthquake epicenter density model for the analysis. The following 
parameters of the cylindrical moving window were used: the radius equal to 100 km, the time interval 
equal to 10 days. The 3D grid-based layer of the earthquake epicenter density was computed on the grid 
with steps for the longitude 'O=0.3q, for the latitude 'M=0.2q and for the time 'T=10 days. Then the 
grid-based layer of anomalies u(O,M,t) was estimated based on the statistical model with independent 
Gaussian sequences by analogy to (2). On the following step the parameters of the anomaly layer were 
estimated. The method of estimating anomaly parameters is based on several assumptions: the anomaly amplitude 
is maximal in the centre of the seismic source preparation zone and exponentially decreases in space 
towards the edges; the time is discrete with step .t; at each point in time there can be at most one 
source preparation zone, its center coinciding with one of the nodes on the grid: k = 1, 2, ..., K. Thus, 
if we fix the time at any arbitrary moment, the anomaly amplitude at any spatial point n can be expressed 
as follows u(n) A .g(rnk , d ) Hn , (3) where A is the amplitude in the central point of the earthquake 
1 r 2 preparation zone; nk is the damping g(rnk , d ) exp( 2) Sd 2d function in the form of a Gaussian; 
rnk is the distance from the  centre of the earthquake preparation zone, located at point k, to an 
arbitrary point n; d is the characteristic linear scale of the earthquake localization area, In is 
an independent Gaussian random variable with zero mean. To estimate the signal parameters one should 
minimize the functional K . M(A, d, k) ¦ u(n) A .g(rnk , d) 2 n 1 At each point k on the grid, the estimator 
A (k, d) for the earthquake amplitude K ¦u(n) .g(rnk , d) , n 1 A (k, d ) K ¦g 2(rnk , d) n 1 and the 
residual sum of squares K ( 2 2. Sk (d ) ¦ u(n) Ak, d ) .g(rnk , d) n 1 Then, to estimate the coordinates 
of the centre, we compute the signal-to-noise ratio Esignal (k, d ) , whereD(k, d ) E (k, d ) noise K 
2 2, Esignal (k, d)(A (k), d) ¦g (rnk , d) n 1 KK K 22 22 Enoise (k, d ) ¦Sn (d) ¦u (n) (A (k, d)) ¦g 
(rnk , d) n 1 n 1 n 1 2 KK K 22 §· ¦u (n)¦g (rmk , d) ¨¦u(n)g(rnk , d)¸ n 1 m 1 &#38;#169;n 1 ¹ K ¦g 
2(rnk , d) n 1 For the purpose of convenience, we introduce the function of certainty E(k,d) , which 
is monotonically related to D(k, d ) § K · 2 ¨ u(n) .g(r , d)¸ ¦ nk (4) D(k, d) &#38;#169;n 1 ¹ E(k, 
d) KK 1 D(k, d)2 2 ¦u (n)¦g (rmk , d) n 1 m 1 The certainty E(k, d ) varies within the range between 
0 and 1, the latter corresponding to the case when u(n) A .g(r , d) , i.e. nk when the signal-to-noise 
ratio is too big. When E(k, d) 0 there is no signal, and when E(k, d) d0.5 the uncertainty with respect 
to the amplitude estimation ak exceeds the amplitude itself. In the latter case we are inclined to deny 
the existence of an earthquake preparation zone within current region, in the context of the proposed 
model. Thereby, the spatial location of earthquake preparation zone centre is estimated under condition 
E(k, d) ! 0.5 by maximizing E(k, d), k 1,2,..., K, di .' d , i 1,2,..., ¬ K ¼, where ' d minrnk is the 
shortest distance between the adjacent nzk nodes on the grid, i.e. (k ,d ) argmaxE(k,d) , and the value 
k,d ! A(k , d ) is accepted to be the anomaly amplitude estimation. As an optimization trick, our implementation 
of the function ~ E(k, d) with fixed dd relies on the computation of the discrete correlation K ~), by 
means of ¦u(n) .g(rnk , dk 1,2,..., K n 1 2-dimensional Fast Fourier Transform, thus significantly reducing 
the computational effort. On the Figure 5 the coordinates of the Gaussian centers with the confidence 
degree exceeding 0.5 are shown as white circles in the projections XY, TY and XT (the size of the circles 
is proportional to the confidence degree). Projection XY reveals an extensive negative anomaly. The epicenters 
of the most severe earthquakes with M . 5.5 are shown in all projections as red circles. The biggest 
red circle corresponds to the Suusamyr earthquake. On Figure 5 one can see two areas with anomalies. 
Small white circles correspond to a positive anomaly that is not attributed to a strong earthquake. Big 
white circles correspond to negative anomaly that precedes the Suusamyr earthquake. Moreover, the most 
significant anomalies (big white circles) show up just before the earthquake. We believe that this approach 
can be used for earthquake prediction. Figure 5. The main window of GeoTime with the pattern of Suusamyr 
earthquake precursor. Windows XY, XT, YT display projections of the 3D anomaly field. Yellow and blue 
colors correspond to significant values of negative and positive anomalies. Tint corresponds to increasing 
of the anomaly value. Projection XY corresponds to T=28.07.1992 (21 days before earthquake), projection 
XT corresponds to Y=41q, projection YT corresponds to X=74q.  4.3 Surface Flow Simulation Here we address 
a very important problem of geo-ecology to forecast and prevent unfavorable development of the urban 
territory by means of modeling the spread of pollutants transported with water. We demonstrate how GeoTime 
2.0 can be applied to tackle this problem ([19]). Nowadays in geo-hydrology there are several highly 
developed empirical methods of how to calculate the integral index that refers to the water flowing from 
the territory under examination and falling into a river within a month, for example. However, these 
methods do not allow one to estimate how much water ran through some local part of the territory, how 
much water infiltrated there and where the water was accumulated. We attempt to answer these questions 
by simulating the process of surface water-flow. First, we propose the physical model of ideal viscous 
water-flow. As the basis we take the solution for the problem of viscous liquid layer movement on inclined 
plane ([17], Figure 6a):  U.g .sin D.cos3 D 3 Q .h , (5)3K where Q is the liquid flow discharge per 
second, . liquid density, . liquid viscosity, I the angle of inclination of the plane, h the depth 
of the slice of liquid.  Figure 6. (a) Viscous liquid flowing down an inclined plane; (b) viscous liquid 
over an arbitrary terrain. Our model is based on the generalization of the solution (5) to the case of 
an arbitrary terrain (Figure 6b): U.g 3 .h(x, y,t) &#38; jx wH (x, y, t) wx wH (x, y, t) wy , (6)3K 
j(x, y,t) 2 . 2 jy . H (x, y,t) 1 x, y where j(x, y, t) is the vector of liquid flow density (depending 
on spatial coordinates x and y and changing in time t), H(x, y, t) the absolute height of the liquid 
surface. Let us introduce the filtration factor .(x, y) which defines the filtration properties of the 
terrain, and p(x, y, t) the intensity of atmospheric precipitations. Then the law of conservation of 
matter for an arbitrary region G in integral form: w h(x, y, t)dxdy j (x, y, t)dy jy (x, y, t)dx  
 ³³ ³ wtG wG x , (7) p(x, y, t) E(x, y) .h(x, y, t) dxdy 0 ³³ G We are interested in computing the total 
amount of liquid (containing particles of pollutant) infiltrated into the soil across the region G: § 
t · ¨E(x, y) .h(x, y,T)dT¸dxdy , (8) ³³³ ¸ ¨ G &#38;#169;0 ¹ By adding initial and boundary conditions 
to the set of differential equations defined above, we are ready to proceed to the discrete representation 
of the system by applying the integro-interpolation method (due to the space constraints we have to omit 
the details). Then we theoretically justify the correctness of the proposed algorithm by analyzing its 
stability and estimating the conditions of its validity. Ultimately, we implement the algorithm on the 
basis of GeoTime 2.0 platform. In a controlled experiment we simulated the surface flow in Dmitrov district 
of Moscow region (a grid of 10 km by 10 km, the step is 100 m). As input data we used the initial uniform 
layer of liquid 20 cm thick, the filtration factor was assumed uniform .(x, y) = 0.01, the factor of 
liquid dynamic viscosity . = 0.01 Pa*s, liquid density . = 1000 kg/m3, the temporal step . was set to 
0.01 ms. Results of the simulation are presented on Figures 7 and 8. t = 0s t = 6s t = 24s t = 192s 
Figure 7. Water layer height dynamics over the terrain. t = 0s t = 6s t = 24s t = 192s Figure 8. Infiltrated 
water dynamics over the terrain.  5. CONCLUSIONS We have presented a web-based geoinformation technology 
GeoTime 2.0. The major features that make GeoTime 2.0 a powerful tool for researchers are: (i) the network 
access to geographical information, which can be distributed over network servers or reside on the user 
PC, (ii) the modern methods of knowledge acquisition from spatial and spatio-temporal data, (iii) high 
interactivity and clarity of visualization making decision­making more efficient. The case studies we 
have provided testify to the efficiency of GeoTime 2.0 to model complex dynamic processes and solve a 
wide range of problems with the main focus on the seismic hazard analysis.  The next milestone in development 
of geoinformation technologies for natural hazard assessment should be a response to the growing demand 
on real-time handling huge streams of multi-typed geographical data being produced by natural and anthropogenic 
spatio-temporal processes. The amounts of data to handle are constantly growing due to the great progress 
in development of the Earth monitoring systems. Nowadays we face a challenging problem of building a 
multi-user computer environment for on-line integrated processing of distributed streams of geodata. 
We believe that a modern approach to the solution consists in imbedding the analytical toolkit of geoinformational 
network systems into the GRID-infrastructure.  6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The research is supported by RFBR 
projects 07-07-12019, 09-07­12077, 10-07-00204-., 10-07-00491-..  7. REFERENCES [1] Andrienko, N. and 
Andrienko, G. (2002) Intelligent Support for Geographic Data Analysis and Decision Making. Journal of 
Geographic Information and Decision Analysis, v.5 (2). 115-128. [2] Berg, C., Tuinman, F., Vijbrief, 
T., Meijer, C., Oisterom, P., Uitermark, H. (1999) Multiserver Internet GIS: standartization and practical 
experiments. In Goodchild M., Egenfofer M., Feageas R., Kottman C. (eds) Interoperating Geographical 
Informatin Systems. Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 365-377 [3] Burrough, P. and McDonnel, R. (1998) 
Principle of Geographical Information Systems. Oxford University Press, Oxford. [4] Carrara, A. and Guzzetti 
F., eds. (1995) Geographical Information Systems is Assessing Natural Hazards. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
p. 345. [5] Derendyev, A.: Geoinformation methods of seismic cluser detection (In Russian) (2007), in 
Proceedings of the conference on Information Technologies and Systems (ITIS 07). M.: IITP RAS. 166-170. 
[6] Gitis, V., Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N. (2004) Exploration of seismological information in analytical 
Web-GIS. Izvestya Physics of the Solid Earth 40(3), 216-225 [7] Gitis, V., Deart, D., Osher, B., Rudenko, 
S. (1989) GEO is an expert system for geological and geophysical forecast (In Russian). In Expart systems: 
state of art and prospects. .oscow, Nauka. 119-130. [8] Gitis, V., Dovgyallo, A., Osher, B., Gergely, 
T. (1998) GeoNet: an information technology for WWW on-line intelligent Geodata analysis. In Proceedings 
of the 4th EC-GIS Workshop, Hungary, Joint Research Centre of European Commission, 124-135. [9] Gitis, 
V., G., Ermakov, B., V. (2004) Fundamentals of spatio-temporal forecasting in geoinformatics (In Russian). 
.oscow, FIZMATGIS. p. 256 [10] Gitis, V.G., Ermakov, B.V., Ivanovsnaia, L.V., Osher, B.V., Trofimov, 
D.P., Schenk, V., Shchukin, Ju.K., Jurkov, E.F. (1993) The Information Technology of the GEO system for 
Prediction Mmax of Earthquake. In J. Research into Earthquake Prediction, vol. 2. n. 2. 221-228. [11] 
Gitis, V., Jurkov, E., Pirogov, S., Derendyev, A., Metrikov P. (2009) Theoretical basis of geological 
catastrophes analysis in GeoTime technology (In Russian). In Electronic Earth. VINITI RAS. 199-229. [12] 
Gitis V.G., Jurkov E.F., Osher B.V. (1991) GEO - an Expert System for Geological and Geophysical Prognosis. 
In Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Seismic Zonation, Stanford, Vol. III, 59-64. [13] Gitis, 
V.G., Osher B.V., Pirogov S.A., Ponomarev A.V., Sobolev G.A., Jurkov E.F. (1994) System for Analysis 
of Geological Catastrophe Precursors. In J. Research into Earthquake Prediction, vol. 3, 540-555. [14] 
Gitis, V., Yurkov, E., Pirogov, S., Petrova, E., Weinstock, A., Derendiaev, A., Metrikov, P. (2005) Web-GIS 
for complex analysis of spatio-temporal processes. In Abstracts of the General Assembly of IASPEI, Santiago. 
[15] Klosgen, W., Zytkow, J.M., editors. (2002) Handbook of Data mining and Knowledge Discovery. Oxford 
university press, 908. [16] Kraak, M., Brown, F. (2001) Web Cartography. Taylor &#38; Francis, 214. [17] 
Landau L.D. and Lifshitz E.M., 1988 Theoretical physics. Vo.l 6, Hydrodynamics (in Russian). Nauka, Moscow. 
[18] Malczewski, J. (1999) GIS and Multicriteria decision analysis. Jon Willey &#38;Sons. INC, 389. [19] 
Metrikov P. (2007) Geoinformation Analysis and Spatio-Temporal Simulation of Surface Flow and Pollution 
Transportation (In Russian). In Information Technologies and Systems ITaS 07, IITP RAS, Moscow, 183-188 
[20] Miller, H.J., Han, J., editors. (2001) Geographical data mining and knowledge discovery. Taylor 
&#38; Francis, 367. [21] Openshaw, S., Openshaw, C. (1997) Artificial Intelligence in Geography. John 
Wiley&#38;Sons. p. 329. [22] Ponomarev, A., Sobolev, G., Gitis, V., Chgan Chaochen, Van Gusuan, Chin 
Sinsi (1999) Complex analysis of geophysicak fields for detection of spatio-temporal earthquake precursors 
(In Russian). In Vestnik OGGGGN RAN, 4 (10). URL: http://www.scgis.ru/russian/cp1251/h_dgggms/4-99/komp­an.zip 
[23] Schenk, V., Gitis, V.G., Schenkova, Z., Mantlik, F., Kotnauer, P., Jurkov, E.F.,Shchukin, Ju.K. 
(1991) Maximum Earthquake Prediction in Central Europe Given by the GEO 1.2 Expert System. In Proceedings 
of 4th Intern. Conference on Seismic Zonation, Stanford, vol. III. 83-91. [24] Shekhar, Sh., Xiong H., 
editors. (2008) Encyclopedia of GIS. Springer. p. 1370. [25] Sobolev, G.,A., Zakrzhevskaya, N.,A., Akatova, 
K.,N., Gitis, V.,G., Derendyaev, A.,B., Bragin, V.,D., Sycheva, N.,A., Kuzikov, S.,I. (2010) Dynamics 
of Interaction between Fields of Seismicity and Surface Deformations (Bishkek Geodynamic Test Area). 
In Izvestiya Physics of the Solid Earth, Vol. 46, No. 10, 817 838. &#38;#169; Pleiades Publishing, Ltd., 
2010. Original Russian Text &#38;#169; published in Fizika Zemli, No. 10, 15 37.   
			