
 WHO IS CARRYING THE MONKEY? THE SERVICE MANAGER CONCEPT Dr. A. Sheth and Mr. S. S. Swaminathan Academic 
Computer Services, University of Guelph Guelph, Ontario, Canada, NiG 2Wi WHO IS CARRYING THE MONKEY? 
 Do you remember a monkey jumping from one branch of a tree to another as you approach it? Well, in many 
traditional computing centres, both the end users and the top management have similar experiences. As 
you approach an individual to get the answers to your questions, you often get directed to a second individual, 
and as you approach the second one, you get directed to a third, and so on. This arises because of the 
fact that in many computing centres, one in- dividual gets to handle primarily technical programming 
questions while a second individual may be responsible for implementation of the program product, and 
a third individual may get the responsibility of supporting hardware. The lines of responsibility among 
these units are thin and often each one draws his own line, leaving gaps that lead to the problem of 
the monkey business. EVOLUTION In the good old sixties it was relatively easy both for the users and 
management to focus on the role of the computing centre and services available. In the seventies, technology 
allowed expansion of computing services on campus. Today, many universities offer several services from 
a single main frame or multiple machines, some of which may belong to departments. The role of the computing 
centre today from both the user and university management perspective is blurred. Most computing centres, 
to a large or small degree, are struggling with Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the 
ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. 01980 ACM 0-89791-023-0/80/1100/00901500.75 similar problems. To mention 
a few: * The new and easier software tools and recognition amongst a large segment of user population 
regarding application of computers as a tool has resulted in an overload situation of the computing facilities. 
 Both the computer centres and the users are wrestling with the distributed computing concept and how 
it fits into the total computing needs of the campus. Can we tap the microcomputer tech- nology to help 
alleviate load on the system? There is rampant user expectation regarding services offered by the centre 
as well as microcomputers to solve all problems. The Budget Squeeze is making the directional change 
to satisfy user demand more difficult. Decrease in human resources at a time when computing is expanding 
leads to poor quality support. With expanded services, decreased staff, and rampant user expectations, 
it is becoming difficult to fulfill our objectives and continue to provide leadership to the user community. 
 FUTURE ENVIRONMENT The idea of planning for the eighties involves anticipation of the nineties as well. 
On the technological side, computers will continue to become cheaper and more powerful. Provision of 
raw cycles may not necessarily be the role of the computer centre. Systems software will be more firmware 
oriented and application packages delivered via interactive services. 90 Computer literacy amongst 
user com- munity will be high and the intro- ductory computing courses at the university level will 
be relegated to high schools. The microcomputer revolution would have made a great impact on the computer 
literacy of the society. Extensive communications net- work capabilities both within the institutions 
and external will not only impact the transfer of data between computers but will result in remolding 
 of our concepts of communications in daily life, such as transmission of electronic mail, filing and 
retrieval of information. Extensive development of Videotext and Telidon will lead us into the "Information 
Society", a society in which information will be traded as a commodity. USER NEEDS With the rapid 
changes in computer technology and the availability of inexpensive microcomputers with the power of the 
large machines of the early 1970's, the user demands would be quite different from what they are today. 
Users will be expecting support in the area of how to communicate with other machines via their own personal 
computers, how to select the additional hardware such as disk or printers from the list of numerous hardware 
that will be made available in the market. On the software side, the marketplace will provide some programming 
languages and application packages that could be run on these machines. However, because of hardware 
limitations on the small machine, they will be different from the standard software available on large 
machines. This will pose a great difficulty for the user support group to assist the users. Because of 
several non-standard software, training and consulting with the users would be very different. They will 
require special- ized consulting on difficult problems and the user services group's training program 
will have to address the variety of different "hardware and software that would be in use throughout 
the campus. GETTING THERE The needs of the users of the elghtles will demand that the User Services 
Group be retrained to support different activities at much higher levels. For example, because of the 
increased user knowledge, there will be a greater need for the User Services Group to excel in expertise 
of techno- logical changes in the marketplace. They will also have to have expert knowledge in telecommunications 
and computer network capabilities. The consulting in application packages will no longer be in the preparation 
 of control cards, which probably would be handled at the local level, but in choosing the methodology 
and solving user problems analytically. The User Services Group will have to prepare themselves in 
giving training programs in all of the above areas. Retraining the staff of the User Services Group 
in the new and fast- growing area with the possibility of no growth in the personnel is going to be the 
greatest challenge. We will have to motivate our staff to change, and we should be able to get rid of 
some of the activities that we are doing currently. With the technological changes in hard- ware and 
software, and network capabil- ities, there will be more interaction among the various services. THE 
SERVICE MANAGER CONCEPT With the introduction of new services, the management problem is getting more 
complex. We at the University of Gu~pn are trying a new concept known as "Service Manager" to solve this 
problem. In this concept an individual is given responsibility for all aspects of a particular service 
that we offer, (e.g. APL, CMS, Word Processing, etc.). The Service Manager becomes the focal point both 
for the users and management re- garding performance, improvement, and information regarding the Service. 
The Service Manager role is a function or a role rather than a line organization entity. The Service 
Manager does not have to do all the work, but is expected to negotiate for help within the organization 
to accomplish the required tasks. At the Institute of Computer Science, this concept was implemented 
approx- imately 2 years ago. It has resulted in a more efficient and responsive organ- ization. The Service 
Manager is expect- ed to function as a LEADER and a CATALYST. From the user viewpoint, they are more 
aware of the person responsible for the quality of service and focus their feedback and concerns to the 
individual within the organ- ization who can do something about it. COMMUNICATION The management is 
now in a better position to know about the quality of service, user problems, and possible solutions. 
Responsibilities have been distributed throughout the organization. This has instilled a sense of idenity 
and achievement among the participants. Through periodic meetings of the Service Managers, there is a 
much better appreciation of the problems and opportunities in various services. 91 There is now an 
improved understanding of the organizational objectives and how each service can contribute to the fulfillment 
of these objectives. The necessity of negotiating with other computing centre staff for work to be done 
has increased rapport among the staff, leading to better communications. Success also has its problems. 
We are moving from a line organization to a matrix management. The traditional line manager role as well 
as academic/ administrative demarcation is less clear. Service Managers sometimes feel uncomfortable 
in this new role. There were people hitherto not ex- posed to management considerations in decision-making. 
They have now not only to initiate tasks within their service, but once approved must make sure that 
tasks are successfully completed. Some managers have a tendency to become emotional in their approach 
to sorting out problems. With the revolutionary changes in hardware and user expectations, the User 
Services of the 1980's will have to adapt to change if they wish to continue providing high quality service 
to their clients. The Service Manager concept is but one of the many organizational changes that we are 
planning to alter our direction. 92 
			