
 Who's Got the Key? David Henry University of Maryland Office of Information Technology College Park, 
Maryland 20742-2411 301-405-6850  david.henry@umail.umd.edu ABSTRACT This paper attempts to illuminate 
several fundamental concepts used in the creation of a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). These concepts 
include encryption, public key cryptography, digital signatures, trust models, and digital certificates. 
In addition, this paper reviews some of the issues related to creation of a PKI for an organization. 
 Keywords Encryption, PKI, Certificate Authority. 1. INTRODUCTION With the growing use of the Internet 
as a medium for doing business, purchasing products, and exchanging personal and private information, 
the need for a secure and verifiable mechanism for information transfer and exchange is becoming critical. 
One of the biggest difficulties establishing a PKI within an organization is likely to be its own complicated 
nature. A Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is a system for supporting digital signatures and document 
encryption for an organization. Digital signatures and encryption are just two tools used to maintain 
security. This paper attempts to illuminate several fundamental concepts used in support of a PKI. These 
concepts include encryption, public key cryptography, digital signatures, trust models, and digital certificates. 
In addition, this paper reviews some of the issues related to creation and management of a PKI for an 
organization. 2. GOALS OF A SECURITY SYSTEM There are many reasons for instituting a security system. 
Among these is the desire to protect proprietary information, secure a financial transaction, or validate 
users of a system. A great deal of work has been done over the years in defining necessary characteristics 
of a good security system. Essentially, there are five primary considerations that should be addressed 
by a good security system. These are: Access Control - Permit only legitimate uses of resources. This 
may also be referred to as authorization.  Privacy - Insure private information is not read by uninvolved 
(or unauthorized) parties.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for 
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. SIGUCCS 99, Denver, Colorado ª1999 ACM 1-58113-144-5/99/0011..$5.00 Information 
Integrity - Insure a document has not been modified from its original state.  Authentication - Verify 
that a person or user is actually who they say they are.  Non-Repudiation - Insure that a party to a 
transaction cannot deny the transaction took place.  All of these characteristics are needed in every 
organization in some way and each is important to insuring protection of the organization and management 
of proprietary information. The remainder of this paper focuses primarily on three of these issues, specifically, 
authentication, document integrity, and privacy.  3. ENCRYPTION There are two major types of encryption 
systems. These are single key systems and dual key systems. Public key systems use dual-key encryption 
to accomplish secure transactions in an insecure environment. 3.1 Single Key Encryption The most easily 
understood type of encryption system uses a single key for both encryption and decryption of documents 
or information. This type of system may be used when the key is not shared or when the key may be safely 
distributed to everyone that requires it. Note that even if the key can be safely distributed, there 
are other problems related to use of keys in this way. In the Internet, single key systems are rarely 
appropriate for use. This is because of the need to share a key between two or more people or entities 
and the untrusted transmission medium presented by the Internet itself. A safer alternative is required. 
 3.2 Dual Key Encryption Dual key encryption systems depend on having a pair of keys where everything 
one key encrypts the other decrypts and vice­versa. If K1 and K2 are such a pair of keys and a document 
is encrypted using key K1, it may be decrypted only using key K2. Similarly, if the document is encrypted 
using key K2, it may be decrypted using only key K1. Also, to be most useful for our purposes, it is 
important that the value of one key cannot be discovered from the other key.  3.3 Public Key Encryption 
Public key systems use a dual key encryption system where we make one of the keys public while keeping 
the other key secret (or private). By doing this, we can do some interesting things. Assume two people, 
Bob and Carol, each have a public key and a private key. The public key of each person is known by the 
other person. The private key of each person is known only to the holder of the key. Under these assumptions: 
 If Bob encrypts a document using his PRIVATE key, anyone can decrypt the document using Bob's PUBLIC 
key.  If Bob encrypts a document using Carol's PUBLIC key, only Carol can decrypt the document by using 
her PRIVATE key.  Since Bob is the only one with his private key, we can be confident that only Bob 
could have created the document. Since only Carol can decrypt documents that have been encrypted using 
her public key, we can be confident that no one else can read them, even if they are left in a public 
location. If Bob encrypts a document using Carol's PUBLIC key, unfortunately, Carol has no way of knowing 
for certain that Bob created the document. In those cases where it is important to verify the creator 
of a document, we need to add something to the document to incorporate information that can be used for 
this verification. This verifying information is called a digital signature.  4. DIGITAL SIGNATURES 
A digital signature serves to verify that the signer of the document created a document and that the 
document has not been tampered with. In order for this to work, the signature must have certain characteristics. 
Specifically, a digital signature: must be creatable only by the signer,  must include information 
that can verify document integrity,  must be verifiable as a legitimate signature.  To construct a 
digital signature, we start with information about the document content by calculating a CRC1, add information 
about the signer, and encrypt this information using the signer's private key. At this point, anyone 
can verify the signature by decrypting the signature using the signer's public key. The document integrity 
can be verified by comparing a newly calculated CRC for the document content with the value stored as 
part of the signature. Note that the document content may be encrypted or not depending on the purpose 
of the document exchange. If the desire is to ensure the document is created by one party and can only 
be read by a second party, the document content should be encrypted using the recipients public key and 
signed using the sender's private key. If the goal is only to ensure that the sender of the document 
is legitimate or the content has not been tampered with, the content need not be encrypted.  5. TRUST 
The use of a public key system as described above solves the basic problems of key exchange/distribution. 
Unfortunately, there is nothing inherent in a signature or encrypted document to verify that the encryption 
key is legitimate. The assumption, up to this A CRC or Cyclic Redundancy Check is a calculated value 
based on the content of a document. Changes to the content cause a change to the CRC for that document. 
The CRC is used as a way to insure a document has not been modified in transit. point, is that the advertised 
public keys for Bob and Carol, above, were actually their public keys. The entity decrypting a document 
must verify the validity of a public key before the document can be accepted as valid. A system where 
public keys can be verified is needed. Essentially, this effort is an exercise in establishing trust. 
Unless we have confidence that the key used in the signature of a document is valid and is actually the 
key of the person or entity claiming to have created the document, we cannot trust that the document 
is valid. 5.1 Real World Trust Models In the real world we use a variety of mechanisms to establish levels 
of trust. Some examples include: Photo ID (e.g. driver's license, student ID card, passport, etc.) 
 Personal experience (face-to-face introductions, personal interactions, exchanged email, phone calls, 
etc.)  References (resumes, contractors, etc.)  Relationship (parent, sibling, cousin, etc.)  Notary 
Public (witnesses and oath/affirmation)  Birth Certificate  Finger Print  Signature  The type and 
level of trust required for a personal transaction is quite different from the type and level of trust 
required for a financial transaction. In most social and strictly interpersonal situations, personal 
experience may be sufficient to establish trust. In other situations, a more trusted third party with 
official credentials (issuer of photo ID, notary) is necessary. In still other cases, another party, 
not necessarily trusted, is sufficient to corroborate information (references). Note that most of these 
mechanisms incorporate a special mechanism for validating the claim. For example, when a document is 
notarized, the notary signs the document and impresses the paper with the notary seal. An official birth 
certificate also contains a seal, which is required if it is used for an official purpose such as obtaining 
a driver s permit or passport. These mechanisms are designed to make it difficult to forge or falsify 
the documents and thus increase the level of confidence (trust) that those documents are authentic. 
 5.2 Digital Trust Models Similarities to the real world trust models exist in the digital world. For 
example, personal experience gained in chat rooms, email exchange, or online games may be sufficient 
to establish a certain level of trust. For other types of transactions, however, a more formal mechanism 
for validating the participants to a transaction is required. There are two approaches to establishing 
trust in wide use today. One is based on establishing trust through mutual trust relationships, while 
the other is based on establishing a trusted third party or central authority, which can vouch for the 
identity of others. Pretty Good Privacy (more commonly known as PGP) is designed around establishing 
a web of trust between key holders. Essentially, this system requires someone who is a trusted member 
of a group to vouch for the public keys of a newcomer to the group, thus admitting the newcomer to the 
web of trust. In this scenario, if the newcomer is a member of a separate trust group, then all members 
of this group will be afforded a level of trust by members of the original group and their public keys 
will be accepted. Once admitted to the web or trust, the public keys for a member will be validated by 
the PGP system. A centralized approach is likely to be much more effective than the distributed approach 
when establishing a public key system for an organization such as a University or College. In this scenario, 
a central authority provides all key and certificate related services. The central authority creates 
and distributes keys and provides validation services as well. An Internet standard has been established 
based on X.509 Certificates (see below) which are used by all commonly used web browsers. In the digital 
world, it is not realistic to expect any single central authority to validate keys for everyone. As such, 
it is necessary to establish a web of trusted authorities. In this way, it is possible to establish a 
distributed authentication support structure and achieve the economies of scale provided by organizational 
support of a central. Unfortunately, this last part is still being worked on in the PKI standards committees. 
In any public key system, (PGP and central authority based systems) it is necessary to use some form 
of publicly accessible directory within which public keys may be advertised. The most commonly used directory 
service for supporting a public key system today appears to be based on LDAP (the Lightweight Directory 
Access Protocol).  6. DIGITAL CERTIFICATES The X.509 Certificate is, for all practical purposes, the 
standard mechanism for validating public keys on the Internet today. The widest use of X.509 certificates 
is probably their use in establishing secure web transactions. This is important since it permits safe 
encryption of credit card numbers and personal information. 6.1 Content of a Certificate A certificate 
is a public key digitally signed and guaranteed by a trusted third party. This third party is called 
the Certification Authority or CA. When asked, the CA validates public keys contained in certificates. 
A certificate contains four primary pieces of information: the holder s public key  credentials related 
to the holder's identity, rights and privileges  information related to the guaranteeing authority 
 a time range of validity  The primary purpose of a certificate is to help validate a public key. Additional 
information may be incorporated to provide a set of rights and capabilities associated with the use of 
that key. For example, certain services available over the web restrict access by network domain. An 
alternative might be to issue temporary certificates to users who have validated themselves as legitimate 
members of an organization, which would then be accepted by the restricted access system. The information 
on the guaranteeing authority is necessary as it provides the reference information for validation to 
take place. Usually, this information will also contain the public key of the CA, for use in securing 
the validation process. When certifying a public key, a time limit on the validation must be established. 
This is one mechanism for limiting adverse impacts should the related private key become compromised. 
It should be noted that use of the certificate and CA has merely transferred the question of trust to 
a third party. You can accept the public key as valid only if you accept the guarantor as valid and the 
guarantor accepts the public key contained in a certificate it created as valid. 6.2 Certificates and 
the Web Browser In order for a web browser to establish a secure connection to a web server, the browser 
and server use X.509 certificates to negotiate a mutually acceptable shared encryption key called the 
session key. As part of this process, the server sends a signed message with the server's certificate 
to the browser. The browser validates the certificate and then the signature. Web browsers distributed 
by Microsoft and Netscape are configured with a number of certificates. These certificates were created 
by a number of Certification Authorities such as Verisign, Thawte, AT&#38;T Certificate Services. Under 
normal circumstances, the browser will only accept certificates from services that can be validated by 
one of the authorities whose certificates are configured in the browser. In some sense, the distributors 
of the browser are accepting the embedded certificates as coming from trusted entities. If an organization 
operates a CA, the certificate for that authority may not be installed in the browser. In this case, 
when an attempt is made by the browser to establish a secure connection to the server, the browser will 
not accept the certificate offered by the server. This is an issue of trust, since the CA could be operated 
by anyone and cannot a priori be trusted. When this occurs, the browser displays to the user a series 
of screens designed to inform the user of the requirement to install a new certificate and to permit 
the user to decide whether or not to trust the certificate and related CA. The certificate may be accepted 
for only the current session or forever. In either case, by doing so, the user is accepting that the 
certificate is valid and that the CA may be trusted.  7. PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE (PKI) The ability 
to authenticate and digitally sign documents enables many activities to be done online rather than on 
paper. Because of its nature, key management must be effectively integrated with the normal business 
practices of an organization. A Public Key Infrastructure involves more than distribution of private 
keys and publishing the public keys for each individual. Keys and certificates must be managed in an 
ongoing manner. Occasionally, certificates must be revoked. Certificates or keys can be lost or compromised. 
Membership within an organization changes. It is important to incorporate these and many other issues 
in the planning for and implementation of a PKI. 7.1 Establishing a PKI A PKI requires a great deal 
of planning and user education to use effectively within an organization. Ignoring the user education 
issues (which will likely be significant), the process of establishing a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
can be abstracted to four steps. These steps include: Determine who in the organization should get keys 
 Create keys for these people  Distribute private keys to each recipient  Publish public keys for 
each recipient  There are a number of issues that must be addressed during this process. There is a 
cost associated with each key, therefore consideration must be given to key allocation policies. It may 
not be necessary to create keys for everyone in an organization. There may be people loosely affiliated 
with the organization that require keys to do transactions. There may be vendors or other organizations 
with which financial transactions take place. The determination of who should get keys depends on the 
situations where digital signatures are used. Once a list of key recipients is determined, the key pairs 
for each person or entity on the list must be created. If the list is large, because of the processing 
time required to create the key pair, it may be necessary to meter key distribution to take place over 
a period of time (days, weeks, months). There are two issues involved with the distribution of keys. 
First, a medium for storing the private key must be determined. And second, a secure mechanism must exist 
to transfer the private keys from the central authority to each individual. The most promising solution 
for private key storage, in the long term, is to use smart card technology. In this case, the private 
key would reside on the smart card in an encrypted form. Inserting the card in an appropriate reader 
would solicit from the holder of the card a pass phrase (or more likely a PIN). Possible issues include, 
among others, the cost of the smart cards and the requirement that a smart card reader be available wherever 
a digital signature is required. The most promising solution for key storage, in the short term, is to 
use a floppy diskette or hard disk to hold the private key. The private key would be stored in an encrypted 
form on the disk, and when required for a transaction, the holder of the key would need to enter the 
pass phrase to decrypt the key. Possible issues involve the availability of a floppy drive or other access 
to the encrypted key as well as a means of entering the pass phrase wherever an encryption or signature 
is required. In addition, the floppy disk is not as convenient as the smart card and the hard disk is 
not mobile at all (unless it on a laptop). Note that most applications, in the short term, are likely 
to be accessed from a desktop or laptop computer, so some of these issues may not be very significant. 
In either case, a safe mechanism must be available to distribute private keys and to insure the intended 
recipient is the actual recipient for the keys. Usually, this would require a face-to-face interaction 
with some kind of validating transaction. However, if another authentication system of sufficient strength 
is available, it may be appropriate to electronically distribute keys provided the private key is never 
transmitted over a network in an unencrypted state.  7.2 Some PKI Related Issues In the scenario above, 
there is an implied assumption that the recipient list for keys is static. Clearly, this assumption is 
invalid. Most organizations undergo continuous changes in both staff and functional needs. Further, a 
system which involves a number of people needs to accommodate all events caused by human error. A process 
is required which will provide for the creation of new keys for new members of the organization. This 
is simply a matter of creating and distributing another key pair for each new member. There are a number 
of more interesting issues which must be addressed when establishing a PKI for an organization. The majority 
of these issues require policy decisions to be made and enforced. Wherever possible, these decisions 
should be made during the initial planning and implementation phases of the PKI project. Lost Keys In 
general, it should be assumed that individuals will lose their private keys. A key loss could be a physical 
loss of the medium holding the key (lost ID card, lost floppy, etc.)  a forgotten pass phrase, or  
a compromised key, where someone has inadvertently made the pass phrase available to another party. 
 In each case, the remedy may be simply to issue a new key pair while disabling the old key pair by revoking 
the associated certificate (see below). However, since there is a cost associated with this, it may be 
appropriate to institute a key replacement fee. How long should a key/certificate be valid? One of the 
ways to limit risk of a compromised key is to limit the time period when it may be used. The length of 
this time period depends on the cost involved in reissue of certificates upon expiration balanced against 
the risk associated with a valid certificate in the hands of someone who is no longer a member of the 
organization and should not hold the certificate any longer. If the certificate is only used for authentication 
and is not used for authorization purposes, the expiration time is of reduced importance. In some scenarios 
for key distribution, a two step process is undertaken. The first step is to issue a certificate that 
may be used only to acquire the actual certificate for the intended recipient. This limited function 
would have a fairly short time before expiration. This special purpose certificate could be sent by email 
or any other means to the intended recipient. The recipient would use that certificate to establish a 
secure network connection, at which point additional information would be required from the recipient 
to verify that they are truly whom they say they are. The actual certificate would then be issued to 
the user. In this way, distribution could be done using the network without any threat of compromise. 
 Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Even with a limited time to live, it will be necessary to revoke 
certificates. When the CA validates a certificate, the CA must check the signature on the certificate 
as its own and it must check the revocation list to insure that the key may still be used. This adds 
some overhead to the management of a key system, but it is necessary to insure timely and correct response 
by the CA as to the validity of a given certificate.  Key Repositories If an organization encrypts 
any of their documents, it may occur that some document content cannot be recovered due to a lost key. 
As insurance against losing access to this information entirely, it is possible to establish a key repository 
where all keys (both public and private) created by the CA are kept. When a key is lost, the repository 
may be accessed to recover the key. Note that in most cases, keys stored in a key repository would be 
encrypted twice, using two public keys. In this way, decryption would require two private keys held by 
different people to decrypt and it reduces significantly an inappropriate use of keys taken from the 
repository.  Should ALL keys be held in repository? Just encryption keys? Just Signature keys?  It 
may not be necessary to store all created keys in a repository. Further, it may be possible to remove 
keys from the repository after their useful life is past. For instance, if a key is used solely for signatures 
and is not used to encrypt documents, it may not be necessary to place that key in the repository, since 
once the CA has validated the signature, the document may be trusted. Of course, it is not always know 
all purposes for which a key is used. If a key is used to encrypt documents that will be held for any 
length of time in their encrypted form, the decryption key should be held in the repository. In fact, 
it should be held until there are no documents left which require that decryption key even if the certificate 
expiration date is past. Liabilities As an operator of a CA and/or key repository, there are certain 
risks being undertaken. If a key repository is compromised, a large number of keys could be compromised. 
Steps must be taken to limit the susceptibility of the key repository system as well as the decryption 
keys. The fact that the key repository system and both decryption keys are required goes a long way toward 
limiting risk. As a creator of a certificate, the CA is guaranteeing certain information about the holder 
of the certificate. This guarantee is primarily to verify that the public key contained by the certificate 
is actually the public key of the individual or entity identified within the certificate. This guarantee 
requires that the identity of the holder of the certificate be verified by some other means. If this 
verification process fails, the CA is accepting risk in the event someone uses an incorrectly assigned 
certificate for some inappropriate purpose.  8. CONCLUSION Imagine a world where you can do all your 
business budgeting, purchasing, timecard, and payroll, all without paper. With a well-developed PKI, 
this will all be possible. Already, organizations have begun the shift from paper based systems to digitally 
based systems. If this shift is done in concert with widely established and accepted standards, it will 
enable significantly easier integration with external organizations permitting validation of digital 
signatures as well as enabling safe transmission of encrypted documents and other transactions. In time, 
there will likely be a worldwide infrastructure tying together organizational PKIs. Before this can happen, 
however, individual organizations must work to establish their own infrastructures for managing their 
PK systems.  9. OTHER RESOURCES Adams, C., Farrell, S., IETF RFC 2510, Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
Certificate Management Protocols http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2510.txt Kaufman, C. et.al., Network Security, 
Prentice Hall, 1995. Stallings, W. Cryptography and Network Security 2nd Ed. Prentice Hall, 1999. Wahl, 
M., LDAP Documentation, http://www.umich.edu/~dirsvcs/ldap/doc/  
			