
 Will Database Researchers Have Any Role in Data Security? Arnon Rosenthal The MITRE Corporation 202 
Burlington Road K/308 +1-781-271-7577 arnie@mitre.org ABSTRACT Data security issues today go far beyond 
the traditional questions of grant/revoke in an RDBMS. We will discuss what the new research agenda should 
be.  Keywords Security, Application Server, Intellectual Property 1. Panel Statement Universal access 
to the WWW has made security a top issue for all large web sites. New problems have arisen, to enforce 
legally mandated privacy policies, and to protect intellectual property. Collaborative arrangements need 
to be created and ended, rapidly. Systems architectures have become far more complex, so it s not just 
the database where data needs protection. And there are too few people skilled either in specifying policies, 
or in the technical means of enforcing them. Is there anything the SIGMOD community can do to help? For 
many years, database security research has been moribund, and has had little impact on recent practice. 
The action is moving far beyond the DBMS. Yet the SIGMOD community, with its expertise in [semi]structured 
data, declarative semantics, query compilation, constraints, triggers, etc. can play an important role 
in making future security systems more robust and easier to use. Permission to make digital or hard copies 
of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ACM SIGMOD 2001 May 21-24, Santa Barbara, 
California USA Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-332-4/01/05 $5.00 Permission to make digital or hard copies 
of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ACM SIGMOD 2001 May 21-24, Santa Barbara, 
California, USA Copyright 2001 1-58113-332-4/01/05 ...$5.00 Questions for the panel include: 1. What 
big advances are needed in data security, and what research questions to they raise for the SIGMOD community? 
 For new kinds of policies (e.g., rights management, privacy)  For large (enterprise, coalitions, web) 
systems  In a world with too few skilled administrators to manage the we create  2. What concepts can 
we contribute to simplify the mix of DBMSs, object managers, policy management tools, systems management 
tools, enforcement systems,, 3. Will the action be in policy specification, or in enforcement mechanisms? 
 4. What are the data security issues raised by fault tolerance (with reconfiguration of entire systems) 
and by defense in depth (where information may remain protected after an intrusion into the operating 
system)  Panel Members (partial list) Arnon Rosenthal Klaus Dittrich Jim Donahue Bill Maimone(MITRE) 
(U. Zurich) (Intertrust) (VP, Oracle)  
			