
 An Approach to Natural Language Processing for Document Retrieval W. Bruce Croft David D. Lewis Computer 
and Information Science Department University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. 01003 Abstract Document 
retrieval systems have been restricted, by the nature of tile task, to techniques that can be used with 
large numbers of documents and broad domains. The most effective techniques that have been developed 
are based on the statistics of word occurrences ill text. In this paper, we describe an approach to using 
natural language process- iag (NLP) techniques for what is essentially a natural lan- guage problem - 
the comparison of a request text with the text of document titles and abstracts. The proposed NLP techniques 
are used to develop a request model based on "conceptual case frames" and to compare this model with 
the texts of candidate documents. The request model is also used to provide information to statistical 
search tech- niques that identify the candidate documents. As part of a preliminary evaluation of this 
approach, case frame representations of a set of requests from the CACM col- lection were constructed. 
Statistical searches carried out using dependency and relative importance information de- rived from 
the request models indicate that performance benefits can be obtained. Introduction Document retrieval 
is a task that involves the comparison of text or representations of text with representations of users' 
informa- tion needs. The aim of this comparison is to identify documents or parts of documents that address 
the information need. Cur-rent approaches to document retrieval emphasize the use of fairly simple techniques 
that are based on statistical models of word importance. For example, the probabilistic model [RIJS79] 
esti- mates the probability of relevance of a document using Bayesian classification theory. The representations 
of documents and in- formation needs (requests) that are used for this model are simply sets of unweighted 
words or index terms. This basic approach can be extended to incorporate weighted terms [CROF81] or requests 
structured using Boolean operators [CROF86a]. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material 
is granted pro- vided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial ad- vantage, 
the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying is by permission of the Associa- tion for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fee and/or specific permission. &#38;#169; 1987 ACM 089791-232-2/87/0006/0026--75¢ Statistical 
indexing and retrieval techniques are efficient and are more effective in terms of finding relevant documents 
than searches based on Boolean queries and exact matching [SALT83b]. The major disadvantage of these 
techniques is that the absolute level of performance in terms of effectiveness is still quite low. A 
number of suggestions have been made to address this problem. The design of the 13R system [CROF86c] 
was based on the ob- servation that many of the retrieval errors made by a document retrieval system 
were the result of inadequate representations of information needs. The emphasis in the operation of 
the I3R sys- tem is on the identification of important concepts or topics in a user's request and the 
acquisition of knowledge about the domain of the request [CROF86b]. The request model that is constructed 
is used to provide information about important index terms and term dependencies to statistical retrieval 
strategies. The flexible control mechanism and architecture of the 13R system supports the construction 
of the request model by making a variety of facilities available to the user. The I3R approach is one 
way of tackling what can be re-garded as the central issue in information retrieval -the design and acquisition 
of appropriate representations for documents and information needs. Since both the requests and the contents 
of documents are usually expressed in natural language, it may be supposed that techniques designed for 
natural language process- ing (NLP) would provide better representations than those used by statistical 
techniques. The difficulty, however, is in finding NLP techniques that can feasibly be used with the 
large numbers of documents, broad domains, and very limited domain knowl- edge that characterize the 
document retrieval task. Despite these constraints, there are reasons to believe that current NLP tech- 
niques can be used to improve the effectiveness of document re-trieval systems. The two main reasons 
are as follows; Document retrieval is a different task than, for example, story understanding and does 
not require a complete, un- ambiguous interpretation of the text passages involved. There is some evidence 
that even simple NLP techniques can provide useful information for document retrieval systems [SMEA86,THUR86]. 
 The importance of an individual request and the user's in- terpretation of the meaning of that request 
provides an inherent limitation on the NLP involved [SPAR84]. Rather than attempting to process all document 
texts independent of individual requests, the NLP component of a document retrieval system should be 
used to analyze a request plus the texts of only those documents that potentially address the particular 
information needs expressed in that request.  26 Additionally, while a traditional NLP system must 
have all the needed domain and linguistic knowledge specified in advance, a document retrieval system 
can acquire some of this knowledge as needed from a human expert (the user) during a search session. 
 The approach described in this paper for augmenting docu- ment retrieval systems using NLP is based 
on these points and on the IZR framework. The initial goal of the ADRENAL sys- tem (Augmented Document 
REtrieval using NAtural Language processing) will be to produce a detailed representation of the information 
need by using both NLP and interaction with the user to analyze the text of the request. The request 
model that is constructed will have an integrated representation of concepts expressed in the request, 
concepts from the domain knowledge ac- quired from the user, and relationships between those concepts. 
Parts of this request model will be used to generate information for statistical retrieval strategies 
that identify potentially inter- esting documents. The texts of these candidate documents can then be 
compared to the full request model using NLP tech- niques. The details of the request model representation 
and the NLP techniques being proposed are given in the next section. The third section gives an overview 
of ADRENAL. In the fourth section we describe an experiment designed to test some parts of the proposed 
system. Representations of a sample query set are constructed using a case frame approach. The information 
in these representations is used to provide information to search strategies based on the probahilistic 
model and the results of these searches are compared to those obtained with standard in- dexed queries. 
2 The Approach 2.1 A Representation for Science and Technology The idea of representing text in terms 
of concepts or units of meaning other than single words has been a theme of much re- search in document 
retrieval (for example, [SPAR74,DILL83]). Usually these units are fragments of the original text, such 
as noun phrases, which are extracted without the use of sophisti- cated NLP techniques. The problem with 
this approach is that all the system knows about these fragments is that their words are somehow related. 
Since the structure and meaning of the fragments is not understood, they cannot be matched against pieces 
of text which, while superficially different, have similar meanings. The goal of applying NLP techniques 
in a document retrieval system, then, is to transform the linguistic structures in the user request and 
in selected documents into representations of their meaning, thus allowing similar concepts to be recognized 
in a variety of textual forms. If an IR system is to be able to compare representations pro- duced by 
an NLP component, it is necessary for those representa- tions to be constructed using a language with 
known semantics. For this purpose we are developing a language called REST (Rep- resentation for Science 
and Technology). REST is a frame-based language which allows the content of a document to be repre- sented 
in terms of a predefined set of basic scientific concepts. As an example of a REST representation consider 
the following user query: "Probabilistic analyses of Quicksort, a divide and con- quer algorithm" The 
representation of this query as REST frames is shown in fig- ure 1. Each frame has a type corresponding 
to a concept such as STUDY, METHOD, RELATIONSHIP, etc. The specific mean- ing of a particular instance 
of a type arises from the slot relations between it and other frames (via the slots marked DEF) and/or 
by an APPEARANCE (APP) slot which shows what words in the text correspond to this concept. (Note that 
while a slot is shown as appearing in one frame, it actually represents a link between two frames. So 
while we only show an IS-A slot in STUDY-2, conceptually there is an IS-A-INVERSE slot in STUDY-1.) The 
key point to notice is that the raw text of the query has been given an interpretation in terms of classes 
of actions, entities, (STUDY-1 APPEARANCE: analysis) (STUDY-2 IS-A(DEF): STUDY-I ARGUMENT-OF(DEF): 
RELATIONSHIP-I) (STUDY-3 IS-A(DEF): STUDY-2 INTEREST(DEF): METHOD-3) (RELATIONSHIP-I APP: probabilistie) 
 (METHOD-I APP: algorithm) (METHOD-2 IS-A(DEF): METHOD-i USES(DEF): ACTION-I) (METHOD-3 IS-A(DEF): 
METHOD-2 APP: Quicksort) (ACTION-I APP: divide and conquer) Figure 1: A REST representation and 
relationships that are understood by the system. The rep- resentation both preserves the original words 
of the query, for ' use with term-based retrieval methods, and allows more sophis- ticated comparisons 
with documents represented in REST form. For instance, consider a document whose title is "Empirical 
results on the behavior of common recur- sive algorithms" If we represented the query and document as 
simple term vectors they would match poorly, having only one term in com- mon. Methods that make use 
of noun phrases or other linguistic structures would be similarly ineffective. However, if REST rep- 
resentations of the query and document were available, then their similarity would be detectable: both 
representations would con- tain a METHOD frame (specialized by "algorithm"), and the system would know 
about the connection between STUDY (as in the query) and DATA (the "results" in the document title). 
Representing queries and documents in REST form does not, of course, guarantee that an effective comparison 
can be made between them. There are two major factors that limit the extent to which useful comparisons 
can be made. The first is that the REST language at present has available only a limited number of fairly 
general scientific concepts. For instance, in the above ex- amples, only the category RELATIONSHIP was 
available to rep- resent the terms "probabilistic" and "empirical". Since a wide va- ri,~ty of textual 
items would be represented as RELATIONSHIPs, tbc system would only be able to draw rather weak conclusions 
about the similarity of these two concepts. One solution is to expand the set of primitive concepts (as 
was done, for instance, in producing STUDY from ACTION) to include a number of dif- ferent primitives 
for relationships and properties, which are cur- rently all subsumed under RELATIONSHIP. REST is designed 
to allow new concepts to inherit properties from pre-existing ones, thus simplifying the expansion of 
the representation language. The other factor that limits the ability of a system to compare REST representations 
is the extent to which it knows anything about the words in the APPEARANCE slots. Drawing on the above 
examples again, note that "divide and conquer" is rep- resented simply as an ACTION, while "recursive" 
would be a RELATIONSHIP. As such the system would be unable to draw any conclusions about how well they 
matched, unless it had some knowledge ofthe connection between "divide and conquer" and "recursive". 
Since we do not wish to assume that a general pur- pose document retrieval system will have this level 
of domain knowledge, the alternative is to ask the user to provide informa- tion about vocabulary items 
that are likely to be encountered in relevant documents. Since it would be inappropriate to expect the 
user to build REST structures to represent this information, we instead follow [CROF86b] and allow the 
user to enter a set of vocabulary terms and indicate whether certain linguistic or thesaurus-like relationships 
(such as SYNONYM and GENER- ALIZATION) hold between them. While these relationships will not support 
the more powerful inferencing and matching proce- dures that the REST primitives do, they will allow 
terms to be matched based on something other than surface form.  2.2 NLP techniques The advantages of 
the REST representation will be irrelevant un- less mechanical techniques can be used to translate queries 
and, to some degree, documents into it. As mentioned in the intro- duction, the document retrieval task 
is a very challenging one for NLP. On the one hand, if we make the reasonable assumption that a general 
purpose document retrieval system will not have dictionary entries for words from specific technical 
domains, then we cannot expect to have syntactic information on all, or even most, of the words encountered 
in document and query texts. This argues against using a parser which analyzes a sentence in terms of 
an implicitly or explicitly built representation of its syntactic structure, On the other hand, limitations 
on domain knowledge also limit the effectiveness of more semantics-oriented parsing techniques. Our proposed 
solution is, as one might ex- pect, a compromise between the two classes of parsers. The overall model 
will be that of an expectation-based parser [SCHA75,BIRN81,CULL86} one of the more successful types of 
semantics-based parsers. (Other names used for this type of parser include "conceptual analyzer", "request-based 
parser", and "situation-action parser".) Briefly, these parsers associate a case frame [BRUC75] with 
certain words (particularly verbs) in their lexicons. Each case frame represents some real-world action, 
and contains slots for the various entities that take part in that action. Associated with each case 
frame is a set of pro- duction rules (called expectations or requests) that suggest where to look in 
the sentence for other words, or concepts triggered by other words, to fill the slots in the case frame. 
Thus as the sen- tence is processed, a frame-based representation of its meaning is both being created, 
and being used to guide the interpretation of the rest of the sentence. In point of fact, the representation 
used by our parser will also be the REST representation of the content of the sentence - the design of 
the primitives in REST has been guided by the intention to use them both for knowledge repre- sentation 
and parsing. For example, the three STUDY frames in Figure 1 would have originated as a single case frame 
built by the parser on encountering the word "analysis." Expecta-tions associated with that word would 
search for modifiers like "probabilistic" and for the entity being analyzed ("Quicksort"), as well as 
looking for other components that are not present in this particular piece of text, While being guided 
by the expectation-based model laid out above, we plan to depart from it in several ways. Traditional 
expectation-based parsers rely heavily on slot restrictions- rules about what semantic classes of words 
or concepts can fill par- ticular slots in the case frames. The difficulty with this in the document 
retrieval task is that the interesting, domain-specific words won't appear in our lexicon, so the parser 
will not know anything about their semantic classes. The system can try to get such information from 
the user on the most important words related to the query, but this is a small fraction of the domain 
words that the parser will encounter. Our solution to this prob- lem is based on an extension of the 
concept of a phrasal lexicon [BECK75]. The idea is that certain text structures larger than words are 
used essentially as a unit and occur frequently enough that they should have lexicon entries similar 
to individual words. Our intention is to represent these phrasal units as small, syn- tactic, transition 
net parsers [WOOD70], and to associate the case frames to be used for expectation-based parsing with 
these phrasal units rather than with individual words, as is the usual method. The phrasal parsers will 
take advantage of the presence of common phrases and syntactic cues to analyze pieces of a sen- tence 
and fill some of the slots of their associated case frames. We believe that such phrasal constructs are 
used frequently enough in technical prose to make this an appropriate strategy. Once a number of case 
frames and other REST structures have been in- stantiated by phrasal parsing, expectation-based parsing 
will link them together to form a representation of the entire sentence. Another departure from usual 
NLP practice is inspired by the fact that the NLP component does not actually need to under-stand a document, 
but rather only process it enough to decide whether it is relevant to the user query. Therefore the design 
of our parser emphasizes finding those sections of a text that con-tain information useful in making 
a relevance decision, and then parsing only these sections. Furthermore, since a representation of the 
sentence will be built up incrementally during parsing, we can integrate parsing the sentence with comparing 
it to the query, and thus increase efficiency by stopping the parse as soon as enough information is 
available to make a retrieval decision. The fact that the meaning representation is built incrementally 
also adds to robustness, since if the parse fails due to some dif- ficult text structure, the partially 
formed representation is still available for matching. This style of parsing is similar to text skimming 
[DEJO79,TAIT82], though research on that subject has not focused on searching for particular concepts. 
The above gives the flavor of our approach to applying NLP to the document retrieval task. We discuss 
this approach further in the next section, which outlines a system design integrating the use of NLP 
with traditional IR techniques.  System overview In the following we describe the processing that ADRENAL 
will use in handling a user request. Detailed design and implemen- tation of the system has begun, with 
some modules being taken from the 13R system. It might seem that the ideal time to apply NLP techniques 
to the system's document collection would be before any user queries are processed, to avoid the time 
pressure of an interac-tive situation. However, this would force the NLP component to try to build a 
complete representation of each document's meaning, without any specific information need, and without 
aid from a user. Such an approach is untenable with current NLP techniques. However, some preprocessing, 
can be done both to improve indexing, and to save work for later parsing. The in- dexing task will use 
some superficial syntactic analysis, aided by one of the large, machine-readable dictionaries that have 
recently become available [ALSH85]. The next step, processing of the user query, involves using NLP in 
a fairly traditional mode; i.e. attempting to produce a complete representation of the meaning of the 
text. As described above, the parsing wilt be expectation-based, with the expecta- tions being associated 
with REST frames instantiated by syntac- tically defined phrasal units. Assuming that the query is being 
made in an interactive environment, the system try to confirm its interpretation with the user. Besides 
building a representation of the query, ADRENAL will ask the user for additional vocabulary terms, and 
for linguistic relationships between these terms and those in the query, as discussed in Section 2.1. 
Once the REST representation of the query is produced, NLP techniques could be used to compare the query 
to every docu- ment in the collection, but this would be hopelessly inefficient. Instead, an initial 
document ranking will be produced by con-verting the REST frames into sets of index terms to compare, 
via a statistical retrieval strategy, with the index terms of docu- ments. Information from the REST 
representation will be used to enhance the effectiveness of the statistical retrieval; preliminary results 
on this method are reported in Section 4. Most documents will score so low on the statistical retrieval 
that they will not be considered further. A few high-scoring ones might be presented to the user without 
further analysis. For the remainder of the documents (those with moderately high scores on the statistical 
retrieval) additional natural language processing with the expectation-based parser may be necessary. 
The sections of a document to be parsed are chosen based on their potential for producing REST frames 
that could be usefully matched with the representation of the query. For instance, if ADRENAL were seeking 
documents in response to the example query on Quicksort (see Section 2.1) a sentence containing the words 
"statistical" and "divide" would be an excellent choice for parsing, to distinguish good matches like 
"...the statistical properties of techniques that divide a problem into smaller..." from bad matches, 
such as "...we divide up AI learning methods into three classes: statistical,...". As the retrieval process 
proceeds the user will be encour- aged to provide additional or corrected vocabulary information based 
on their judgment of the relevance of the documents be- ing retrieved. The user will decide when the 
retrieval process should stop, though ADRENAL will attempt to keep him or her informed of its estimation 
of the potential of the documents re- maining to be checked. 4 The Experiment Given a REST representation 
of a request, it is relatively straight- forward to generate information for a statistical retrieval 
strat-egy. The strategy developed from the probabilistic model by Croft [CROFS1,CROF86a 1 can make use 
of information about the relative importance of terms and about dependencies between terms. This information 
is derived from the relative importance of slots in case frames and the term groupings that represent 
concepts. In the absence of information about the importance of terms in the query, the retrieval strategy 
produces a ranked list of documents according to the following score; ~T(x,). W(xi).x, + A (1) where 
x~ is the ith term in the document representative and is either 1 or 0 depending on whether the term 
is assigned or not, W(xi) is a weight related to the collection frequency of term i, and T(xi) is the 
term significance weight of term i, and A is a correction factor that depends on the presence of dependent 
groups of words in a particular docmnent. The summation is done over all the terms in the request. In 
this section, we shall describe techniques for determining, from the REST representa- tion of the request, 
the dependencies used in A and their relative importance. Note that the dependencies in A can have relative 
importance weights (in the theory, these are correlation coeffi- cients) but they have not been used 
in previous work. The re- quest model can also be used to estimate the relative importance of individual 
terms in the request. The simplest method for using information from the request model involves taking 
the terms for the probabilistic request from the REST representation of the query rather than by re-moving 
stopwords from the natural language text and using the remaining terms. When this was done to the 32 
queries from the Communications of the ACM (CACM) collection which were used in [CROF86a] the average 
number of terms per request was 9.6, as opposed to 12.6 terms when a standard stoplist is used. The difference 
comes from the fact that a term is present in the REST representation only if it is important to the 
meaning of the query. For instance, the word "information" would be present in the REST representation 
of "articles on information theory" but would not be present in the representation of "give me informa- 
tion on parallel processing." Our hypothesis was that generating the request in this fashion would considerably 
increase precision. The relative importance of query terms is based on the pres- ence or absence of the 
terms in our science vocabulary and/or in a large general purpose dictionary. For the experiments reported 
here, we chose to assign query term weights as follows: 1.0 if the term is not in our science lexicon 
 but not in the general-purpose dictionary. 0.8 i:f the term is in dictionary but not in our science 
lexicon. 0.6 if the term is in our science lexicon but not in the dictionary.  0.4 if in the dictionary 
and in our science lexicon. The hypothesis is that the more general the term, tile lower the relative 
importance in the query. This weight is used to modify the weights in equation 1. The most interesting 
way to enhance probabilistic retrieval is to use the fact that the REST representation makes apparent 
term relationships that are not explicit in the text of the query. We produced by hand REST representations 
of a set of queries from the CACM collection, and then automatically generated for each query subsets 
of terms that the REST representation indicated were related conceptually, and which thus should be considered 
mutually dependent in a probabilistic model. These dependent term groups were then used to modify the 
rankings of documents retrieved by a probabilistic retrieval, as was done in [CROVS6a]. The algorithm 
used to generate dependent term groups from a REST representation is described below. It is based on 
gen- erating clauses (sets of related frame names) and then replacing the frame names in the clauses 
with~corresponding sets of terms. We say that frame A is a defining frame of frame B if A's name appears 
in a slot in B marked DEF. A is a neighboring frame of B if A's name appears in any slot in B. 1. Generate 
the tezt groups for each frame. One such group corresponds to the filler of each APPEARANCE slot in the 
frame, with words from a stoplist removed. If the frame has defining frames, then all combinations formed 
by taking one text group from each defining frame are also text groups for this frame. (The recursion 
wilt always terminate unless there a circular definition is present.) 2. Generate the O-order clauses 
for each REST frame. One 0-order clause is always the name of the frame itself. The other, if present, 
is the set of all names of defining frames for this frame. The 0-order clauses represent those sets of 
frames which we know to be closely related, because all the frames named in a 0-order clause are part 
of the definition of a single concept. 3. Generate the k-order clauses for each frame, for k = 1 to 
a desired maximum value. The set of k-order clauses for a frame is the union of the following sets of 
clauses: a. All (k-1)-order clauses from neighboring frames. b. All clauses formed by deleting an element 
from one of the (k-1)-order clauses for the frame. c. All clauses formed by replacing an element from 
one of the (k-1)-order clauses for the frame with a (k-1)-order clause from a frame neighboring the one 
whose name was replaced.  4. Generate the term groups corresponding to each clause by forming all combinations 
of replacing each frame name in a clause with one of the text groups representing that frame. Discard 
all term groups which contain no terms or only one term, as well as all duplicate groups.  The intent 
behind the algorithm is to produce clauses corre- sponding to strongly dependent groups of terms before 
producing clauses for less strongly dependent groups. The factors to con- sider in choosing an algorithm 
to generate dependent clauses and in choosing a maximum value for k are discussed under Future Work; 
for these experiments we generated dependent term groups only from 0-, 1-, and 2-order clauses, and eliminated 
any group containing more than five terms. Also, as in [CROF86a], only the top 100 documents from the 
initial retrieval were reranked using information from the dependent term groups. While the above algorithm 
does well at producing groups of terms that are indeed dependent, not all such groups should have equal 
impact on the score of a document that matches the group. In particular, we do not want to give as much 
weight to groups consisting predominantly of general scientific terms. These terms, which make up a science 
lexicon closely associated with the REST "types", have dependencies which are indepen- dent of any particular 
query, and so should not be counted as heavily. To reflect this we set the correlation coefficient for 
a term group equal to the proportion of terms in the group that are not from the science lexicon. This 
means groups which con- tain mostly domain terms will have the most influence on a docu- ment's score. 
Figure 2 shows an example of text groups, clauses, and dependent term groups (with correlation coefficients) 
for one of the frames from Figure 1. To test the effectiveness of these various methods we used them 
in combination with a probabilistic retrieval incorporat- ing inverse document frequency and within document 
frequency weights. The use of these two weights is equivalent to the tf.idf model [SALT83b,CROF84] which 
is regarded as one of the best statistical search strategies. If any of these methods provided additional 
performance gains above and beyond those provided by the best standard methods, this would be an encouraging 
pre- liminary result. In fact, as shown in Tables 1 and 2 all three methods yielded significant improvements. 
Comparing columns 1 and 2 in either Table 1 or Table 2 shows significant improvements in precision METHOD-2 
text group: {algorithm, divide, conquer) 0-order clauses: {METHOD-2}, {ACTION-1, METHOD-1) 1-order clauses: 
{ACTION-1}, {METHOD-l}, {ACTION-I, METHOD-2}, {METHOD-I, METHOD-2} dependent term groups: {algorithm, 
divide, conquer) .66 {divide. conquer) 1.0 Figure 2: Clauses and Dependent Term Groups (with correlation 
coefficients) resulting from using the term set based on the REST representa- tion rather than one from 
stoplist-pruned natural language text. Comparing columns 2 and 3 in either table shows the improve- ments 
at almost all recall levels gained by using term signifi- cance weights based on lexicon information. 
Finally, comparing any column in Table 1 with its counterpart in Table 2 shows the improvements gained 
in all cases by reranking the top 100 documents based on the clauses generated from the REST rep- resentation. 
It should be emphasized that this result comes from a small sample of manually constructed REST representations. 
The automatic construction of these representations and evalu- ating them with the full query set of 
the ACM collection is the aim of our current system development. 5 Future Work Development of ADRENAL 
is just beginning, and there are many issues yet to be resolved in how to apply natural language pro- 
cessing technology to document retrieval, especially with respect to analyzing documents. Therefore, 
the above results are encour- aging in that they suggest that significant performance gains will result 
even if NLP is applied only to the user query. The use of REST representations for augmenting probabilis- 
tic retrieval can certainly be improved. An obvious extension is that when generating a probabilistic 
request and dependent term groups from a REST representation, not only those general sci- ence terms 
that appear in the text of the query should be used, but also other science lexicon terms that correspond 
to the same REST primitives. In effect we would be using the REST concepts as indices into a thesaurus. 
Term significance weighting could be used to avoid negative effects of adding multiple general terms. 
We are also investigating improvements in the algorithm for generating dependent term groups. Heuristics 
which take ad- vantage of the semantics of the links between frames have the potential of both improving 
the quality of clauses generated and for making clause generation more efficient.    Acknowledgments 
This research was supported in part by NSF grants IST-8414486 and by a NSF Graduate Fellowship. We would 
like to thank Wendy Lehnert and Daniel Suthers for their advice on the parser, and on REST, respectively. 
Precision  Standard REST-derived REST-derived Recall term set term set terms + weights 10 45.8 52.3 
60.7 20 34.6 35.8 40.9 30 29.1 31.2 34.0 40 27.2 28.1 29.8 50 10.6 21.7 26.0 60 14.5 17.0 20.6 70 0.3 
10.5 13.0 80 6.6 7.0 0.3 90 2.7 2.8 3.4 100 1.0 1.0 1.2 Table I: Probabilistic retrieval using within 
document frequency weights (preliminary results from 6 queries) Precision Standard REST-derived REST-derlved 
Recall term set term set terms + weights 10 51.0 52.7 53.2 20 41.1 42.5 47.4 30 30.8 32.1 35.6 40 27.8 
28.4 31.8 50 22.7 24.8 28.1 60 16.4 10.0 23.5 70 0.4 10.5 14.3 80 6.6 7.0 9.3 90 2.7 2.8 3.4  100 1.0 
1.0 1.2 Table 2: After reranking using dependent term groups (prelimi- nary results from 6 queries) References 
<RefA>IALSH85] Alshawi, }I.; Boguraev, B.; Briscoe, T. "Towards a Dictionary Support Environment for Real Time 
Pars- ing". Technical Report, Computer Laboratory, Univer- sity of Cambridge, 1985. IBECK75I Becker, 
J. D. "The Phrasal Lexicon". Bolt, Beranek, and Newman Inc. Report No. 3081, May 1975. {BIRN81] Birnbaum, 
L.; Selfridge, M. "Conceptual Analysis of Natural Language." In Inside Computer Understand- ing : Five 
Programs Plus Miniatures. Edited by R. Schank and C. Riesbeck, 318-353. Hillsdale : Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1981. [BRUC75] Bruce, B. "Case Systems for Natural Language." Ar- tificial Intelligence, 6: 327-360; 
1975. [CROFS1] Croft, W. B. "Document Representation in Proba- bilistic Models of Information Retrieval". 
Journal of the American Society of Information Science, 32: 451- 457; 1981. [CROF84] Croft, W.B. "A Comparison 
of the Cosine Correla- tion and the Modified Probabilistic Model". Informa-tion Technology, 2: 113-114; 
1984. [CROF86a] Croft, W. B. "Boolean Queries and Term Dependen- cies in Probabilistic Retrieval Models". 
Journal of the American society for Information Science, 37: 71-77; 1986. [CROF86b] Croft, W.B. "User-Specified 
Domain Knowledge for Document Retrieval". Proceedings of the A CM SIGIR International Conference on Research 
and Develop- ment in Information Retrieval, 201-206, Pisa, Italy, 1986. [CROF86c] Croft, W. B.; Thompson, 
R. "I3R: A New Approach to the Design of Document Retrieval Systems". journal of the American Society 
for Information Science, (to appear). [CULL86] Cullingford, Richard E. Natural Language Processing: A 
Knowledge-Engineering Approach. Totowa : Row-man &#38; Littlefield, 1986. [DE JOT9] De Jong, G.F. "Skimming 
Stories in Real Time: An Experiment in Integrated Understanding." Research Report 158, Yale University 
Department of Computer Science, New Haven, Connecticut , 1979. [DILL83] Dillon, M.; Gray, A.S. "FASIT: 
A fully automatic syntactically based indexing system." Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science. 34:99-108; 1983. [RIJS79] Van Rijsbergen, C. J. Information Retrieval. Second Edition. Butterworths, 
London; 1979. [SALT83b] Salton, G.; Fox, E.A.; Wu, H. "Extended Boolean information retrieval." Communications 
of the A CM. 26:1022-1036; 1983. [SCHA75] Schank, R. C., ed. Conceptual Information Process-ing. Amsterdam 
: North Holland, 1975. {SMEA86] Smeaton, A.F. "Incorporating Syntactic Information into a Document Retrieval 
Strategy: An Investiga- tion." Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR International Conference on Research and 
Development in Informa- tion Retrieval, 103-113, Piss, Italy, 1986. [SPAR741 Sparck Jones, K. "Automatic 
Indexing". Journal of Documentation, 30: 393-432; 1974. [SPAR84] Sparck Jones, K.; Tait, J. I. "Automatic 
Search Term Variant Generation". Journal of Documentation, 40: 50-66; 1984. [TAIT82] Tait, J.I. "Automatic 
Summarizing of English Texts." Technical Report 47, University of Cambridge Com- puter Laboratory, Cambridge, 
England, 1982. [THUR86] Thurmair, G. "REALIST: Retrieval Aids by Linguis- tics and Statistics." Proceedings 
of the A CM SIGIR In- ternational Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 138-143, 
Piss, Italy, 1986. [WOOD70] Woods, W. A. "Transition Network Grammars for Natural Language Analysis." 
Communications of the ACM. 13:591-606; 1970. </RefA>
			
