
 Analyzing Human Gait Patterns for Malfunction Detection Monika KOhle, Dieter Merkl Institut for Softwaretechnik 
Technische UniversitSt Wien Favoritenstral~e 9-11/188 A-1040 Wien, Austria {monika, dieter}@ifs.tuwien.ac.at 
ABSTRACT Clinical gait analysis is an area aiming at the provision of support for diagnoses and therapy 
considerations, the development of bio-feedback systems, and the recognition of effects of multiple diseases 
and still active compensation patterns during the healing process. The data recorded with ground reaction 
force measurement platforms is a convenient starting point for gait analysis. We discuss the usage of 
raw data from such force platforms for gait analysis and show how supervised artificial neural networks 
may be employed for gait malfunction identification. In this paper we provide our latest results in this 
line of research by using Radial Basis Function networks for gait pattern classification. Keywords Gait 
analysis, pattern classification, Radial Basis Function networks. I. INTRODUCTION Human gait analysis 
is particularly attractive to model because of its importance in everyday life and its complexity as 
a total body movement. In particular, pathological gait in humans following disease or injury is the 
subject of much contemporary research [12]. Gait analysis is traditionally the domain of dynamic Permission 
to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is ~anted without 
fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the fidl citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish., to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and or fee. SAC'00 March 19-21 
Cmno, Italy (c) 2000 ACM 1-58113-239-5/00/003>...>$5.00 electromyography, (ground reaction) force platforms, 
and joint kinematics and kinetics [2]. We perform a medical computing project based on ground reaction 
force measurements of patients' gait. The project aims at an assessment of gait after injury that is 
useful, on the one hand, as a support of diagnosis and therapy considerations. On the other hand, it 
is intended to give clues to a model of gait, to help developing bio-feedback systems to train patients, 
and to find effects of multiple diseases and still active compensation. Employing a supervised neural 
network model (simple three layer MLP [1,13]) for discriminating "healthy" and "pathological" gait patterns 
leads to a fairly good classification scheme of the gait patterns [4]. [9] classified a number of "pathological" 
gait patterns by using the unsupervised learning strategies of Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) [8], yielding 
a topographic arrangement of the diverse patients' injuries, and thus a detailed classification means. 
A description of gait pattern classification based on the vertical force component may be found in [10], 
where Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) [6] was used for classification and yielded the highest recognition 
accuracy reported on that data so far. In this paper the employed classification algorithm is Radial 
Basis Function networks (RBF) [13]. We report on supervised identification of gait malfunction with respect 
to the location of ailment. The location is provided by labeling the measured input patterns with the 
location of the injured body region as known from the patient's record. The remainder of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section 2 introduces basics of human gait biomechanics and ground reaction force 
for walking. In section 3 we present a brief description of the application data and its preprocessing. 
This is followed by an outline of RBF networks in section 4. In section 5 we present the experiments 
and their results. Finally, our conclusions are presented in section 6. acceleration) indicates the body 
weight. The solid line graphs the vertical (load) force. The non-solid lines 2. BIOMECHANICS OF HUMAN 
GAIT indicate the (friction) forces in the horizontal plane. Stable human locomotion requires a periodic 
motion of the legs. Normal walking involves coordinated motion at the hip, knee, and ankle, none of which 
are simple joints. Muscles which attach at various points along the skeletal supporting structure often 
perform more than one function. This complex architecture makes modeling and analysis extremely difficult, 
but also provides the redundancy which makes walking possible after disease or injury. Pathology gives 
rise to remarkable compensatory mechanisms to allow for locomotion, often with unusual body postures 
or the use of muscles for unaccustomed functions. The major portion of energy expended during walking 
is required for the vertical motion of the body center of gravity. Humans show a remarkable ability to 
coordinate ankle, knee, and hip motion in order to minimize the vertical displacement of the center of 
gravity [12]. When a body is in contact with the ground, the downward force due to gravity is reflected 
back onto the body as a reaction. When a person stands still, this ground reaction force, GRF, is equal 
to the person's mass multiplied by the gravitational acceleration. This reaction force acts upwards towards 
the body from all parts of the body in contact with the ground (usually the feet). The distribution of 
this force (pressure) over the sole of the feet is not even, and more force is taken by some parts of 
the sole than others, when all forces over every part of the sole are averaged together, the ground reaction 
force can be represented by a single force acting a point called the center of pressure. So far we have 
looked at purely vertical (load) forces: the GRF on the body while standing still. Forces can act in 
other directions, though. When we walk, we also produce friction forces on the ground. When the foot 
hits the ground at heel strike, the friction between the heel and the ground causes a friction force 
in the horizontal plane to act backwards against the foot. The force therefore causes a breaking action 
on the body, slowing it down. Analogously, acceleration occurs at push-off. Not only do we alternatively 
accelerate and brake while walking, we also climb and dive. Since force is mass times acceleration, any 
acceleration of the body will be reflected in a reaction when at least one foot is on the ground. An 
upwards acceleration (as occurs at push-off) will be reflected in an increase in the vertical load (weight) 
recorded, while a downwards acceleration will reduce the effective body weight. A graphical representation 
of the measured force during a human footstep is depicted in Figure 1. All forces have been divided by 
the body weight (i.e. body weight normalization). The straight line at 9.81 N/kg (gravitational I:i 
Figure 1. Ground reaction force during a single footstep A more detailed exposition of the biomechanics 
of human gait may be found in [14], a comprehensive online tutorial is provided in [5]. 3. THE GAIT PATTERNS 
The gait patterns used in this study were collected in the gait analysis laboratory from patients during 
their stay at the Austrian rehabilitation center "Weil3er Hof' by using two ground reaction force measurement 
platforms (Kistler 9281B). These platforms are mounted evenly on the ground in such a way that a pair 
of consecutive left and right footsteps can be recorded. The patients start walking at least three footsteps, 
then step on the first platform and afterwards on the second one. In order to produce habitual gait patterns, 
the patients were asked to walk three further footsteps after they left the second platform. The recording 
as such was done at a sampling frequency of 250 Hz. One footstep takes about 0.75 seconds on the average 
for healthy persons. Patients with gait malfunctions usually walk at speeds far below "normal"[3]. The 
amount of data recorded, obviously, depends on the footstep's actual duration. In order to come up with 
comparable values, the recorded components are Fast--Fourier transformed and subsequently rescaled to 
zero mean and unit standard deviation. The Fast-Fourier transform leads to massive data reduction because 
the first few coefficients contain most of the information needed to reproduce the graph. As an example 
consider the pair of left and right footstep of a "healthy" person as depicted in Figure 2. In this figure 
we find the vertical (FZ) and horizontal (FX and FY) forces of left (L) and right (R) footstep. Especially 
with the vertical force the various phases of a footstep may be identified readily. 150 10.0 5.0 Z ./~_ 
_ _.._..<---~" ' _.._S /~. '''\ 0.0 -5.0 i i i 0.00 0.20 0.40 060 Figure 2. Ground reaction force during 
a pair of left and right footsteps Our database comprises 487 persons, most of which are patients. For 
evaluation purposes there are also "healthy" persons added in. On the average, each person had about 
I0 pairs of footsteps recorded. In total, we used 5556 gait patterns in this study which were split up 
into a training set comprising 4446 patterns and an independent test set comprising the remaining 1110 
gait patterns. In order to ensure the independence of these two sets, all footsteps of a single person 
were assigned to either one set completely. For identifying gait malfunctions, the patients' injuries 
were grouped into 15 body regions (e.g. left foot, left ankle, left knee, etc.). Each measured gait pattern 
was labeled according to injuries within these regions as stated by the patient's clinical record. This 
yields a 15 digit code of "diagnosed" location of ailment where each digit encodes "okay", "injured", 
or "prosthesis", respectively. Multiple malfunctions occur in about half the patients. In our data set 
we have 55 distinct classes of malfunctions at the moment. 4. RADIAl_, BASIS FUNCTION NETWORKS Radial 
basis functions (RBF) are a large class of approximating functions, computed as a linear combination 
of non-linear functions of the distances to a set of centers: f(x) = a + Zi bi G(llx - xi It) The radial 
basis function approach thus introduces a set of basis functions G(.), where G is some non-linear function 
and depends on the distance between an input vector x and a prototype xi, the distance usually taken 
to be Euclidean. The output of the mapping is then taken to be a linear combination of the basis functions. 
Examples for G are the most common Gaussian G (r) = exp - r2/2, the multiquadratic G (r) = ~(c 2 + r:), 
and the thin-plate spline function G (r) = r 2 log r. The norm H is unspecified. Finding the coefficients 
a and bi is usually done by least squares and is easy; for fixed centers and fixed scale parameters these 
are linear regression equations, so least squares fitting reduces to solving linear equations. The number 
of basis functions (and thus the number of centers) is usually much less than the number of data points, 
especially with large data sets or noisy data where exact fitting is not desirable and a good generalization 
ability is looked for. The number of centers rather depends on the complexity of the mapping than the 
amount of data. For finding the centers and scale factors, we could take a representative collection 
of training patterns (either random or according to some elaborate methods), or find representative points 
not necessarily within the training set, for example by the widely used k-means algorithm. There is much 
literature on more or less elaborate methods for finding the centers, and there is always a compromise 
to be made between speed of fitting and accuracy of approximation. Radial Basis Function networks employ 
a two-stage training procedure. In the first stage the input data set alone is used to determine the 
parameters of the basis functions. The basis functions are then kept fixed while the second stage training 
takes place where both, the input and the output data set is used (to determine the coefficients a and 
bi as mentioned above). Considering the use of such networks for classification problems, the mapping 
is described via kernels identified in the input space and thus dividing up the input into appropriate 
classes (as opposed to separating the input via hyperplanes into classes). Due to the limited scope of 
this paper we refer to [1, 13] for a more detailed exposition on Radial Basis Function networks. 5. EXPERIMENTS 
AND RESULTS Based on the ground reaction force measurements as described above we trained Radial Basis 
Function (RBF) networks to reproduce the mapping from gait pattern to diagnosis. During our experirnents 
we were especially interested in recognition accuracies with different combinations of measured ground 
reaction force components. The following results are based on RBF networks with 100 centers. Remarkably 
better results may be achieved by using more centers. This, however, is achieved at the expense of increased 
training times. In Table 1 we provide the mean recognition accuracy based on different force components. 
In particular, the table contains the results for the vertical (FZ) and the horizontal (FX, FY) force 
component as well as for the torque (MZ) of the ground reaction force. These results clearly indicate 
the superiority of the vertical force component (FZ). Force Component Test Set Training Set FX 48.20 
57.78 FY 53.78 59.81 FZ 64.41 73.46 MZ 52.88 57.42 MZ be lower than for FZ alone. This effect is due 
to the larger amount of input when the two components are combined while the RBF network still has 100 
centers. The absolute figures in the tables are to be compared only within a table. As indicated above, 
some improvement in the recognition accuracy is achievable with RBF networks containing a larger number 
of centers. Just to give an idea of the effects of adding centers, we show the recognition accuracy for 
RBF networks with 500 centers in Table 3. Force Component Test Set Training Set FZ 71.62 94.76 FZ + FX 
75.23 96.56 FZ + MZ 74.32 95.30 FZ + FX + MZ 76.04 96.96 Table 3. Recognition accuracy with RBF networks 
with 500 centers Table 1. Recognition accuracy based on one single force component Based on the singular 
results as described above we were interested in the effects of using combinations of force components 
in a second step. We restricted ourselves to combinations including the FZ component simply because this 
component leaded to the best singular recognition accuracy. The recognition accuracies of various combinations 
of force components are shown in Table 2. Force Component Test Set Training Set FZ + FX 59.55 71.17 FZ 
+ FY 60.63 64.64 FZ+MZ 64.32 71.95 FZ + FX + MZ 62.25 72.27 Table 2. Recognition accuracy based on combinations 
of force components It might be surprising, when comparing Table 1 and 2, to see both, the value for 
the training set as well as the value for the test set for the combination of the components FZ + The 
increased number of centers not only leads to a remarkable increase in the recognition accuracy for both, 
training and test set, but also shows the gain in recognition accuracy when components are combined in 
comparison to the single FZ. 6. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we described an approach to classification 
in human gait analysis based on the application of RBF networks. Our experimental results provide clear 
indication that strict utilization of observable data obtained from ground reaction force measurements 
yields remarkably high recognition accuracy for a broad variety of gait malfunction classes. More specifically, 
the results indicate that the vertical force component (FZ) produces the best singular recognition accuracy. 
This is in line with the experiments from [ 11 ]. Additional improvement may be achieved by combining 
force components. The improved recognition accuracy is not dramatic, though, and is gained at the expense 
of increased training times due to the then longer input vectors, which is also in line with [11]. It 
might be interesting to note that employing LVQ on the same data set yields a recognition accuracy of 
51.12% for the test set and 89.86 % for the training set [10]. Thus, RBF networks seem to perform better, 
especially on the test set which might indicate better generalization capabilities and a better description 
of the mapping. We have to admit, however, that some malfunction classes still show rather poor recognition 
accuracy. An explanation for that may be found in the characteristics of gait pattern distribution among 
various classes. The classes with poor recognition accuracy generally show a broad range in the actual 
values of the force components. Because of that broad range, several classes are widely overlapping making 
it tremendously difficult to recognize them with high accuracy. Only about 15% of the 55 classes show 
a clear dislocation, whereas the rest is more or less covering the same area. To give a clue for a physiological 
explanation of this observation, some injuries might allow for more variation in gait with more degrees 
of freedom than others. In this sense it is not surprising that the class of "healthy" persons seem to 
express the largest variety possible. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks are due to the Austrian rehabilitation 
center Weifler Hof and the Institut fiir Orthop~idietechnik for providing us with the ground reaction 
force data. 8. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] Bishop, C. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 
1995. [2] Cavanagh, P. et. al. Gait analysis and prescription diabetic footwear. BioMechanics Desk Reference. 
http://www.ifi-mpls.com/biomech/bdr96, 1996. [3] Hof, A. Scaling gait data to body. Gait &#38; Posture, 
vol. 4, 1996. [4] Holzreiter, S. K6hle, M. Assessment of gait patterns using neural networks. J. Biomechanics, 
26(6), 1993. [5] Kirtley, C. Clinical Gait Analysis. http://www.curtin.edu.aulcurtin/depffphysio/pffstaff/kir 
tley/cga, 1996. [6] Kohonen, T. Learning vector quantization. Neural Networks I (suppl. 1), 1988. [7] 
Kohonen, T. et. aI.:.LVQ_PAK. The Learning Vector Quantization Program Package v3.1 Laboratory of Computer 
and Information Science, Helsinki University of Technology, 1995. [8] Kohonen, T. Self-Organizing Maps. 
Springer, Berlin, 1995. [9] K6hle, M. Merkl, D. Identification of gait patterns with self-organizing 
maps based on ground reaction force. Proc. European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Binges, 
Belgium, 1996. [10]K6hle, M., Merkl, D., Kastner, J. Clinical Gait Analysis by Neural Networks: Issues 
and Experiences. Proc of the IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems, Maribor, Slovenia, 1997. 
[ll]K6hle, M., Merkl, D. Experiments in Gait Classification with Neural Networks of Adaptive Architecture. 
Proc of the 8 th Int'l Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (ICANN'98), Sk6vde, Sweden, 1998. [12]Perry, 
J.. Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function. Slack, Thorofare, NJ, 1992. [13]Ripley, B. Pattern 
Recognition and Neural Networks Cambridge University Press, 1996. [14]Winter, D. The biomechanics and 
motor control of human gait: normal, elderly, and pathological. University of Waterloo Press, Ontario. 
1991.   
			</RefA>
