
 Proceedings of the 1983 Winter Simulation Conference S. Roberts, J. Banks, B. Schmeiser (eds.) A DYNAMIC 
LONG RANGE BUDGET MODEL TO ASSIST NAVY PLANNERS Samuel Graves Rolf Clark The George Washington University 
Institute for Management Science and Engineering Washington, DC 20052 Navy long range planning is a complex 
process in which a 15-yr budget is coordi-nated through numerous interested offices and agencies. In 
this administrative process it is difficult to capture all of the interactions between budget ele- ments 
and the downstream influences of decisions. Alterations in one budget element affect not only other elements 
in the same year but, through a ripple effect, influence many other elements in subsequent years. The 
computer model described here, The Navy Resource Dynamics Model, has been developed and applied to assist 
in this process. I. Introduction The Resource Dynamics model, under development at the George Washington 
University, is a macro- scopic planning model for long range budget and financial analysis. It is intended 
to capture, in an abbreviated but coherent and consistent form, the most important technological, economic, 
and organizational factors which combine to determine the Navy's annual budget requirements. Navy long 
range planning establishes the intended allocation of the Navy's financial resources over a 15-year horizon. 
The process requires input data and coordination from a number of offices. Many of the inputs are dynamically 
interdependent so that revision of a given variable for one year of the plan may influence other variables 
in that year and all subsequent years. (For example, increasing procurement of aircraft in the first 
year of the plan, Will, other things being equal, increase the funding required for aircraft operations 
in subsequent years.) Such revisions commonly occur as a part of the usual resource allocation process. 
The Supported by Office of Naval Research Contract Number NOOO14-82-K-0150. normal administrative planning 
process, however, is quite time-consuming and involves review and coordination of all the input data 
through directives and briefings between the numerous Navy offices involved. The process is not well 
suited for frequent planning revisions. It is particularly difficult to maintain internal consistency 
and coherence through such an admin- istrative planning system in a process which involves complex time 
dependent dynamics (i.e., downstream ripple effects). The Resource Dynam- ics research was undertaken 
to assist in this process; it does so by combining a number of known statistical relationships in a fast-running 
computer model which allows rapid turnaround, and requires a minimum of detailed input data. The Resource 
Dynamics Model is not a replacement for the normal Planning, Programming, and Bud- geting System (PPBS). 
Rather, it establishes an independent estimating procedure to be used in quick response excursions providing 
approxi- mate results for comparison to existing plans and programs. Recently the Assistant Secretary 
of Defense (Controller) described the PPBS decision-making environment as one which: -Is basically open-loop 
as it tends to give rudder directions but does not look back at the wake and in which CH1953-9/83/0000-0663 
$01.00 o 1983 IEEE Samuel Graves, -High-level managers are confronted with dynamic situations that consist 
of complex systems of changing problems which interact with each other (Borsting, 1982) Recognizing 
problems and concerns such as these, Resource Dynamics attempts to close the loop and assist managers 
in the complex dynamic analysis required in long range planning and resource allocation. 2. The Model 
The Navy Resource Dynamics model is essentially a 'parametric' long range planning tool. In the same 
way that parametric cost estimates are con- structed for individual systems whose future cost is uncertain, 
so the Resource Dynamics approach constructs estimates of future force levels (i.e., numbers of ships 
and aircraft) and asso- ciated ownership costs. (Ownership costs include the costs of operating, maintaining, 
and manning a given force level). This kind of parametric estimation is appropriate for at least two 
purposes: I) for estimations of events which are sufficiently far into the future that detailed information 
on the characteristics of the system are uncertain, 2) for independent estimations of nearer term cost 
which may be compared to the results obtained from more detailed methods. The model establishes, at 
a macroscopic level, simple and direct relationships between Navy investment expenditures (i.e., expenditures 
for acquisition of capital assets such as ships and aircraft), the characteristics of the assets acquired, 
the future ownership costs of these assets, and the ownership cost effects of readi- ness policy changes 
(i.e., changes in manning, maintenance, or operating policies). Ownership costs are estimated largely 
as a function of the accumulated level of investment assets (i.e., the dollar cost of all ships and aircraft 
in the fleet). Ownership costs change in two ways l) as a function of fleet characteristics such as ship 
tonnage, crew size and generating capac- ity, and average weight and thrust levels of aircraft, and 2) 
as a function of fleet mainte- nance, manning and operating policies. Both fleet characteristics and 
ownership costs (such as fuel prices and military salaries) change over time along historically-derived 
trends. The model reflects relative price changes, that is, it treats all costs and investment values 
in constant dollars so that inflation need be represented only in those costs which are grow- ing faster 
or slower than the overall inflation rate. Shown in Figure 1 is a simplified diagram of the basic model. 
This figure describes the budget process for only one year; the computer model repeats the cycle shown 
in the diagram each year, with each cycle dependent on the results of the previous years. The solid lines 
represent the parts of the model which are now operational. The dashed lines represent those parts which 
are experimental or projected for future exploration. The heart of the model is shown by the relation- 
ship between the budget, investment funding, cumulative investment assets, and required Rolf Clark ownership 
funds. It is saying, simply put, that for a given budget level, a decision must be made as to the division 
of available funds between aggregate investment (including R&#38;D) and owner- ship. Note that this decision, 
once made, inevitably affects the next year's decision through the feedback from levels of investment 
to required ownership funds. Higher levels of investment in assets eventually result in greater requirements 
for ownership funding, which in turn will limit the amount of procurement in future years. Ownership 
requirements may be underfunded to allow for more procurement as, for example, by reductions in readiness 
associated expenditures such as maintenance, manpower, or operations. The full model contains on the 
order of 1000 equations which represent the system shown in Figure 1. Clearly, a resource allocation 
process of this degree of complexity could not be exer- cised consistently and coherently by unaided 
mental processes. / .~ FUNDS (~SIICS X ~p // ~-'T~Tm ~ "J"" .Ell)GEl ~ ~ ~ WUAII~E NIDS \ / ;~ ..... 
. /~L~'" x // OWfERglIPF~ " ------~ ~" OWNF~IIP / SUPPLIB) IT~,OJlRED @PABILnY / -- Rrr~llE.~ ~ ~ POLICIES: 
... / ~" I~INIAINING (~I~VI~ Figure 1 Note in Figure 1 that fleet characteristics (such as average tonnage 
and generating capacity for ships, and average weight and thrust for air-craft), influence required ownership 
costs. This influence reflects results of estimations which have been performed using historical data. 
3. Estimations In order to estimate maintenance and operating costs the model uses estimating equations 
which relate these costs to aggregate characteristics of the ship and aircraft fleet. Maintenance costs 
historically have been strongly correlated with the investment cost of the weapons systems. Statistical 
research in support of the model has shown, for example, that naval aircraft mainte- nance costs can 
be predicted reasonably well at the aggregate level as a function of aircraft investment cost, average 
aircraft age, and operating level in flying hours per year per aircraft. Figure 2 shows a plot of the 
ratio of maintenance cost to aircraft investment cost for three categories of aircraft based on four 
years of maintenance data. Dynamic Long Range Budget Model 0INCmF'r mlh'TIOMJ4CE TO INgESTNIflT C~T MTI0 
0.24 T ,-รท i,m ..-"" fln hnn. aHu v i r i u n i i r r f f r f ! t" h h h h k h v r-lrl~l) WING N- JtI~ICOPT~ 
V -USIOL Figure 2 Note that this plot suggests a relationship between investment cost and maintenance 
cost which differs by aircraft category (e.g., fixed wing, helicopter and vertical/short take off). The 
variability of the ratio within categories suggests that other factors are at work as well. Using data 
such as this, estimating equations were derived through ordinary least squares techniques which predict 
aircraft annual mainte- nance. One of these equations (for fixed wing aircraft) is shown below. .88 .It 
c=.073 * Ic *Na Mc Maintenance cost (lO00's of 19835) Ic Investment cost (1000's of 19835) Na Average 
aircraft age (years) Operating costs (primarily fuel) for both ships and aircraft are estimated in a 
similar way. The per hour fuel estimating equations for both air-craft and ships are shown below. Aircraft 
.77 .37 Gph=79.0*W *Tw Gph Gallons per hour W Weight (lOOO Lbs) Tw Thrust to weight ratio Ships .30 .14 
Gph=20.1*W *Gc Gph Gallons per hour W Weight (Tons) Gc Generating capacity (Kw) Manpower costs are estimated 
using relationships to investment cost and a set of predicting equations developed by the Naval Personnel 
Research and Development Center (NPRDC) in San Diego, California. (Blanco and Liang, 1982) First, manpower 
afloat is predicted using historical relationships between afloat man-power and investment cost of assets 
(ships and aircraft are treated separately). Then the sup- port manpower burden is predicted using the 
NPRDC relationships between manpower afloat and man- power ashore. Differences in personnel skill levels 
and associated costs will be included in the version of the model which is now in develop- ment. Together, 
these costs (maintenance, fuel and man- power), constitute the bulk of ownership costs. Certain miscellaneous 
support costs, such as base operating support, medical support, and military construction are estimated 
as a constant or constantly growing percentage of other inde-pendent variables such as the total Navy 
budget or total cumulative investment value of the fleet. These ownership costs then become the model's 
estimate of the funding requirement to support projected force levels. An example of some excursions 
and their results may serve to illustrate. 4. Results Shown in Figure 3 is one of a number of output 
presentations which are available. In addition to the physical quantities (Ships and Aircraft) shown 
here, graphic or tabular output is easily produced for cost data by several different DOD accounting 
schemes (e.g. by appropriations, by mission elements, or by capability and readiness accounting). Cost 
data may also be output at several levels of detail from, say, total opera-tions and maintenance budget, 
down to ship and aircraft fuel, maintenance, manpower, and various miscellaneous cost categories. ~ L~ 
880 ~IPS D o All~qAn/lO m lSH 2014 Figure 3 The output shown in this example is for a hypo- thetical 
30 year run of the model from 1984 to 2014. The run assumes seven percent real growth in the total Navy 
budget for the first five years followed by one percent for the remaining 25 years. Other assumptions 
include real growth in manpower costs of 1.5 percent per year and two percent real growth in fuel costs. 
Note that a fairly steady growth rate in the fleet is main- tained until the late 90s. The growth occurs 
as a result of a substantial excess of funds available above ownership spending requirements during the 
first five years of accelerated (seven percent) budget growth. The fleet!s growth rate then tapers off 
and finally becomes negative as, during the outyears of moderate (one percent) growth, the available 
funding for 666 Samuel Graves, Rolf Clark investment declines as ownership requirements grow along with 
the fleet. The same dynamic is present in the aircraft line, with substantial growth during the first 
years followed by decline as the ownership costs of increased force levels require more and more of a 
more slowly growing budget. Aircraft fleet levels fall off faster primarily due to their short life span 
(15 years average) compared to ships (30 years). Note that while lagged effects such as these are relatively 
simple to represent in a computer model such as Resource Dynamics, they are most difficult to trace through 
by intuition or manual calculation. One of many possible financial presentations of the same excursion 
is shown as Figure 4. Here, the relationship between investment and owner- ship costs is shown. Investment 
expenditures (as a percentage of the total budget) begin at 40 percent, and grow to about 43 percent 
before beginning a decline which continues to the end of the run. Ownership costs (here including only 
maintenance and operating costs) begin to grow with a short lag behind investment. This growth reflects 
the increased ownership costs which are projected as the higher procurement adds to the level of total 
investment in ships and aircraft. (Recall that these ownership costs are strongly correlated with cumulative 
investment.) Minor cycles are apparent: for example, during the late 90's enough excess (after deducting 
required ownership expenditures) becomes available to increase the percent of budget to investment slightly; 
this excess is eliminated in about five years, as the increased force levels that it funded arrive in 
the fleet and add again to the ownership costs. IHUI3~mD4T VS O~a~lP COSTS P U ! JWI~l'Ki14T 0 F 38 D 
D Ole~BSHIP i-34 1984 2014 Figure 4 Similar to the many comparative excursions which were c~nducted for 
the Navy is the one shown in Figure 5 (here using hypothetical data). INt~ESlrN]O~T US GEm~RSHIP ~qSE 
I ~ 2 t l 50 ,.,.. R C 45 I J~I3TN~4TI EH ! Q 'ili ImJ~J~2 ~HIPI The Resource Dynamics model was used 
to assess the sensitivity of total budget requirements to such contingencies as increases in manpower 
compensation growth rates, and increases in fuel cost growth rates. The excursion shown here assumed 
a doubling of fuel cost growth rates from two percent annually to four percent. The figure compares base 
case (case i) allocations toward investment and ownership to those which result when fuel cost growth 
is doubled (case 2). Under the alternative assumptions, the percentage of budget to investment is typically 
lower by about one percent. The model is suitable for other excursions in addition to the cost excursion 
illustrated here; for example, it may be used to examine the effects of policy alternatives such as changes 
in the overall budget or changes in the force mix and thus in the aggregate fleet characteris-tics. In 
all, approximately ten procurement plans extending over a fifteen year period were exam-ined by the Navy 
during the fiscal year 1984 extended plan preparation process. Each of these cases was prepared in part 
through the use of the Resource Dynamics model described above. Acknowledgment This research was supported 
by ONR contract NOOOI4-82-K-OI50. References <RefA>Blanco, Thomas A. and Liang, Timothy T. 1982. A set of integrated 
analytical models for estimating aggregate military and civilian manpower for the Navy support establishment. 
Navy Personnel Research and Development Center, San Diego. Borsting, Jack R. 1982. Decision-making at 
the top. Management Science, Vol. 28, No. 4, (April), pp. 341-3--5i~. OJ~MIP2 25 1984 2814</RefA> Figure 5 
CAPTAIN RICHARD WILLIAM BARKER graduated from the Air Force Academy and was commissioned in 1978. He 
spent three years in Strategic Air Command in the intelligence data proceeding business. During his operational 
assignments, he completed an MBA program at Creighton University. After graduation from the Air Force 
Institute of Technology with a MS in Operations Research, he was assigned to the Air Force Operational 
Test and Evaluation Center, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico. He is currently serving as an Avionics 
Manager. and Electronics Logistics Analysis Address: Phone: 8201Colfax Avenue NE Albuquerque, NM 87111 
(505) 821-2316 CAPTAIN KENNETH C. KONWlN received his B.S. degree in Civil Engineering and commission 
from the United States Air Force Academy in 1974. He is a Senior Pilot with over 1700 hours flying time. 
During his operational assignments, Captain Konwin completed an MA in Management and Human Relations 
from Webster College. Since graduation from the Air Force Institute of Technology with a MS in Operations 
Research in 1982, he has become a member of Alpha Iota Delta, an honorary fraternity of the American 
Institute of Decision Sciences. He is currently serving as a mathematics instructor at the United States 
Air Force Academy, Colorado. Address: 5035 Horseshoe Bend Colorado Springs, CO 80917 Phone: (303) 597-4371 
 
			
