
 A Full Text Retrieval System with a Dynamic Abstract Generation Function Seiji Miike Etsuo Itoh Kenji 
Ono Kazuo Sumita {miike, etsuo, ono, sumita}(!isl. rdc. toshiba. co. Jp Research and Development Center 
Toshiba Corporation Komukai-Toshiba-cho 1, Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki, 210, Japan Abstract We have developed 
a Japanese full-text retrieval system named BREVIDOC * that enables the user to specify an area within 
a text for abstraction and to control the volume of the abstract interactively. This system analyzes 
a document structure using linguistic knowledge only and thus is domain-independent. In its text structure 
analysis, the system determines relations among paragraphs and sentences, based on linguistic clues such 
as connective, anaphoric expressions, and idiomatic expressions. The system analyzes and stores the text 
structure in advance so that it can generate an abstract in real time by selecting sentences according 
to relative importance of rhetorical relations among the sentences. The retrieval system works on an 
engineering workstation. *&#38;oadcatching System with an J@ence ~ewer for Retrieved ~urnents 1 Introduction 
Retrieval of documents from very large data collections or very large text databases may soon come into 
wide use (e.g. [1]). In order to make such retrieval more feasible, a document retrieval system must 
provide an efficient interface. In the research of human-computer interaction, visualizing and presenting 
information is one of the major topics. At present, concrete and abstract objects with hierarchical relations, 
such as a work space or directories, are the target of visualization (e.g. [2]). However, visualizing 
and presenting information and documents by analyzing and structuring their contents have not been realized 
so far. This will be important in document processing since information and documents continue to increase 
and text plays an important role in multimedia. To realize the aforesaid visualization and presentation, 
a method for analyzing and structuring con­tents of documents needs to be established. In computational 
linguistics, although efforts have been applied to analyze text structure and discourse structure (e.g. 
[3], [4], [5], [6]), little practical application has been presented, because of difficulties in building 
large lexicons and grammars as well as compu­tational complexity in analyzing texts from the standpoint 
of practical use. In comparison, most of knowledge-based systems tend to show good performance in limited 
domains, such as M&#38;A in financial news stories (e.g. [7]). This paper first presents our approach 
to the design and construction of a full-text retrieval system with a dynamic abstract generation function 
and the system configuration. Next, the component subsys­tems of the retrieval system are described: 
the document structure analyzer and the dynamic abstract generation function. Finally, an example of 
the operation of the retrieval system is shown. 2 Approach It is a burden on the user of a document 
retrieval system to select documents that she/he truly needs from the documents retrieved by the system. 
For content-based retrieval, robustness and extendability are important, especially for a practical use. 
If documents have abstracts, users can easily grasp their outline. Research has been carried out on automatic 
abstract generation. Here, the widely used simplified method is based on types of words or phrases in 
the sentences, and further progress in developing effective methods to represent knowledge and to analyze 
and understand language must be made [8]. 153 For interaction between a human and a document retrieval 
system, the system is desired to inter­actively generate and modify an abstract from the viewpoint of 
the user, which is not realized by the conventional met hod of preparing an abstract in advance by a 
human or computer. Keeping these points in mind, we have constructed a prototype of a full-text retrieval 
system named BREVIDOC that analyzes a document structure and interactively generates an abstract. The 
document structure analysis is based on linguistic knowledge only, therefore, the system is domain-independent. 
Moreover, since an abstract is generated according to relative importance of rhetorical relations among 
the sentences in a text, the abstract is coherent and qualitatively better than those generated through 
word-frequency-based abstraction [9]. In order to make it efficient for the user to select documents 
she/he needs, the system provides a dy­namic abstract generation function which enables the user to specify 
an area within a text for abstraction and to control the volume of the abstract interactively. In abstract 
generation, real-time processing is crucial to system performance from the viewpoint of human interface; 
however, the computational power of current workstations is insufficient for this purpose. To meet the 
demands of real-time response, the document structure analyzer extracts document structures and stores 
them in advance. 3 System Configuration Based on the approach described above, we have constructed a 
prototype of a full-text retrieval system with a function for dynamic abstract generation. Our prototype 
retrieval system consists of a document structure analyzer, a full-text search engine, and a dynamic 
abstract generation function. The system configuration is shown in Figure 1. In Figure 1, the dashed-line 
box represents the module executed before the real-time retrieval process, and the dashed-line arrows 
represent their data flow. The modules indicated by the solid lines are active in the retrieval process. 
We used the full-text search engine developed by Nakamoto et al.[10]. In advance, the document structure 
analyzer (Figure 2), described in the next chapter, extracts document structures from Japanese documents 
that are free of descriptive markup like SGML, and stores them in the document database. In a real-time 
retrieval process, the system retrieves documents which contain the given words. The system then generates 
an abstract of the retrieved document and presents it to the user. The retrieval system has been implemented 
on a UNIX-based engineering workstation, and applied to technical papers of monthly Toshiba Revtew and 
newspaper editorials of Asahl. Ongmal Text @ b User User s query Doamrem +4 i ,, Abstract Retrieval 
Generation I 44 B;?I Document Database Word Index Original Text ­se-sole + Document t t ,--1 Strrseture 
I 11 I1 Omwmm -1--------------------i -----1 , ----- I Dncument Structure Analysis I, 1---------------------------.-.--, 
Wwd Max ,1 E!!) Figure 1. System Configuration Figure 2. Configuration of Document Structure Analyzer 
 154 4 Document Structure Analyzer Figure2 shows the document structure analyzer which realizes four 
major processes: (1) document organization analysis (2) sentence analysis (3) text structure analysis 
 (4) semantic role extraction and word indexing  4.1 Document Organization Analysis A document composed 
of several sections has a structure. A technical paper, for example, consists of a preface, a set of 
sections and references, and a section consists of a heading and a text. In order to analyze the organization 
of sections the system finds a heading of each section based on the morphological characteristics of 
headings, e.g., they begin with a number or symbol character, they do not end by a period, they follow 
and precede a null line [11]. It also detects a space character at the beginning of a line to recognize 
the boundary of each paragraph in sections. The output of each document in the document organization 
analysis consists of the heading of each section, the scope of the body of the section, and the position 
of each paragraph in the section. 4.2 Sentence Analysis Each phrase or sentence is analyzed by a morphological 
analyzer and a syntactic analyzer [12], with a dictionary which has about 60,000 entries. The morphological 
analyzer constructs word lattice for input sentences and produces a sequence of word structures, which 
in turn will be the input of the syntactic analyzer. Since Japanese language is one of agglutinative 
languages, which means that there are no blanks bet ween adjoining words within a sentence, the morphological 
analyzer utilizes word connection informa­tion to eliminate morphologically implausible word sequences. 
The syntactic analyzer which emptoys an ATN-like fashion derives a syntactic structure for a string of 
categories in a sentence. Lexical ambiguities are resolved by eliminating category values that do not 
permit coherent word category combination, The sentence analysis speed is about 20,000 words per hour 
on an engineering workstation. 4.3 Text Structure Analysis This process analyzes the internal structure 
of the body of each section. In an ordinary text, rhetorical patterns are often used to clarify the argument. 
The typical connective expressions are connect ives and sentence predicates. We have divided them into 
34 categories as in Table 1. Here, connective expressions include not only connective such as therefore 
, but also idiomatic expressions stating relations to other part of text such as in addition and here 
is described. A text structure is represented by a binary tree analogous to a syntactic tree of a natural 
language sentence. The text structure analysis is composed of the following four major steps ([3], [13]). 
(1) Rhetorical relation extraction Rhetorical relations, some of which are shown in Table 1, are detected 
by matching with connective expressions described by 1,350 regular expressions and a sequence of sentence 
identifiers and relations is constructed. For a sentence without any explicit connective expressions, 
the extension relation <EX> is set to the sentence. (2) Segmentation Rhetorical expressions between distant 
sentences which define the text structure are detected by 150 z~-then rules. The I\part corresponds to 
linguistic surface patterns, e.g, . . . follows. First ., , Second . . . . The then-part represents a 
connection sequence embedded with constraint operators which are added onto the sequence produced in 
step (2) and put restrictions on structures to be generated in step (4), In addition, anaphoric expressions 
and their referents are extracted for segmenting the sequence. (3) Candidate generation All possible 
text structures are generated, using the binary trees which do not violate segmentation restrictions. 
The generation is performed in a bottom-up manner of sentence parsing by the CYK algorithm. For an example 
of a text composed of 6 sentences, only 6 candidates are generated, while 42 binary trees would be produced 
without the segmentation rules. (4) Preference judgment The structure candidate with the lowest penalty 
Score is selected by determining by 600 preference rules for every two neighboring relations in the candidate. 
For example, the sequence [[P <EG> Q] <SR> Table 1. Example of Rhetorical Relation relation expression 
serial <SR> yoiie (thus), sokode (then) summarization kekkyoku (after all), rnatomeru to (in summary) 
reason naze nara (because), sono wake wa (the reason is . ..) rephrase sunawachP (that is . . . ), iikaem 
to (in other words) negative shikashz (but), daga (alt bough) example <EG> tatoeba (for example), .. 
nado de arzi (and so on) background juuraz (previously), kor-e made (until now) direction koko dewa 
wo noberu (here . is described), konkaz (this time) parallel doujz n? (at the same time), mata (in addition) 
supplement <SP> nao (besides), . . wa ZU made mo naz (Needless to say . . . ) contrast ippou (however), 
bhanrnen (on the contrary) repetition (to w noha (in other words), sore wa (it is . ..) topic shift sate 
, tokorode (well, now) first alai zchi n? (first), mazu (first) extension <EX> k-ore wa (This is), sono 
youna . .. (Such . ..) R] is more preferable than [P KEG> [Q -cSR> R]], where each of P, Q and R represents 
a sentence (see Table 1). After the analysis of intra-paragraph structures, the analyzer analyzes inter-paragraph 
structures. In both analyses, the same steps are taken; the only difference is that the latter uses a 
rhetorical relation of the first sentence of each paragraph. Figure 3 shows a paragraph from an article 
titled A Zero-Crossing Rate Which Estimates the Frequency of a Speech Signal, where underlined words 
indicate connective expressions. Although the fourth and fifth sentences are clearly exemplifications 
of the first three sentences, the sixth is not. Also, the sixth sentence is the concluding sentence for 
the first five. Thus, the text structure for this text can be represented by a binary tree as shown in 
Figure 4. 1: In the context of d-lscrete time signals, zero­crossing is said to occur if successive samples 
have different algebraic signs. The rate at which zero crossings occur is a simple measure of the frequency 
content of a signal. This is particularly true of narrow band sig­nals. For example, a sinusoidal signal 
of frequency FO sampled at a rate f ,, has F, /F, samples per cycle of the sine wave. Each cycle has 
two zero crossings so that the long-term average rate of zero-crossings is z = 2Fo/F$. m, the average 
zero-crossing rate gives a reasonable way to estimate the frequency of a sine wave. (L.R.Rabiner and 
R. W.Schafer, Digital Processing of 1 2 3 4 5 6 Speech Signals, Prentice-HaLl, 1978, p.127.) Figure 4. 
Tree Structure for the Text in Figure 3 Figure 3. Text Example 156 4.4 Semantic role extraction and 
word indexing A document includes a number of predictable subtopics. Types of subtopics to be included 
in a document depend on the category of the document. For example, a research paper usually includes 
the background and the purpose of the research, the approach taken, and the conclusion, whereas a newspaper 
editorial includes the background and the writer s opinion The purpose of this procedure is to improve 
retrieval precision by recognizing the semantic role of sentences which include query words. The procedure 
is composed of the following three major steps [14]. (1) Semantic role extraction The system extracts 
the semantic role of each sentence in every document based on the semantic role extraction rules in a 
tf-then form. The conditional parts give syntactic patterns corresponding to the semantic roles and are 
matched with sub-trees obtained by morphologically and syntactically analyzing sentences. If the matching 
succeeds, the semantic roles of the sentences are determined. We have prepared 122 extraction rules with 
the semantic roles shown in Table 2 for analysis of technical papers. Table 2 also shows examples of 
linguistic expressions corresponding to the semantic roles. The variety of semantic roles necessary and 
sufficient to alanyze document structures must be determined through further experimentation. Table 2. 
Example of Semantic Roles semantic role expression topic . nttsuite kaisetsu suru . . . is explained), 
natsutte noberu (. is described) purpose . wo rnokutekz n? (for the purpose of . . . ), wo mezasu (. 
aim at. ) background juurat .,. (previously . ..). kznnen . te iru (recently has been -ing) feature 
tokuchou gu aru (. has the merits ), chuurnoku nZ stat .suru (. is worth notice) conclusion . wo hakatta 
(. . has been achieved), ( ga wakatta (. has been confirmed) remaining kongo tar? (in the future we wish 
to . ..). problems Lt.suiome te AI tar (we intend to ) In the current svstem, the result of svstactic 
analysis of sentences are onlv used for extractin~ semantic . roles. However the framework can be used 
for extracting semantic relations of the words in documents, and we plan to utilize such word relations 
in addition to the current word-based approach. (2) Semantic role projection This step projects the semantic 
role of a sentence extracted in step (1) onto the neighboring part of the text, by looking at the text 
structure. The projection is executed when a sub-text structure defined in the conditional part of the 
projection rule matches with an input text structure. For example, in a context such as The feature as 
follows First Second , the semantic role feature extracted from the first sentence is projected to the 
second and third sentences referencing the local text structure. Typical rhetorical relations used for 
the semantic role projection are parallel, example, supplement, summarization, rephrase and first. (3) 
Word indexing For every semantic role, a word index is generated from document ID s and words obtained 
by morphological analysis of sentences with that role. This word index is utilized for fast retrieval. 
5 Dynamic Abstract Generation Function The abstract generation function looks at the analyzed text structure 
for each section, and then generates an abstract based on relative importance of rhetorical relations. 
The relative importance of rhetorical relations are categorized into three types as shown in Table 3. 
For the relations categorized as RZghtNucleus, the right node is more important, than the left node from 
the viewpoint of abstract generation, than the left node. In the case of LeftNucleus relations, the situation 
is reversed, while both nodes of the Both Nuc/eirelat ions are equal in their importance. For example, 
since the right node of the serial relation (e.g., yoite (thus)) is the conclusion of the left node, 
the relation is categorized into RzghtNucleus, as the right node is more important than the left node. 
In order to determine important text segments, the system imposes penalties on a node for each rhetorical 
relation according to its relative import ante. The system imposes a penalty on the left node for the 
RightNucleus relation, and also on the right node for the LeftNucleus relation. In the current system, 
the penalty is always one. It then adds penalties from the root node to the terminal nodes, to calculate 
the penalties of all nodes. Then, it recursively cuts off the nodes, from the terminal nodes, which are 
imposed the highest penalty. The list of terminal nodes of the final structure becomes an abstract for 
the original document. If that abstract is longer than the expected length, the system cuts off terminal 
nodes of the last sentences, which have been imposed the same penalty score. Figure 5 is the result of 
carrying out the aforementioned penalty calculation on the tree structure in Figure-4. Table 3. Relative 
Importance of Rhetorical Type Relation Ty~e Relatlon ~mport. Node serial, RightNucleus summarization, 
right node direction, contrast, negative, . . . example, LeftNucleus reason, left node background, 1 
0 supplement, / 0 first, . . . BothNuclei parallel, extension, rephrase, both nodes Figure 5. Penalties 
on Relative Importance the Text Structure in Figure 4 for repetition, toRic shift. . . . In Figure 5, 
the italic numbers are the pena~ties the system imposed on each node of the structure, and the broken 
lines are the boundaries between the nodes with different penalty scores. The figure shows that the sentences 
four and five have penalty score two, that the sentences one, two and three have one, and that the sentence 
six has no penalty score. In this case, the system selects sentence six as the shorte>l, abstract. lL 
could also wkct the seutences one and six as a longer abstract. Example Retrieval from 386 analyzed documents 
of Toshiba Revzew and abstract generation are described. (1) Analysis of the user s query The user can 
input her/his query sentence in Japanese as shown in Ex. 1. The query is analyzed by the same morphological 
and syntactic analyzer as in the document structure analyzer. The sentence analyzer analyzes the query 
and extracts a semantic role and content words. Ex.2 shows t,he semantic role and the content words extracted 
by analyzing the sentence in Ex. 1. The user can modify them if necessary, and set sernentic roles and 
words explicitly. f3X.1 &#38;ZE+OWi?2Ei%Lf: kC ). Documents whose aim is to reduce human exposure to 
radiation. (in translation) EX.2 El M : &#38;%/@ii&#38; purpose: exposure to radiation / reduction (in 
translation) (2) Retrieval The system retrieves documents according to the content words in Ex.2 based 
on boolean search, using the word index for the semantic role purpose. As the result of retrieval, the 
system shows a list of retrieved documents in the left window, an abstract of a document at the top of 
the list in the middle window, and its original text in the right window as shown in Figure 6. In the 
left Window, the Litk, the authors and the first part of the shortest abstract generated from the original 
abstract for each retrieved document are shown. Figure 7 shows the translation of the content of the 
left window. In the middle window, the system first shows the title, authors, a sentence selected from 
the original abstract, and headings of the chapters and sections as shown based on the extracted document 
structure of the retrieved d~cument. Figure 8 shows the translation of the content of the middle window. 
GmGE!D .. ~ -. .. -.- - -Iwloma J Wm)l (*) *mJFfmmmK I 9WX!!H : !J!Xwl (*) wlw~l Cu6trutlm of lklit 
bl, rlwasa ?XH@w fwlear Fwer S1alim * :Wmm3m<R m m :JMmmTJluRm8Bimw41tz. mix =wAttIl (1 ) K5X! (2) -*(3) 
lwul (1%) EJlm%b%wriwll %lC4, l%wJ52 MWeUJBWR~_15$1J, HKf059~f3H I B~&#38;M 4 r m!%w (l) mlE (2) -*(3) 
wt.. TMwit N&#38;l 01 ~ t4X16W PCaOrStatl~TChW E ectric Pwer m., Im. is a tW4-1 tme S24+ ~ plmt.1 lb 
gat tk ar*r Ior tha blm ad mtrwtlm * a In cmtractor, zrd WIetd lb pkn! to bn PA Into om rcial cwratim 
last JUU C4wrlptim is I@ h?re of the hl!$ll$lts In Its *I9 cmstrwltm ad test vratlm II will M 0! MM lhat: 
(1) th, smit ,saw t~h in a tlM4-1 type primary cmtaimmt wsm: (2) the cwdrwlica v.xk b k _letsd In mly 
42 wmtb .1 th4 start in ~r Iam; a [a) ttmnaker of Em u its CC4PleleUby T@4NtMh rmd d tO 10 w,th th, s 
m,t t0t81iW I@ to 7,214 ma in altwt mlty. 1 Figure 6. Retrieval Result 1 ConstructIon of Umt No.1. O 
na~awa N uclear Power Station AUTHOR Kago, J., Fujita, K. ~nd Takiguchi, Y. CONTENT : The unit No. 1 
of Onagawa Nuclear Power Station, Tohoku Electric 2 Improvement and Development of Boiling Water Reactor 
AUTHOR: Masuda, K. and Fukazawa, M. CONTENT : Current status of the improvement and development of these 
BWR 3 Liquid and Solid Radwaste Management AUTHOR Irie, H. and Tajima, F. CONTENT : As for the reduction 
of radiation condensation of laundry wastes 4 X-Ray-TV Diagnostic Tables, W Series AUTHOR Masuzawa, Y., 
Nakamura, H. and Kubo, A. CONTENT : W series which is the new product of the TV fluoroscopic system 5 
Remote Handling Equipment for Nuclear Instrumentation AUTHOR: Shimada, H., Kate, H. and Kate, T. CONTENT 
: These. for operations ~erformed in a radioactive environment Figure 7. Translation of the List shown 
in the Left Window in Figure 6 Since the first document has the expression underlined in its text in 
Figure 9 (the underlines are drawn by the authors of this paper), it is included among the retrieved 
five d~cuments. (3) Abstract generation The system provides the user with an abstract of any specified 
area within the text, such as a chapter or a section, and in this way the length oft he abst r act can 
be controlled interactively. Moreover, sentences which are being displayed in the abstract window are 
colored in the original text window, so that the correspondence between the two windows can easily be 
seen. When the user points at any position in the abstract window with a mouse, and then clicks the button 
% L { (kuwashiku, in detail) or i%&#38; K (kantanni, in short) , the system identifies a chapter or section 
where the pointed position is contained and generates an abstract of the chapter or section. When the 
button =# L { (in detail) is chosen, the system lowers the threshold by which an abstract is generated. 
In the case that the button f%% i: (in short) is chosen, the situation is reversed. Figure 10 shows the 
abstract generated by pointing at an area above chapter 1 and clicking #L < (in detail) once. Figure 
11 shows what happens when % L { (in detail) is clicked again. Figure 12 -s Construction of Unit No.1, 
Onagawa Nuclear Power StatIon Kago, J., Fujita, K. and Takiguchi, Y. The unit No. 1 of Onagawa Nuclear 
Power Station, Tohoku Electric Power Co., Inc. is a MARK-I type 524-MWe BWR plant and wss put into commercial 
operation in June 1, 1984. 1. Introduction 2. Organization and Main Features of the Plant 3. Construction 
Steps  3.1 Setting the Primary Containment Vessel 3.2 Rationalizing the Inspection 3.3 Maintenance and 
the Overall Inspection of the Plant (a)RPV Water Pressure Test (b) Before Loading the Fuel (c)Before 
Commercial Operation 3.4 Construction of a Clean Plant 3.5 Avoiding Emergency Halt of the Plant 3.6 
Completing the Construction in Only 48 Months 4. Test Run 5. Conclusion  Figure 8. Translation of 
the Abstract shown in the middle window in Figure 6 3. 4 9 ) 77921-OE% tiJlll%&#38;li&#38;*4@fi ha&#38; 
K5?-EL75hu~ &#38;77 Yho&#38;*&#38;Es Lr 4 .Y7Y7 5>i-#FI&#38; &#38;Rl%f Lfi. ?!) ->?? > bfia Ti2&#38;4#BBs@%*B 
atiti Dfia@9 97 F4EW*X ?Yx%kM%?i!llI&#38;l% mcD%i%E#fHk:J 3EEJ+O? 57 FmA@mtiJ* 4vi!El#f*@ &#38;?%M%i%El@Lfa 
k @T. iX14 ic%~R%Wtifi%%EtMWi~%~Ltco 3.4 Construction of the Clean Plant From the construction to the 
test run of Onagawa I Power Station, we consistently followed the Clean Plant Strategy in the hope of 
building a clean plant. The clean plant strategy aims at reduc­ing clads for reducing the amount of radioactive 
wastes, suppressing the inflow of clads into the fur­nace by keeping the inner surface oft he apparatus 
tubes clean, and reducing exposure to radiation when the plant is in operation. We carried out our concrete 
plans s~ Flg.4. Figure 9. Text in the First Document and its Translation shows the translation of the 
sentences shown in Figure 10, and Figure 13 shows the translation of those in Figure 11. In Figure 11 
and 13, one sentence is inserted. The user can skim retrieved documents interactively using this function. 
n!tvl (*) 4dliRFMmf%i3 1WoxY!%? =W!k!lE (1) EIEK (2) KW* (3) I . *M* 2. 75> tMl&#38;Em#k Figure 10. The 
2nd Abstract Figure 11. The 3rd Abstract The unit No. 1 of Onaxawa Nuclear Power Sta­ tion, Tohoku Electri~ 
Power Co., Inc. is a MARK-1 type 524MWe BWR plant and was put into commercial operation in June 1, 1984. 
This unit, a BWR-4 type housed in a MARK- The unit No. 1 of Onazawa Nuclear Power Sta-1 tvpe primary 
containment vessel, incorm­tion, Tohoku Electri~ Power Co., Inc. is a ra;e~ s~veral ~ewest techniques 
and mos; of MARK-1 type 524-MWe BWR plant and was the results obtained during the reform stan­put into 
commercial operation in June 1, 1984. dardization which was led by the Ministry of Toshiba got the order 
for the design and con-International Trade and Industry. Toshiba got struction as a main contractor, 
and completed the order for the design and construction as a the plant to be put into commercial operation 
main contractor, and completed the plant to in only 48.5 months since the start in Decem-be put into 
commercial operation in only 48.5 ber 1979. months since the start in December 1979. Figure 12. Translation 
of Sentences in Figure 10 Figure 13. Translation of Sentences in Figure 11 Preliminary Experiment (1) 
Text structure analysis 114 paragraphs among 18 papers of Toshiba Review were analyzed, and correct text 
structures were produced for about 74% of the man-made structures [3]. (2) Key sentence coverage The 
generated abstracts of 42 papers of Toshiba Review and 30 editorials of Asahi were compared with their 
key sentences selected by a hand. As for 24%-abstracts (the percentage signifies the ratio of the number 
of sentences in the abstract to that in the original text), the coverages of the key sentences and the 
most important key sentence were 51% and 7470 respectively. Whereas, as for 30%-abstracts, the coverages 
were Al~o and 60Y0. On the other hand, w for the papers, the coverages of key sentences and the most 
important key sentence selected by three subjects were 60Y0 and 8070. As for the editorials, the coverages 
were 6070 and 6070. (3) Abstract browsing The time for selecting retrived editorials of Asahi with the 
dynamic abstract generation function and only with the original text browsing function was compared. 
In each case, five subjects selected editorials among several ten editorials ret rieved by each of some 
queries. The time using the abstract generation function was about 80% of the time using only the original 
text browsing function, while precision and recall remained more or less the same. Conclusion A full-text 
retrieval system with a dynamic abstract generation function has been developed. The ab­stract is generated 
based on rhetorical relations among sentences extracted by analyzing a document structure. The dynamic 
abstract generation function enables the user to skim through each of the re­trieved documents and judge 
whether it is really required or not efficiently. A preliminary experiment shows that this function is 
effective. We plan to improve it by incorporating semantic roles of sentences and extra-linguistic knowledge 
in order to generate an abstract from a viewpoint of the user. Acknowledgment The authors would like 
to thank Isamu Iwai, Yukio Nakamoto, Hideki Hirakawa and Kimihito Takeda for productive discussions; 
Yumi Mizut ani and Tetsuya Sakai for their help with thes ystem implementation. References <RefA>1. Harman, 
D.: The DARPA TIPSTAR Project , SIGIR Forum, VO1.26, No.2, pp.26-28, 1992. 2. Card, S.K., Robertson, 
G. G., Mackinlay J.D.: The Information Visualizer, An Information Work­place , Proc. of CHI 91, pp.181-187, 
1991. 3. Sumita, K., One. K., Chino, T., Ukita, T. and Amano, S.: A Discourse Structure AnaJyzer for 
Japanese Text , Proc. Int. Conf. Fifth Generation Computer Systems 1992 (FGCS 92], pp. 1133-1140, 1992. 
 4. Cohen, R.: Analyzing the Structure of Argumentative Discourse , Computational Linguistics, VO1.13, 
pp.11-24, 1987. 5. Mann, W. C., Thompson, S.A.: Rhetorical Structure Theory: A Framework for the Analysis 
of Texts , USC/Information Science Institute ResearchReport, RR-87-190, 1987. 6. Grosz, B.J., Sidner, 
C. L.: Attention, Intentions and the Structure of Discourse , Computational Linguistics, VO1.12, pp.175-204, 
1986. 7. Jacobs, P., Rau, L.: SCISOR Extracting information from on-line news , CA CM, VO1.33, No.11, 
PP.88-97, 1990. 8. Salton, G.: Automatic Text Processing, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, PP.439-448, 
1989. 9. Chino, T., Ukita, T., One, K., Sumita, K.: Implementation and Evaluation of Automatic Text 
Skimming System for Japanese Explanatory Texts (in Japanese) , Proc. of IPSJ .#6th National Conf, VO1.3, 
pp.189-190, 1993. 10. Nakamoto, Y., Nogami, K., Yajima, M., Tanosaki, Y.: An Experiment of Full Text 
Retrieval by Japanese Analysis Method (in Japanese) , Proc. of IPSJ i6th National Conf., VO1.3, pp.125-126, 
1993. 11. Sumita, K., One, K., Miike, S.: Document Structure Extraction for Interactive Document Retrieval 
Systems , Proc. of SIGDOC 93, pp.301-310, 1993. 12. Hirakawa, H., Nogami, H., Amano, S: EJ/JE Machine 
Translation System ASTRANSAC -Exten­sions toward Personalization , Proc. of MT SUMMIT III, pp.73-80, 
1991. 13. One, K., Sumita, K., Chino, T., Ukita, T.: Discourse Structure Analysis for Automatic Text 
Skimming System for Japanese Explanatory Texts (in Japanese) , Proc. of IPSJ i6th National Conj, VO1.3, 
pp.187-188, 1993. 14. Sumita, K., One, K., Miike, S.: Document Structure Extraction for Interactive 
Full-Text Retrieval , Proc. of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium(NLPRS) 93, pp.144-152, 
1993.   </RefA>
			
