
 A Hierarchical Illumination Algorithm for Surfaces with Glossy Re.ection Larry Aupperle Pat Hanrahan 
Department of Computer Science Princeton University Abstract We develop a radiance formulation for discrete 
three point transport, and a new measure and description of re.ectance:area re.ectance. This formulation 
and associated re.ectance allow an estimate of er­ror in the computation of radiance across triples of 
surface elements, and lead directly to a hierarchical re.nement algorithm for global illumination. We 
have implemented and analyzed this algorithm over surfaces exhibiting glossy specular and diffuse re.ection. 
Theoretical growth in light transport computation is shown to befor suf.cient nO e n i kk 3 h re.nement, 
where is the number of elements at the .nest level of subdivision over an environment consisting ofinput 
polygonal patches this growth is exhibited in experimental trials. Naive application of three point 
transport would require computation overO e n 3 h element-triple interactions. CR Categories and Subject 
Descriptors: I.3.7 [Computer Graph­ ics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism. Key Words: adaptive 
meshing, global illumination, radiosity, ray tracing.  1 Introduction A major open problem in image 
synthesis is the ef.cient solution of the rendering equation. Radiosity methods have been quite success­ful 
over environments containing surfaces that exhibit only diffuse re.ection. Unfortunately, very few materials 
are purely Lamber­tian re.ectors, and ef.cient solution techniques have not yet been developed for more 
general specular or glossy re.ection functions. The rendering equation is an integral equation, and the 
solutions to complicated integral equations are generally obtained using either Monte Carlo or .nite 
element techniques. Monte Carlo algorithms sometimes go under the name of distributed or stochastic ray 
tracing and are the most commonly employed in computer graphics (e.g. see [4, 5, 9, 12, 16]). Monte Carlo 
techniques have the advantage that they are easy to implement and can be used for complicated geometries 
and re.ection functions. Unfortunately, their disadvan­tage is that they are notoriously inef.cient. 
The second approach, the .nite element method, has been very successfully applied to the rendering equation 
under the radiosity assumption, but has only begun to be employed in the general case, and with limited 
success. For example, Immel et al. [8] discretized radiance into a lattice of cubical environment maps, 
and solved the resulting system. More recently, Sillion et al. [13] used a mesh of spherical harmonic 
func­tions to represent radiance, and solved the resulting system using a shooting algorithm. Permission 
to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or 
distributed for direct provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, 
the ACM copyright notice and the title of the commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the 
title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by publication and 
its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
To copy permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. otherwise, or to republish, requires 
a fee and/or specific permission. otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
&#38;#169;1993 ACM -0 -89791 -601 -8/93/008 $1.50 &#38;#169;1993 ----8/93/008/0015 $1.50 There are many 
ways to parameterize the rendering equation, and each leads to a different choice of basis functions. 
In the transport theory community two techniques are common: directional sub­division (the method of 
discrete ordinates or ), and spherical P N S N harmonics (). These two techniques roughly correspond 
to the methods of Immel et al. and Sillion et al., although many interest­ing variations are possible. 
Our approach is somewhat different, and based on Kajiya s original formulation of the rendering equation 
[9]. Under this formulation, the rendering equation is expressed in terms of three point transport. That 
is, the kernel of the integral expresses the transport of light from a point on the source to a point 
on the receiver, via a point on a re.ector. Given this formulation, the three point rendering equation 
can be discretized over pairs of elements to form a linear system of equations. Solving this system yields 
the radiance transported between elements. Note that this approach is very similar to the radiosity formulation. 
The problem with .nite element methods is that the matrix of interactions is very large for interesting 
environments. For a given environment of input polygonal patches containing elements k 3 n at the .nest 
level of re.nement, the three point discretization that we are proposing generates an matrix of interactions. 
However, in this paper we show that we can accurately approximate the O e n i nk 3 h n 3 re.ectance matrix 
with blocks, in a way very similar to our recent hierarchical radiosity algorithm [7]. In that paper 
we showed how the form factor matrix could be approximated withO e n i k 2 h n 2 blocks, resulting in 
a very ef.cient algorithm in both space and time. Although the results presented in this paper are preliminary, 
we believe a hierarchical .nite element approach along these lines will ultimately lead to a fast, ef.cient 
algorithm. In the following section we describe our application of the .­nite element element method 
to the three point rendering equation, yielding a radiance formulation for discrete transport. In Section 
3 we present a simple adaptive re.nement algorithm for computation over this formulation, and the iterative 
solution technique employed for the actual calculation of transport. In Section 4 we discuss our implementation 
of the algorithm over glossy re.ection, and in Sec­tion 5 we present some experiments and results. An 
appendix to this paper contains details of our error analysis for discrete transport under the glossy 
model. 2 Discrete Three Point Transport The algorithm presented in this paper operates through two func­tions: 
re.nement of the environment to form a hierarchy of discrete interactions, patches and elements, and 
the actual computation of illumination over this hierarchy. In this section we develop the basis for 
both discretization and transport. We derive a radiance formulation for three point transport, and a 
new measure and description of re.ectance, area re.ectance. This radiance formulation and associated 
re.ectance provide a natu­ral criterion for discretization under illumination and re.ection, and allow 
both the computation of radiance across triples of individual surface elements, and the expression and 
computation of all light transport over all surfaces. 2.2 Area Re.ectance The quantity has a natural 
and satisfying physical signi.cance it is an expression of re.ectance over areas , , and . Consider the 
fraction of the radiant .ux transported from incident to that is re.ected in the direction of area : 
R A i R A j R A k R j f krj e i R x A i x R 0 A x j 00 L he Lx e x x 0 x h 0 G h G e x e x x 0 x h dx 
0 h G 0 Adx e x i 0 Ax j 00 A h dx k 00 Adx k 0 dxA i If we assume that incident radiance is uniform 
and isotropic over both (as induced by ) and , we may divide through by , yielding: L e jx e Ax i 0 i 
0 h R A Aj i j R A e A A k j i h R i A Aj k fA rk e R x h A A i i x R 0 A x j 00 G h AG e x j e x x 0 
x h 0 dx h G 0 dx e x 0 x 00 h dx 00 dx 0 dx We de.ne to be area re.ectance. Note that area re.ectance 
is similar to biconical re.ectance [11], save that it is also integrated over the re.ecting surface. 
By de.nition of : R ij R kijk j e A i A j A k h Conservation of energy over re.ection, and the reciprocity 
rela­tion derived for above, constitute fundamental properties of area re.ectance: X R ijk n R 1 ijk 
ij 1. ,for.xed , . A ki F ij R ijk A k F kj R kji 1 where equality is achieved in property over complete 
enclosures and perfect re.ectivity. 2.3 Evaluation of  A i A j A k R kji R kji In this section we examine 
the evaluation ofover given patches ,, . Recall: R 2. kji R A k R A j R A i f R r e A x k 00 R A x 0 
. Gx he Gx 00 e xx 000 h xdx 0 h 0 Gdx e x 000 x h dxdx 0 dx 00 We assume that discrete areas , , are 
of small enough scale that and are relatively constant over their surfaces. Then: f r RG kji S kj i 
GAG kikjj GAA jjik A A kjk A j A i where is the discretized value of , . FF jij i AS i S kji A i R k 
A jj S ik GA jikj G i FA j f ijr GA i S e i S k x ijj 0 ik xF h ji S kji A i S x k x j x AR i jkji Note 
that the average value of over and is we thus estimate by , and compute as: In practice, it will not 
be possible to compute the exact values of and over , , . We assume that we are able to estimate these 
values, along with error bounds for each estimation. Letandbe error estimates for computed and , respectively. 
We then have an estimate for area re.ectance in the form: R kj i F j v i F e j F i S j i ki S j iF ik 
j i i F j S i he k F j SR j iki i k S jjik i iS j i k i ji S e k S j F ik hj i SF kj i j h i ii F j 
F i S jik ji FSS kjkij h jii h Assuming,, we have neglected the last term and estimate the error in 
as . In general, and as is shown for glossy re.ection in Section 4, the accuracy of estimators for and 
is dependent on the F ji S kji size of the patches over which re.ectance is computed, relative to their 
distance apart. As relative size decreases, so does error in computation, leading directly to the adaptive 
re.nement strategy for illumination presented in Section 3 below. 3 Algorithms for Three Point Transport 
3.1 Introduction Recall equation (2):  L jk E jk i X i L ij R kji This equation suggests both a solution 
strategy for radiance under three point transport, and a natural representation for illumination within 
the solution system. We may interpret equation (2) as a gathering iteration similar to that employed 
for radiosity under diffuse re.ection: the radianceat patch in the direction of patch is found by gathering 
radiances in the direction of at patches . We may solve for transport by gathering radiance for each 
, and successively iterating to capture all signi.cant re-re.ection. We are left with the question of 
what structure we are gathering over and iterating upon. Note that all illumination is expressed as the 
radiance at a given patch in the direction of another it is these patch-patch interactions that form 
the primary structure within the solution system. All operation is over interactions: both the representation 
and transport of radiance, and the iteration and solution for illumination. Consider the following structure: 
 L jk L ij A j A j A k L jk A i typedef struct _interaction { Patch *from; Patch *to; Color L; Color 
Lg; List *gather; struct _interaction *nw, *sw, *se, *ne; } Interaction; A given interaction is de.ned 
by two patches ij->fromand ij ij->to, and represents the radiance at from in the direction of to. This 
radiance is stored within the interaction as attribute L. Lg is radiance gathered during the current 
solution iteration from interactions contained in the list gather. Subinteractions nw, sw, se, ne are 
the children of , induced by subdivision over either ij from or to. The structure assumes quadtree re.nement, 
leaving northwest, southwest, southeast, and northeast descendants. In the following sections we will 
present an algorithm for the re.nement and computation of illumination over a hierarchy of interactions. 
The algorithm will operate by re.ning pairs of inter­actions , (such that ij->to == jk->from), to ensure 
that ijjkijjkijjk computed re.ectance across the interaction pairs, and associated patch triples, satis.es 
user speci.ed error bounds. If a given in­teraction pair , is satisfactory, the interactions are linked 
to record that radiance may be gathered from to , otherwise one or both interactions are subdivided and 
re.nement applied to their descendants. After re.nement, a gathering iteration may be carried out, each 
interaction gathering radiance from interactions to which it has been linked. The gathered radiances 
are then distributed within each re­ceiving interaction hierarchy, and subsequent iterations computed 
until satisfactory convergence has been achieved. Note that, within this system, the eye may be regarded 
as simply another object with which patches may interact. The radiance along interactions to the eye 
provides the resulting view. 3.2 Adaptive Re.nement Consider the following procedure: Refine(Interaction 
*ij, Interaction *jk, float Feps, float Seps, float Aeps) { float feps, seps; feps = GeometryErrorEstimate(ij); 
seps = ReflectionErrorEstimate(ij, jk); if (feps < Feps &#38;&#38; seps < Seps) Link(ij, jk); else 
if (seps >= Seps) { switch(SubdivS(ij, jk, Aeps)) { case PATCH_I: Refine(ij->nw, jk, Seps, Feps, Aeps); 
Refine(ij->sw, jk, Seps, Feps, Aeps); Refine(ij->se, jk, Seps, Feps, Aeps); Refine(ij->ne, jk, Seps, 
Feps, Aeps); break; case PATCH_J: /* refine over children of ij and jk */ case PATCH_K: /* refine over 
children of jk */ case NONE: Link(ij, jk); } } else { /* feps >= Feps */ switch(SubdivG(ij, jk, Aeps)) 
{ /* refine over children, or link, as */ /* directed by PATCH_I, J, K, or NONE. */ } } This procedure 
computes over pairs of interactions, and associated patch triples, subdividing and recursively re.ning 
if estimated error exceeds user speci.ed bounds, linking the interactions for gathering if the bounds 
are satis.ed, or if no further subdivision is possible. Fepsand Sepsare the bounds for geometric and 
re.ection error, respectively; Aepsspeci.es the minimum area a patch may possess and still be subdivided. 
GeometryErrorEstimate and Re­ flectionErrorEstimateprovide estimations for and . SubdivS and SubdivG 
control re.nement for re.ection and geometry error, respectively. Both routines select a patch for re.ne­ment, 
subdividing the patch and associated interaction(s) if required. An identi.er for the selected patch 
is returned if no patch may be subdivided, then NONE is passed back. Note that a given in­teraction/patch 
may be re.ned against many different interactions within the system, and thus may have already been subdivided 
when selected by a Subdiv routine in this case, the routine simply returns the proper identi.er. The 
Subdiv routines should select for re.nement patches that are of large size relative to their distance 
from their partner(s) in the transport triple. Form factor estimation is a convenient criterion for the 
determination of such patches a large differential to area form factor indicates that patch is of large 
relative size. Care must S } kji F ji F ji S kji F dpq q be taken in subdivision, however, to ensure 
that each interaction is always subdivided in the same way for all re.nements involving that interaction. 
The Subdiv routines thus choose for re.nement the patch of size at least Aepsthat is of greatest form 
factor within and/or that will not induce multiple sets of children over either interaction.p k p k p 
j p j p j ijijjkp i jpk i If patch is of greatest form factor over both and , and of area greater than 
Aeps, then it is chosen for re.nement (Figure 3 at middle). Otherwise, if is selected over one interaction, 
but or is selected over the other, then the outside patch is chosen for re.nement. Given two selected 
outside patches, SubdivS selects the one of greater form factor relative to ; SubdivG selects over , 
as has no direct effect on geometric accuracy. Note, however, that even under SubdivG, if only and are 
allowed p j p k p j p k subdivision, will be selected, although with further subdivision the triple will 
eventually balance suf.ciently to allow re.nement over . Figure 3: Re.nement and Subdivision 3.3 Gathering 
Radiance Gathering radiance over interactions may be written as a simple procedure: Gather(Interaction 
*jk) { Interaction *ij; if (jk) { jk->Lg = 0; ForAllElements(ij, jk->gather) jk->Lg += ij->L * Reflectance(ij, 
jk); Gather(jk->nw); Gather(jk->sw); Gather(jk->se); Gather(jk->ne);  } } We gather radiance into 
jk->Lg rather than directly into jk->L to avoid the necessity of a push/pull with every invocation of 
the procedure (see Section 3.4). The solution method is thus simple Jacobi iteration, as opposed to Gauss-Seidel, 
as the hierarchical structure imposes simultaneous rather than successive displacement. 3.4 Radiance 
within a Hierarchy A gathering iteration results in received radiance scattered through­out each interaction 
hierarchy. This gathered radiance must be dis­tributed and accounted for over all ancestors and descendants 
of each receiving interaction, in order to maintain the consistency and correctness of the hierarchical 
representation of radiance between patches. We employ a distribution algorithm similar to that presented 
in [7] for radiosity over patch/element hierarchies: gathered radiance is pushed to the leaf interactions 
within each hierarchy to ensure propagation to all descendants, and then pulled and distributed back 
up from the leaves through all higher level interactions to their common ancestor at the root. As is 
shown in [2], radiance may be pushed unchanged within the interaction hierarchy, and area averaged as 
it is pulled from child to parent.  4 Application over Glossy Re.ection In this section we discuss our 
implementation of the above algo­rithms over glossy re.ection. 4.1 The Re.ection Function We employ 
a highly simpli.ed Torrance-Sparrow [15] model for our glossy re.ection function: f g e n i n r h b 8i2coscos 
i. cos mr sh e ir hcos Fm This function incorporates the facet distribution function developed by Blinn 
[3], normalized for projected facet area under  Figure 4: Estimating Cones . r Figure 5: , , and C 
m nn mi [10]. Angle is that made to the mean surface normal by , the microfacet mirror orientation normal 
lying halfway betweenand f g .  n r sh m e ir .h i sh i 1 r 0 ir Function expresses self-shadowing over 
microfacets for near specular surfaces, such self-shadowing or masking does not become critical until 
relatively high or [6]. The imple­mented system thus simply clamps from to when or exceeds a preset bound 
near the horizon. This scheme serves as a crude approximation to the shadowing function; however, a better 
strategy would be to employ a much fuller tabulation of the func­tion, incorporated into the error analysis 
presented below. A more complete discussion of shadowing and conservation of energy over is presented 
in [2]. 4.2 Error Estimation Recall the general expression for error derived in Section 2.3: A i e F 
ji S kji i S kji FA jji h F ji F d A ji In implementation we have estimated the form factor by , the 
form factor from a differential area at to a disk of area centered at , as was employed in [7]. As discussed 
in [7], the relative error in this estimate is proportional to the estimate itself. In our implementation 
we have thus estimated absolute error as at most proportional to .A brief discussion of relative and 
absolute error over hierarchical methods is presented in [2]. We now consider the error estimate . As 
discussed in the appendix to this paper, we may compute bounding cones , , and over all possible incident, 
re.ected, and mirror orientation directions induced at by and (Figures 4 and 5 these .gures are discussed 
more fully in the appendix). We may then  F d 2 ji F ji C m bA j A i cos A Fkm S k cos jii cos r C 
i C r compute maximum and minimum, , over these cones, and estimate error by interval width. The full 
expression for estimated error over transport is given in the appendix. 4.3 Clamping and Visibility Evaluation 
of glossy re.ectance over three surface areas, as required by the gather iteration, may be dif.cult, 
particularly if surface sub­division has been limited by Aepsrather than satisfaction of error bounds, 
and if , the facet distribution exponent, has high value. In this case we must estimate the integral 
of a spikey function over a relatively broad area. Our solution is to band limit the BRDF in a fashion 
similar to that presented by Amanatides [1]. We employ the cone estimation techniques of the previous 
section to determine if the BRDF varies signi.cantly over the given patches if this variance exceeds 
a set bound, we roughen the re.ecting surface, loweringto b broaden the resulting re.ection over the 
estimated cones. We then renormalize the resulting blurred function, as described in [1], to Figure 
6: Geometric Con.gurations prevent ampli.cation of its low frequency components. We note that the resulting 
antialiasing is relatively aggressive, signi.cantly dimming or eliminating re.ections requiring overmuch 
blurring. In implementation, we have computed visibility via jittered ray casting and inheritance similar 
to that of [7], storing visibility data in interactions as it is computed.  5 Results 5.1 Growth in 
Transport We have measured the growth in transport triples (linked interac­tions) versus , the maximum 
number of elements at the .nest level n of subdivision, over parallel, perpendicular, and oriented patches 
(Figure 7). The corresponding geometries are shown in Figure 6. The graphs show linear or near linear 
behavior over each range the graph of triples vs. for the perpendicular case is slightly con­ n cave 
over the lower data points, but subsides to linear with further re.nement. In previous work [7] on hierarchical 
re.nement for radiosity, it was shown that for error estimate proportional to, and suf.cient cnkcF dji 
re.nement, each subpatch may only interact with other patches in a limited local neighborhood. As discussed 
in [7], each patch may thus participate in at most interactions, for some constant independent of and 
. Adaptive re.nement thus generates at most transport interactions. We will show a similar bound for 
discrete three point transport under glossy re.ection. Recall that the estimate for error in computed 
transport is pro­portional to . Our argument depends on two assumptions:  O e n h F ji S kji i S k S 
jikji F ji S kj S i S 1. We may bound both and by some max. As discussed below, the lower this max, the 
smaller the magni­tude of the leading coef.cient underling the resulting bound. Note that our argument 
thus does not apply to perfect specular re.ection, as the corresponding BRDF incorporates the Dirac delta 
function [11]. Equivalently, the argument does not hold overfor b 1 bS f g (inducing mirror re.ection), 
as we can not provide a .nite bound for in this case. For .nite , however, the desired bound over glossy 
re.ection is achieved by:  b i82maxecos Fm hmaxesec i hmaxesec r h The maxima over the secant terms 
are bounded by microfacet self­shadowing. 2. and within our error estimate are at most proportional F 
jdiji F ji F ji F dji F ji F d 2 ji to . Recall that we estimate as , and as , thus satisfying this assumption. 
Given these assumptions, estimated error is at most proportional tomax. We may now show growth, for suf.cient 
re.nement. Con­sider re.nement over interaction under an error estimate at worst proportional to max. 
The error estimate is thus proportional to , and therefore, for suf.cient re.nement, there are at mostsuch 
interactions, as discussed in [7]. Consider now an error satis.ed link from to an interaction . For suf.cient 
re.nement under our subdivision scheme, we may F dj Sn i Fk dji SF d O ji e nF h ij F ji ijF jk F kj 
ijp i p j pO k e jnk h assume that form factors , , , over , , and are roughly equal. Furthermore, these 
satisfying form factors depend only on the error estimate, re.ection function, and error bounds, not 
on or. 6000000 b Triples   8000000 6000000 4000000 2000000 Triples  10000000 1500000 8000000 Triples 
1000000 500000 2000000 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 N 1000 1500 N Figure 7: Triples vs. 500 Parallel Configuration 
N   500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 N Perpendicular Configuration 0 1 0 005 . 4000000 Oriented Configuration 
e e over Geometry. Error bounds . Glossy exponent Figure 10: Meshing for glossy and diffuse re.ection 
1500000 . = 500  . = 100 Triples 1000000 . = 50 . = 25  . = 5  500000 . The graph is over parallel 
polygons for which the error bounds and interpolygon distance have been F Si max Figure 8: Triples 
vs. F ij 200 300 400 500 N Specular Configurations over (ie. doubled. above, S j 0 At worst the 
above form factors are such that where Eps is the most restrictive error bound. Note that, as stated 
depends only on the error estimate, re.ection function max), and error bounds. Only some constant number 
of such form factors may be .tted over the directional hemisphere abovemay only be linked to some constant 
number of interac­. The total number of linked interactions, and corresponding kO e n h S . Eps, p 
 ij may not achieve ,  and thus j transport triples, is thus For a given pb j S  tions over As Note 
that the above argument, although it establishes the desired bound, may overstate the potential for links 
at a given interaction. , much of the directional re.ection into the hemisphere max, and may even be 
of maximum That is, the analysis ignores the modulation between the paired error increases in magnitude, 
the corresponding boundincrease as well. We may thus expect greater growth in transport computation with 
higher specular exponent, as shown in Figure 8. 2000 b 500  and value terms within the error estimate. 
Within this graph, growth is superlinear for 500 . max must trials over a higher range of n n , though 
further have shown that the increases, allowing suf.cient re.nement Finally, we note that under specular 
re.ection each element is re.ected across every other element perfectly, and to a .rst approx­imation 
is visible from a constant number of other elements in the environment (at least in the case of a convex 
enclosed room; the analysis is complicated by occlusion and certain worst case align- O e n 2 h we Table 
1: Image Statistics eye/offset views for the re.ection of a garish checkerboard. The image in Figure 
10 shows contrasting illumination and mesh­ing induced by diffuse and glossy re.ection. Note the distinct 
mesh­ing for each highlight. Glossy re.ection is at a less oblique angle, and thus both the highlight 
and meshing exhibit less distortion in the direction of the eye. Note that these scenes are extremely 
simple application to more complex environments is still very expensive, despite the em­rate subsides 
to linear as for the local neighborhood property to obtain. ments). Thus, the number of interactions 
is at least conjecture that it is no worse than this bound. 5.2 Illumination and Re.nement Figure 9 shows 
illumination and meshing over surfaces of varying glossiness (specular exponent). Within each image, 
the re.ecting surface is perpendicular to the diamond shaped light source, and we see the resulting re.ection 
in the direction of the eye. Note the conformation of meshing to the highlight over each surface. The 
stretched nature of the highlight along the axis to the eye is characteristic of Torrance-Sparrow re.ection 
over fairly oblique angles, and accounts for the increased sensitivity of meshing along this axis. The 
rightmost three images in the .gure show the meshing from above. The illumination shown in these images 
is somewhat unusual -it shows the re.ection to the eye as though it had been painted on the re.ecting 
surface, and then viewed from a different location, directly above. The images in Figure 11 show similar 
ployment of hierarchical methods. Motivated by the work of Smits et al. [14] in hierarchical radiosity, 
we are currently experimenting with importance and radiance weighting over three point transport preliminary 
results of this work are shown in Figure 12. The given environment contains four re.ectors: the broad 
face of each of the three slabs and the top of the central cube. In addition to the re.ections seen in 
the slabs, note the play of light originating at the lamp at left, re.ected off the cube top, and over 
the upper part of the green wall at right. Total potential transport triples over this environment at 
the .nest level of subdivision is just over 222 billion our system, under importance and radiance weighting, 
employs 70,995, a reduction to 3 hundred-thousandths of 1 percent. Table 1 provides further statistics 
for the images. Timings are given for a Silicon Graphics indigo workstation with a single 50 MHz R4000 
processor. The image shown in Figure 12 was generated after seven complete iterations (gathers to all 
interactions), and total time just over three minutes.  Figure 9: Illumination and Re.nement 6 Discussion 
Recall the matrix formulation shown in Figure 2. For any of n 3 n reasonable size, the resulting matrix 
will be unmanageable we have shown, however, that for suf.cient re.nement theentries in the matrix may 
be approximated to within user speci.ed bounds O e n h n 3 by subblocks. The gather and push/pull procedures 
described in preceding sections allow manipulation and solution over this representation. As discussed 
in [2], the resulting system may be shown to converge. Growth in transport is more accurately described 
as , kk 3 O e n i k 3 h where is the number of input polygonal patches within the en­vironment, as opposed 
to elements. The term is generated by the initial examination of all polygon triples for re.ection, and 
is subsumed by as the number of elements increases. As the number nk 3 of polygons in an environment 
grows, however, the term will become prohibitively large. As discussed in [14] with respect to the related 
problem under hierarchical radiosity, the capability to cluster as well as re.ne polygons would reduce 
the dif.culty of unneces­sary initial interactions. Clustering is arguably the most important open problem 
in the computation of global illumination. The hierarchical approach described in this paper was derived 
by writing the rendering equation in a three point transport formulation. Another option would be to 
parameterize radiance by position and direction we believe that a similar hierarchical approach could 
be employed with the method of discrete ordinates or spherical harmonics. Finally, we note that, similarly 
to other algorithms for hierar­chical illumination [7, 14], the algorithm described in this paper bounds 
estimated error over individual transport computations. As discussed in [14], bounding estimated error 
over individual trans­port does not easily or necessarily provide a rigorous bound for overall error 
in the solution. An analysis and means of computing such a bound over hierarchical illumination remains 
an interesting open problem. 7 Acknowledgements This research was partially supported by equipment grants 
from Apple and Silicon Graphics Computer Systems and a research grant from the National Science Foundation 
(CCR 9207966). The authors would like to thank Dr. P. Prusinkiewicz for access to the graph­ics research 
facilities at the University of Calgary during the .nal stages of this work, and Deborah Fowler for her 
crucial assistance in shooting test images, paste up and much other support and en­couragement. Thanks 
to Cullen Jennings and David Laur for all of their help recording images. We especially thank the anonymous 
referees for their many helpful comments and suggestions. 8 References <RefA>[1] Amanatides, J. (1992) Algorithms 
for the detection and elimi­nation of specular aliasing. Proc. Graphics Interface 92, 86-93. [2] Aupperle, 
L. (1993) Hierarchical algorithms for illumination. Doctoral Dissertation, Princeton University. [3] 
Blinn, J.F. (1977) Models of light refection for computer syn­thesized pictures. Computer Graphics 11 
(2), 192-198. [4] Chen, S.E., Rushmeier, H.E., Miller, G., Turner, D. (1991) A progressive multi-pass 
method for global illumination. Computer Graphics 25 (4), 165-174. [5] Cook, R.L. (1986) Stochastic sampling 
in computer graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics 5 (1), 51-72. [6] Hall, R. (1989) Illumination and 
color in computer generated imagery. Springer-Verlag, New York. [7] Hanrahan, P., Salzman, D., Aupperle, 
L. (1991) A rapid hierar­chical radiosity algorithm. Computer Graphics 25 (4), 197-206. [8] Immel, D.S., 
Cohen, M.F., Greenberg, D.P. (1986) A radiosity method for non-diffuse environments. Computer Graphics 
20 (4), 133-142. [9] Kajiya, J.T. (1986) The rendering equation. Computer Graphics 20 (4), 143-150. [10] 
Mitchell, D. (1992) Manuscript. [11] Nicodemus, F.E., Richmond, J.C., Hsia, J.J., Ginsberg, I.W., Limperis, 
T. (1977) Geometrical considerations and nomenclature for re.ectance. National Bureau of Standards monograph, 
no. 160. [12] Shirley, P. (1990) A ray tracing method for illumination cal­culation in diffuse-specular 
scenes. Proc. Graphics Interace 90, 205-212. [13] Sillion, F.X., Arvo, J.R., Westin, S.H., Greenberg, 
D.P. (1991) A global illumination solution for general re.ectance distributions. Computer Graphics 25 
(4), 187-196. [14] Smits, B.E., Arvo, J.R., Salesin, D.H. (1992) An importance­driven radiosity algorithm. 
Computer Graphics 26 (2), 273-282. [15] Torrance, K.E., Sparrow, E.M. (1967) Theory for off-specular 
re.ection from roughened surfaces. J. of the Optical Society of America 57 (9), 1105-1114. [16] Ward, 
G.J., Rubinstein, F.M., Clear, R.D. (1988) A ray tracing solution for diffuse environments. Computer 
Graphics 22 (3), 85­ 92.</RefA> Appendix: Error Analysis Recall the error expression derived in Section 2.3: 
In implementation, we have divided into separate compo­nents for each subfactor of . We thus have: e 
82mmm F secji cose i cos F F ji Fji f S cos gmk Fjr ir m i m cosm S k S secjFik F j mijri FF h jjii cos 
cosF i 1cosim r In implementation, the re.nement procedure of Section 3.2 takes an additional argument, 
Ceps, against which the two estimates of error in reciprocal cosine are tested. We are left with the 
computation of , , andn i cos n rFm A i A jk sec i 0 sec r . The variance (and associated error) in these 
cosine terms over given patches , , is determined by the set of possible , lying between the patches 
(we dispense with notation in this section). Consider patches , and (Figure 4): we enclose these patches 
S i S j A i A j c i c j r i r j S i S j in spheres , with centers , , and radii , , respectively. For 
the moment we will assume that the interiors of and do not intersect, and thus there exists a tangent 
cone lying between the spheres. Note that this cone is a right circular cone centered on the line joining 
and . Consider the nappe containing : it may be regarded as a cone of direction vectors centered about 
the vector . We will call this vector cone . If and are any two c i x cmm jri c i cS ji S j c i x n i 
c j CAp iij x mp ij A k pS ji C i C ri C i points on or in , , then the vector lies within . thus bounds 
the set of possible . We may characterize by the angle de.ned by its axis, , and boundary cone and angle 
may be similarly de.ned over and . If either pair of spheres intersect, we set the corresponding. We 
may easily compute maxima and minima for and given andC r , and may then compute error in estimation 
as sec i secemax r x min C i h2 . The cones and centered about and induce a similar C i Cn rm n i n r 
cone of variation about(Figure 5). Application of basic spherical trigonometry yields [2]:  m m n arcsinminesine 
m i 2hisine m r 2h10h Given m m , determination of maxecos n i i F n mm h , minecos Fm h , and thus 
immediately follows. Having computed these estimates and maxima, and incorporat­ing the estimates for 
form factor computation, we may bound and estimate error in transport as: cos F O28 F m F m m d 2 j cossec 
i max F ir F m mcos d F j i d maxmcosFmax j i maxmsecm mcosmaxmsecF i i max i msec max msec rir r 
 It is this error measure that we employ in our implementation.  
			
