
 An Accelerated Program in Computer Science 0nkar P. Sharma Professor, Moorhead State University Moorhead, 
Minnesota 56560 All Behforooz Visiting Associate Professor, U.C. (Santa Barbara) Associate Professor, 
Moorhead State University ACKNOWLEDGEMENT INTRODUCTION The details of this program have been finalized 
in consultation with two other faculty members of the department; Dr. Martin O. Holoien, the chairperson 
and Dr. Curtis R. Bring. This paper reflects the latest thinking of the authors about this program, and 
are not necessarily the same as originally developed. ABSTRACT This paper is in the nature of a preliminary 
report on a pilot project aimed at developing quality instructional materials in three basic areas of 
computer science (problem solving and programming, hardware and software) for presentation in a concentrated 
manner. A total of 162 90-minute (54 periods per area) class periods in a classroom environment and an 
equal amount of supervised workshop study are contemplated. It is expected that the project implementation 
would extend the capability of the computer science departments across the nation to offer a unique opportunity 
to students to earn a special minor in computer science and/or to prepare for entering a computer science 
graduate program -all in the shortest possible time. The courses were offered for the first time during 
the summer of ~981. The course outlines, the background of the participants and other details of the 
project are included in the paper. KEY WORDS Accelerated curriculum, computer science minor, entrance 
requirement for graduate program. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright 
notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or 
specific permission. &#38;#169; 1982 ACM0-89791-067-2/82/002/0}74 $00.75 During the last two decades, 
an unprecedented growth in computer applications has taken place. The advent of microprocessors made 
possible by advances in microelectronics, has accelerated this growth rate beyond the most optimistic 
forecasts. This has resulted in an acute shortage of trained personnel in all areas of computer applications. 
As a result schools, colleges and universities all around the nation are facing ever increasing enrollment 
of students wanting to major in computer science. Schools are responding in various ways such as opening 
new departments of computer science, expanding existing departments to handle more students, or simply 
by adding new course offerings. For the most part, however, the needs for trained personnel remain unsatisfied 
primarily because the demand is growing at a faster rate than the supply. The problem of computer specialist 
shortage has been studied by the Labor Department [I] and they have made some projections. "Even after 
doubling in the 1970's," the Labor Department says, "overall employment in the field is expected to almost 
double again by 1990 and all computer occupations except keypunch operator will grow rapidly." The Labor 
Department estimates that between 1978 and 1990 the demand for computer service technicians will climb 
by 154 percent, systems analysts' demand will increase by 120 percent and the need for operators of computers 
and other equipment will more than double, with job openings averaging 46,200 a year. The Bureau of Labor 
Statistics report notes that "Colleges and universities are also finding it difficult to compete with 
business and government in retaining computer science professors who may earn less than a beginning programmer 
does in business." "As the upward pay spiral for computer personnel continues," the study adds, "schools 
will find it increasingly difficult to compete for these workers. " We, at Moorhead State, have initiated 
a project to partially solve the problem of the shortage of computer specialists. It may be appropriate 
to first say a few words about our department. The computer science department at  174 Moorhead State 
University in Minnesota was minutes. The breakdown of a typical day could established in the fall of 
1970 to offer an undergraduate program in computer science. The enrollment in the department has been 
constantly growing and it presently stands at about 300 majors and 100 minors. Starting the academic 
year 1981-82, a graduate program is now being offered and 8 students have joined our program this year. 
One major consideration in developing the graduate program has always been the background of the students 
to be admitted to the program. With the job market ever expanding in this discipline, we see difficulty 
in attracting students with a ~.S. in computer science to our graduate program. We talk more about this 
problem at a later point in our paper. As a partial solution to the problems of training computer specialist 
and preparing students for our graduate program, we have launched a project at Moorhead State. The main 
objective of the project is to develop curriculum and detailed instructional materials in three basic 
areas of computer science for presentation in a conce ntrated manner. The areas of interest are: I ) 
Introduction to computer problem-solving and programming, 2) Computer organization and hardware, 3) Computer 
software and applications. In the rest of the paper, we shall refer to the courses proposed for the 
three areas as COMS 350, COMS 351, and COMS 352, respectively. Basically the main activity consists 
of defining curriculum, developing instructional materials and techniques, and conducting classes for 
evaluating and modifying the curriculum, the materials, and the techniques in light of feedback received 
in the classroom. At the end of a three-year period, we plan to produce a self-contained instructional 
package that can be used for providing concentrated and quality training in computer science. It is expected 
that the existence of this package will facilitate the offering of a concentrated educational program 
in computer science. Implementation of this project is expected to provide a facility to educate computer 
science personnel in the shortest possible time and thus have a direct impact on meeting the acute shortage 
of qualified people in this area. Additionally it is expected to provide a unique opportunity to undergraduate 
students to prepare for a graduate program in computer science or for better job opportunities. THE 
ACCELERATED CURRICULUM  As mentioned earlier, the program consists of three main courses: CONS 350, 
C0MS 351, and CONS 352. The duration of each course is 4 weeks with 18 days of instruction and a 4-day 
weekend separating any two courses. Each instructional day consists of 3 lectures and 3 workshop sessions. 
Each session consists of 90 be as follows: 7:30 AM -9:00 AM Lecture 9:00 AM -10:30 AM Workshop 10:30 
AM -12:00 Noon Lecture 1:00 PM -2:30 PM Workshop 2:30 PM - 4:00 PM Lecture 4:00 PM -5:30 PM Workshop 
 The workshop concentrates on individualized instruction and is conducted with the help of teaching 
assistants and/or instructor. It should be noted that in terms of 500 minutes of classroom lecture per 
credit hour, each course is equivalent to 9.72 quarter credits, not counting the workshop hours. As a 
matter of fact, in each accelerated course, we attempt to cover the subject matter that is normally covered 
in three 4 quarter-credit courses. However, we allow only 8 quarter credits to be earned by students 
for each accelerated course that is completed. In the three accelerated courses, we attempt to cover 
the following subject matter. A. Introduction to Computer Problem-Solving and Programming: CONS 350 
 -Problem-solving and algorithm development -Computers and their applications -Programming in a high-level 
language -Assembler programming -Program development skills  B. Computer Organization and Hardware: 
COMS 351 -Information representation -Boolean algebra -Analysis and synthesis of combinational and 
sequential circuits -Computer systems organization -Processor and control logic design  C. Computer 
Software and Applications: CONS 352 -Data structures (arrays, stacks, queues, linked lists and binary 
trees) -File organization ~ processing (sequential, indexed-sequential and random) -Computer applications 
(internal sort methods, search techniques and external sort methods) -Language translation (assemblers, 
interpreters, lexical analyzers and parsers) -Introductory concepts in operating systems (memory, processor 
and file management)  A more detailed outline of each course is available on request. 175 PROJECT 
PHASES We envision four phases to this project. Phase I: Curriculum planning and material development 
Phase 2: Field testing of curriculum materials and instructional techniques Phase 3: Modification based 
on field testing. Phase 4: Project evaluation, implementation and dissemination The curriculum planning 
and development phase includes defining the courses and developing teaching/learning materials. The second 
phase involves field testing of the  developed instructional materials in an actual classroom environment. 
Each of the three courses are planned to be taught three times. Students enrolling in any of these courses 
are expected to devote full time to the effort. It is our belief that field testing is essential if these 
instructional materials are to be of superior quality and thus more likely to meet the needs of the computer 
science education community. Phase three is the one where modification of prepared materials is done. 
It is planned that this phase should begin just after the completion of teaching the three courses for 
the first time, and continue to the end of the project. The fourth phase calls for project evaluation, 
full implementation of the developed curriculum and of the instructional materials, and dissemination 
of both the materials and the evaluation of their effectiveness to the computer science community. The 
project will not be installed in its entirety until funded. Phase 2 has started with initial support 
from our university. We are attempting to finalize course outlines through field testing. THE PARTICIPANTS: 
BACKGROUND AND RESPONSE The program was advertised in the beginning of 1981 as a full time (12 weeks) 
summer study. With some modification, we plan to use the following advertisement this year: "Department 
of Computer Science at Noorhead State Un~iversity offers an accelerated program consisting of 3 courses 
(8 quarter credits/each) to those willing to enter an M.S. program in Computer Science. This accelerated 
program consists of 12 weeks of classes beginning at  7:30 in the morning and ending at 5:30 in the 
afternoon. Participants must have no other obligations during these 12 weeks. Those students successfully 
completing these 3 courses can enter the Computer Science graduate program offered at Moorhead State. 
Or if they wish, they can take another 6 credits of Computer Science courses in the area of business 
application and can be declared as a Computer Science minor. Those who wish to participate must have 
adequate mathematical background (a year of Calculus and be somewhat familiar with computers (to the 
level of one course or workshop in computer applications and programming)." In spite of very limited 
advertisement, which basically consisted of including information about the accelerated courses in the 
university summer schedule which is mailed to the students who have taken courses under the division 
of Continuing Education, the response was very good in that we received 38 applications. In fact, all 
who applied could not be accommodated. Because of size limitations, only 26 students were selected. (The 
department was authorized to offer only one class in each of the three courses and in the interest of 
quality of instruction, we wanted to limit enrollment to 25). The majority of selected students had a 
B.S. degree in mathematics. There were others with B.S. degrees in Physics, Biology and Social Sciences 
and B.A. degrees in Philosophy, History, and Music. There were two Ph.D. holders, one in Physics and 
one in Chemistry. The computer science background of the participants ranged from self-taught using 
home facilities to one year of course work in computer programming. The computer background of the majority 
was equivalent to one 4-credit introductory computer science course. They were mostly family men and 
women who had to relocate in order to take this program. We had particapants from neighboring states 
such as Montana, Iowa, the Dakotas and Wisconsin. Of the original 26 people entering the first course, 
we were able to carry 23 to the second and 19 to the third. The majority of those who stayed with the 
entire program passed the course with a grade of B or better. Of the 19 who completed the program, 6 
have entered the graduate program, 5 are planning to enter the program next year, 3 have changed their 
job to work in a computer-related position and the rest are planning to complete a minor in computer 
science. A majority (60%) of the participants were high school or college teachers and the others (40%) 
were unemployed or in a job which they did not like or which did not pay a good salary. The overall motivation 
of the participant was the job availability with computer science area as opposed to their own field 
of study. The overall reaction of the participants was very positive. They all agreed that such a program 
should be continued on a permanent basis. Most agreed that they had the most valuable (not necessarily 
the most enjoyable) summer of their life. They believed that a more careful selection policy should be 
used to select participants for the program instead of a first-come first-served policy. It was recommended 
that our selection policy should emphasize getting a more balanced group. Most of all, the participants 
were wondering why no other place had thought of offering such a 176 p~gram. Those coming from other 
states and campuses strongly believed that if such a program were publicized, it would provide the necessary 
stimulus to other campuses to develop similar programs. ENTRY REQUIREMENT FOR GRADUATE PROCRAN The 
need for computer science graduates with M.S. and Ph.D. degrees was underscored in the ~981 ACM Computer 
Science Conference by the following statistics: "There are ~I jobs for every MS in Computer Science 
and 30 jobs for every Ph.D." This is a good indication that there exists a need to find ways to attract 
students to the graduate study in computer science. Because of a great demand for trained personnel, 
it is very hard to motivate students in our undergraduate computer science program to go to the ggaduate 
programs 12]. During the past 5 years, less than 13% of our undergraduates have attended any graduate 
 program and less than 8% have gone to computer science graduate program. This excludes those sent 
to school by their employer. Computer science departments are well aware of this problem as evidenced 
by the fact that very few computer science graduate programs in this country require an undergraduate 
degree in computer science as an entrance requirement. Generally, two types of entry requirements are 
found. Some departments would accept students who have a baccalaureate degree in any discipline and have 
taken s certain number of core courses in a computer science undergraduate program. The advantage of 
this type of entrance requirement is that the students obtain a basic understanding of core concepts 
before entering the graduate program. The disadvantage of this method, which is possibly a major reason 
for unsatisfactory performance of this method (not attracting enough students to the program), is that 
it increases the normal length of time required for an M.S. degree by at least one year, in some cases 
by 2 years. There are other departments who accept those students in their graduate program, who have 
a B.S. degree in some related area such as Mathematics, Physics or Engineering, and some form of familiarity 
with computer science. The latter is defined differently by different departments. Most define this computer 
science familiarity as follows: I. knowledge of two programming languages, 2. two introductory courses 
in computer science with a GPA of 3.0 or above, or 3. comprehensive knowledge of computers (very vague) 
 These departments indirectly put the responsibility of initial preparation on the students themselves. 
It is left to students to figure out if they are to enter and~or continue a graduate program in computer 
science or not.  Often they spend several months or even a full year in the department before they realize 
that it is beyond their capacity to continue. This method, also, has not been very successful mainly 
because of these reasons: I) students are not ready to risk a year or two to figure out if they can handle 
it and 2) there is not a well-defined requirement and direction for these students to follow. It is 
true that there are a number of departments which do not fit into any of these two broad categories and 
they have successful computer science programs. But they are relatively few and are parts of prestigious 
institutions that attract students with higher academic standing. Computer science departments at other 
institutions can't follow their examples. It is our belief that a program of accelerated courses which 
we have developed and partially experimented with provide a satisfactory solution of the problem. It 
is true that we can't speak with a great degree of certainty at this point until more groups of our graduate 
students complete their work. And it is precisely for this reason that we will be carefully watching 
the performance of the students that we are training. CONCLUSION  We believe that the program described 
in this paper, in addition to providing a partial solution to the problem of meeting the acute shortage 
of trained computer personnel, affords a satisfactory solution for preparing in the shortest possible 
time students with s baccalaureate degree in a non-computer area for entry in a graduate program in computer 
science. It is advisable to experiment with several modifications to the program such as: -a longer 
term for each course (say 5 weeks rather than 4) -offering the three courses at night during the period 
of one academic year (one course per quarter) -requiring no computer background but instead extending 
the first course (CONS 350) to provide the required background. When we polled the students participating 
in our program on these issues, a great majority of them felt that the depth of coverage, the pace of 
instruction, the duration, and the sequencing of courses were about right and needed minimum or no modifications. 
They all, however, felt that the presence of a good textbook would help the learning process (two or 
three textbooks were used for each course). It also seems advisable to use a selection policy for entrance 
into the program so as to maximize the output and minimize the attrition rate. For instance, a comprehensive 
entry test may be administered for acceptance into the 177 program. In that case, however, preparation 
of the test would be s major task. REFERENCES  <RefA>I. "Higher Education and National Affairs (ISSN pp 18-~579)", 
American Council on Education, 4/Vol. 30, No. 25, July 31, 1981. 2. Danielson, Ronald L., "Educating 
the working computer scientist: a survey and analysis," ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, Vol. 13, Number I February 
1981, pp. 109-113.</RefA> 
			
