
 Analyzing Communication Latency using the Nectar Communication Processor Peter Steenkiste School of 
Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 Abstract For multicomputer 
applications, the most important performance parameters of a network is the latency for short messages. 
In this paper we present an analysis of communication latency using measurement of the Nectar system. 
Nectar is a high-performance multicomputer built around a high-bandwidth crosspoint network. Nodes are 
connected to the Nectar network using network coprocessor that are primarily responsible the protocol 
processing, but that can also execute application code. This architecture allows us to analyze message 
latency both between workstations with an outboard protocol engine and between lightweight nodes with 
a minimal runtime system and a fast, simple network interface (the coprocessor). We study how much context 
switching, buffer management and protocol processing contribute to the communication latency and we discuss 
how the latency is influenced by the protocol implementation. 1. Introduction Multicomputers that use 
existing hosts and a general network are an attractive architecture for many applications [11], and they 
are one of the main motivations for improving the performance of networks [1]. Some users are interested 
in pardoning applications across a large number of workstations, while other users want to combine the 
resources of a smaller number of supercomputers. In order to make these general multicomputers a viable 
architecture for a wide range of applications, networks have to support low latency and high bandwidth 
communication. This research was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DOD) 
monitored by DARPA/CMO under Contract MDA972-90-C-O035. Permission to copy without fee all or part of 
this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, 
the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that 
copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fee and/or specific permission. COMM 92-8/92/MD, USA @ 1992 ACM 0-89791 .526.7 /92/0008 /0199 
. ..$1.50 Reducing latency has traditionally been the biggest challenge. Dedicated multicomputers with 
special-purpose interconnects such as the Intel Touchstone system have Iatencies below 100 microseconds 
[4], while Iatencies between Unix workstations communicating over general networks are typically one 
order of magnitude higher. The latency between two Sun4/330 running Sun OS 4.1 is for example about 800 
microseconds. One reason for the higher latency is the difference in communication medium. The interconnection 
networks used by dedicated multicomputers only have to cover a few meters and guarantee data integrity 
in hardware, while general networks have to cover much larger distances and introduce errors in the data 
stream with non-zero probability. The communication protocols that recover from these errors introduce 
overhead, thus adding to the latency. This overhead however is, or should be, of the order of 10s of 
microseconds [7], and does not account for the order of magnitude difference in latency. In this paper 
we identify other sources of overhead based on measurements collected on Nectar. The Nectar network [3, 
11] consists of a high-bandwidth crosspoint network (Figure 1-1). Host are connected to the network through 
Communication Acceleration Boards (CABS) that are responsible for protocol processing. A 26-node prototype 
system using 100Mbit/second links has been operational since 1989 and has been used to parallelize several 
engineering and scientific applications [12]. he host-host latency over Nectar is about 200 microseconds. 
One of the goals of the prototype was to experiment with different protocol implementations and make 
the communication coprocessor customizable by applications. For this reason, we built the CAB around 
a general-purpose CPU with a flexible runtime system [8]. The application-level CAB-CAB latency is about 
150 microseconds. The Nectar architecture allows us to study the communication between different types 
of hosts: H DataMemoryBus DM.4 CmKoller I,, 1, 1, ~.. *.. r V[ 1Fibersto mm HOST n ~=#%---J %-b------ 
CPum 4 sendLme Figure 2-1: CAB architecture mailbox module). Several communication protocols have Figure 
1-1: Nectar system overview been implemented on the CAB using these facilities: the traditional workstations 
with a powerful outboard protocol Nectar-native datagram, reliable message (RMP) and engine and light-weight 
hosts with basic network request-response (RR) protocols, and the standard internet interface, i.e. the 
CABS. The CAB runtime system is protocols (UDP~CP/IP). We describe the software in similar to the runtime 
system on dedicated multicomputers more detail in the remainder of this section. and to micro-kernel 
operating systems. 2.1. Threads and SPARC register windows In this paper we first give an overview of 
Nectar, Previous protocol implementations have demonstrated that concentrating on the CAB architecture 
and Nectar multiple threads are useful, but multiple address spaces are communication software (Section 
2). In Section 3 we unnecessary [6, 13, 15]. As a result, we designed the CAB present a breakup of the 
CAB-CAB message latency for a to provide a single physical address space with a runtime number of communication 
protocols, and we discuss how system that supports multiple threads. The threads these overheads are 
influenced by the CAB hardware and package is based on Mach C threads [9]: it provides mutex runtime 
system, and the protocol implementation. Section locks to enforce critical regions, and condition variables 
4 analyzes the host-host message latency. We also present for synchronization. Preemption and priorities 
were added estimates for how the host-host latency would change if we so that system threads (e.g. protocol 
threads) can be replaced the flexible CAB by a hardwired protocol engine. scheduled quickly, even in 
the presence of long-running In Section 6 we discuss related work. application threads [8]. The SPARC 
CPU has seven register windows and eight 2. The CAB architecture and software global registers. Each 
window has eight input registers, The CAB is built around a 16.5 MHz SPARC CPU eight output registers, 
and eight local registers; the input [17] and devices such as timers and DMA controllers registers of 
one window overlap with the output registers (Figure 2-l). It is connected to the host through a VME 
of the next window. Register windows support fast bus. To provide the necessary memory bandwidth, the 
procedure calling and returning: during a call, the CAB memory is split into two regions: a working memory 
processor switches to the next window and it switches for the SPARC (program memory), and a packet memory 
back when the call returns, so typically no registers have to (data memory). DMA transfers are supported 
for data be saved or restored. Registers only have to be saved and memory only but the SPARC can access 
both memories restored on window overflow and underflow, i.e. when the equally fast. The memories are 
built from static RAM and call depth exceeds the number or register windows. there is no cache. The memories 
are directly accessible to applications on the host. The threads packages utilizes the SPARC register 
windows in a fairly standard way. The executing thread The SPARC runs a flexible runtime system [8] that 
can use all the windows in the register file. On a thread provides support for multiprogramming (a threads 
context switch, the entire processor state, including the package) and for buffering and synchronization 
(the register windows that are in use, is flushed to main memory, and the state of the next thread, including 
the sending InterruptHandler R~eaa~g rhread ReceivingNede contents of the top window, is restored. When 
a thread blocks and no other threads are runnable, it polls the thread Application ready queue if it 
is also the first thread to b woken up, no o context switching is needed. When a trap happens, the SPARC 
changes the current window pointer automatically to the next window, and the program counters are placed 
in local registers of that window. This allows traps to be handled without saving any registers, but 
since the next window is always reserved for traps, threads can only use six windows. Traps build their 
stack on top of the stack of the executing thread, so the trap handler shams the register window stack 
with the thread that was running at the time of the interrupt. 2.2. Mailboxes Mailboxes are queues of 
messages with a network-wide address. Host processes and CAB threads communicate over Nectar by sending 
messages to remote mailboxes using a transport protocol, while a host and its local CAB can exchange 
messages through a mailbox directly. Mailboxes provide synchronization between readers and writers. For 
example, a host process can invoke a service on the CAB by placing a request in a server mailbox; this 
wakes up the server thread that is blocked on the mailbox. Mailboxes form a uniform mechanism for both 
intra-node and inter-node communication. The primitives operations on mailboxes are placing a message 
in a mailbox (Put) and fetching a message from a mailbox (Get). Both operations can be executed in two 
steps to avoid the copying of data. Begin_Put and Begin_Get return a pointer to an empty buffer or a 
message in the mailbox. The user can then build or consume the message in place. End_Put and End_Get 
return the message or empty buffer to the system. The buffer space for the messages in a mailbox is allocated 
in CAB memory. By mapping CAB memory into their address spaces, host processes can build and consume 
messages in place. 2.3. Communication over Nectar Figures 2-2 and 2-3 show the path that is taken through 
the software when a message is sent between two Nectar CABS or hosts. Vertical arrows indicate procedure 
calls and horizontal arrows indicate context switches, either between threads or between a thread and 
interrupt handler. Application threads on the CAB send messages by executing a procedure call to the 
desired transport protocol @e t. 4 Data on wue ......+II.SOP Interrupt Sending Intemupt Handte.r Protocol 
Receiving head Receiving Node Thread Thread Data on wire ....---+*.SOP Interrupt Figure 2-2: CAB-CAB 
communication with Nectar足native (top) and Intemet (bottom) protocols (Figure 2-2). The transport protocol 
does the necessary processing, hands the packet off to the datalink protocol, which places it on the 
wire, When the message arrives on the receiving CAB, the SPARC is interrupted, and the datalink protocol 
places it in a mailbox using Begin_Put. The transport protocol performs the matching End_Put, which wakes 
up any waiting application thread or process. The transport protocol can be called in one of two ways. 
The Nectar-native protocols are invoked by an upcall inside the interrupt handler [6] (top Figure 2-2). 
This implementation was motivated by speed it avoids waking up a thread. The disadvantage is that since 
many data structures are accessed at interrupt time, critical regions often have to be enforced by masking 
interrupts. Furthermore, by doing a lot of processing at interrupt time, the CAB response time is potentially 
high. An alternative organization is to move the transport protocol processing from the interrupt handter 
to a thread. Tltis simplifies the software organization, and possibly improves response time. This organization 
was chosen for the intemet protocols (bottom Figure 2-2). Sendirrg Protocol Interrupt Handler Receiving 
Protocol CAB-CAB Host-host Host ~OCeSS Thread Receiving Node Host Pmceas Latency Latency Application 
Datagram 97 169 o Request-Response 154 225 TranapoflApplication Protocol Transport Put Get Protocol 
 8- -s? Q Datalink ProtocOI Protocol Datalink QQ Data on wire +,-SOPInterrupt Sending Protocol Intenupt 
Handler HOst process Thread ReceivingNode Application TCPIKJDP/lP Put Jntemet Put Get protocol a? Datalirk 
Datalink protocol protocol C5 ~ Data on wire ....1o SOP Interrupt protocol Receiving Thread Host Process 
as a light-weight distributed-memory multiprocessor. Studying CAB-CAB latency in this CAB multicomputer 
213RMP 127 UDP 234 308 Table 2-1: Message latency in Nectar (microseconds) 3. CAB-CAB breakup The CAB 
architecture and rtmtime system support the execution of application code on the CAB. Although this was 
not the intent, the collection of CABS can be viewed TCPJUDP Application Protocol gives us insights 
into the network expect in multicomputers using Get Put Get nodes with a fast but simple network o /)--8 
Table 3-1 breaks up the CAB-CAB Figure 2-3: Host-host communication with Nectar足native (top) and Intemet 
(bottom) protocols Host processes send message over Nectar by placing a request in a protocol mailbox 
in CAB memory (Figure 2-3), This wakes up a protocol thread on the CAB, which performs the send, and 
then blocks on the mailbox, waiting for the next send request. The behavior of the sending protocol thread 
is similar to that of a sending application thread in CAB-CAB communication. Incoming messages are handled 
in the same way as was described for the CAB-CAB test, except that the message is read from the mailbox 
by a host process. Host processes that are waiting for a message have the option of polling for a short 
period of time, thus (potentially) avoiding the overhead of being put to sleep by the Unix scheduler. 
Table 2-1 shows the CAB-CAB and host-host latency for the Nectar-native and UDP protocols, The results 
are half of the roundtrip time between two application processes or threads, and they include the time 
to build and consume a one-word message. We analyze these results in the remainder of the paper. We briefly 
look at performance measures other than latency in Section 5. performance we can general networks and 
interface. latency measurements. The cost is shown for interrupt processing, buffer management (mailboxes), 
protocol processing (datalink and transport), condition handling (wait and broadcast), thread management 
and ~gister window overhead. The measurements were collected using a functional of the CAB. This simulator 
is built around simulator provided by Sun, and its performance the performance of the hardware within 
0.5Y0. simulator a SPARC matches Multiple CAB simulators can be linked together to simulate a multi- 
CAB network. Send Datalink Transport Mailbox Other Rxeive Interrupt Datalink Transport Mailbox protocol 
14 protecol 6 put 0 2 handling 7 protocol 18 protocol 0 put + get 28 Conditions 10 Thread switch 0 Register 
windows 12 rOtd 97 3.1. Analysis of CAB-CAB latency numbers The datagram latency is the easiest to analyze 
(Figure 2-2). On transmit, one word is sent from an area in the applications stack, and the main cost 
is in the communication protocol processing. On receive, the datalink and datagram protocols are invoked 
through upcalls in the interrupt handler. They place the message in a mailbox and wake up the blocked 
application thread. Since that thread was the last one to be active, there is no thread switch overhead. 
The reeeiving thread reads the message from the mailbox and frees the buffer space, Table 3-1: Breakup 
CAB-CAB RR RMP UDP 12 12 14 7 22 23 8 0 8 9 2 0 7 7 7 24 44 23 18 9 27 35 25 10 0 % 0 0 11 24 6 48 154 
127 234 latency (microseconds)  The request-response protocol uses responses (requests) as acknowledgements 
of earlier requests (responses). As a result, the request-response protocol has to save messages (in 
a mailbox) kefore they are sent, and when receiving a response (request), it has to free the matching 
request (old response). This results in a higher mailbox overhead than in the datagram test. The request-response 
protocol also generates more window overflows and underflows since it has a higher call depth than the 
datagram protocol. The RMP test has to explicitly acknowledge a packet before the receiving thread can 
run; this results in a high dat.slink overhead on receive. Between every send and receive the RMP test 
also has to handle the acknowledgement packet. This actually distorts the latency measurements beeause 
the incoming acknowledgement slows down the CAB, and the message arrives before the application thread 
blocks. This reduces the mailbox, register window and condition broadcast costs, compared with an isolated 
one-way communication operation. While the Nectar-native protocols are handled inside the interrupt handling 
on receive, UDP protocol processing is done inside a protocol threa~ IP processing is still done inside 
the interrupt handler. This difference shows up in Table 3-1 as a higher thread and condition overhead 
since first the protocol thread and then the reeeiving thread have to be woken up. Since the message 
is passed between the interrupt handler and the threads through mailboxes, there is also a higher mailbox 
cost. In the remainder of this section, we look in more detail at the cost components of the communication 
latency. 3.2. Context switching The overheads in Table 3-1 for interrupt handling, conditions, threads, 
and, indirectly, register windows are all associated with some form of eontext switching. They account 
for about 25% of the message latency. 3.2.1. Threads and context saving/restoring overhead Table 3-2 
breaks up the context switch overhead into time spent on thread management and on saving and restoring 
state. The thread-related overhead includes the cost of signaling and waiting on condition variables 
and the cost of thread switching. The latter cost is only incurred for UDP, beeause in the tests with 
the Nectar-native protocols, the thread that is woken up is always the one that blocked last. Saving 
and restoring state breaks up in saving and restoring global registers when entering and leaving an interrupt 
handler, and managing register windows: saving and restoring windows and checking and updating registers 
that control the windows. One window overflow/underflow costs 6 microseconds. lDgraml RR IRMP UDP Threads 
Conditions 10 10 0 21 Thread switch o 0 0 11 Total threads (% of latency) (10!%) (6.!%) (01) (1:;%) 
 Save/restore state Global Stii@ 3 3 3 3 Register windows 14.3 26.3 8.3 50.3 Total save/restore 17.3 
29.3 11.3 53.3 (% of latency) (17.8%) (19.0%) (8.9%) (22.8%) Total eontext switch 85.3 (36.5%) : Table 
3-2 Context switch overhead in CAB-CAB latency (microseconds) The results in Table 3-2 show that the 
overhead of the threads package (we ignore RMP since its results are artificially low) is relatively 
low (6.5% to 13.7%). As expected, UDP has the highest cost, since the separate protocol thread creates 
context switches. The cost of saving and restoring the state during context switches is higher than the 
thread overhead, and it roughly triples the cost of context switching. Ahnost all this cost is the result 
of register windows. For the Nectar-native protocols, each node has to handle two threads of control 
throughout the testi the application thread and the receiving interrupt handler. Since the interrupt 
handler can share the register file with the interrupted thread, register windows theoretically allow 
packets to be received without having to save any registen. In practice windows do have to be saved, 
because the combined call depths of the two threads exceed the number of windows available on SPARC. 
For the request-response test for example, 64 registers have to be saved and restored. This number is 
higher than what would have to be saved on a processor with a flat register file, so the register windows 
do not reduce our interrupt overhead, but increase it. For the UDP test, each node has to handle three 
threads of control: the sending thread, the receiving interrupt handler, and the receiving protocol thread. 
This organization results in two extra thread-thread switch, thus further increasing the register window 
overhead. As pointed out earlier, the UDP organization is more attractive, because it is easier to implement 
and maintain and does not mask interrupts for as long. Unfortunately, the thread implementation and, 
especially, register windows make this organization expensive. With a flat register file, the cost of 
doing protocol processing in a thread instead of an interrupt handler should drop to less than 30 microseconds. 
3.2.2. Use of register windows In our test programs, six windows are typically sufficient to hold the 
context of one thread of control and the number of windows in the SPARC implementation was probably chosen 
based on similar measurements. We incur a substantial overhead if we try to place two thread contexts 
in the register file. The SPARC architecture supports up to 32 windows, and we decided to change the 
CAB simulator to simulate a CAB with a SPARC processor with 13 (= 12 + 1) register windows, i.e. enough 
windows to hold two contexts. Table 3-3 shows the new context switch overheads. For the Nectar-native 
protocols the window saving and restoring disappears, as was to be expected, but for UDP, the overhead 
remains the same. The reason is that threads never occupy register windows simultaneously, so the number 
of window overflows and underflows remains the same, independent from the number of windows. Dgram RR 
RMP I UDP Threads Conditions 10 10 o Thread switch 0 0 0 Total threads 10 10 0 Save/restore state Global 
state 3 3 3 3 Register windows 2.3 2.3 2.3 50.3 Total save/restore 5.3 5.3 5.3 53.3 F Table 3-3: Context 
switch overhead for CAB-CAB latency with 13 windows (microseconds) The number of windows used by a thread 
of control is of course not a fundamental property. We could for example reduce the call depth of both 
threads of control in the datagram test so that their sum is six or less, thus eliminating register save 
and restore overhead. This is not a desirable optimization procedure boundaries should not be based on 
the size of the register file. Moreover, this optimization is not done automatically by the compiler, 
and is not visible to the programmer. Changes to the code can easily add a level to the call depth, thus 
undoing the optimization. An interesting observation is that from the point of view of register windows, 
threads usually blocks at the wrong time when the call stack is relatively deep and several windows are 
in use. The reason is that communication operations are often implemented as several layers of abstmction. 
The left column in Figure 3-1 shows the layers for blocking send and receive operations. Higher levels 
of abstraction that hide the send and receive operations from the application can further increase the 
call depth. Each layer typically adds at least one level to the call tree. sending Interrupt Hendler 
R&#38;ecei;~g Thread Receiving Node Application Dgrarn_T@ Dgrmt_Tst Send/Receive send.-RwJmtt PrOtOeOI/MailbOx 
Dgram.!k?nd Mkx_Get Condition COrrrt_Wait Corrd_Wait (Context Switch) I COndkiOn Cond_SigttaI Mailbox 
MbOx_Put Protocol Dliuk.soP Imel-rupt lrtt+HandIe. ++ Data on wire --II-SOP Interrupt Figure 3-1: Layers 
of abstraction for datagram The right side of Figure 3-1 shows the routines that are executed for the 
CAB-CAB datagram test. Each layer is implemented as a single procedure call. The bottom of Figure 3-1 
shows the layers for the start-of-packet trap handler. The sum of the call depths of the blocked receiving 
thread (4) and of the trap handler (4) exceeds the number of usable windows (6). Figure 3-2 shows the 
layers for the more complicated UDP test. 3.3. Buffer management Mailbox operations account for about 
20-25% of the CAB-CAB latency. Most of this cost is on the receive side. All mailbox operations in the 
tests follow the fast path through the code. Each mailbox has space to cache one small empty buffer (508 
bytes). When a small packet is put in the mailbox, this buffer is used if it is available, and similarly, 
when a small packet is freed, the buffer is cached if the cache is empty. The cached buffer optimizes 
the case when performance is most critical: an application sending InterruptROtLKXi Handler Receiving 
Thread Receiving Node Thread Thread Application UDP.TWC UiX_Tmt Send/Receive ~.settd UDP&#38;puk mP_output 
,,, w-output ,,,,, Protocel/Mailbox ~ Ftie@d ,,,,,, Mlwx w ,,$%?*-W ,,?.,,,,,, D-i_Sad .,..,,,,,,,, ,,,, 
,,, ,,. MbOx_ckao Condition Cond_Wair + f20nd_Wait (Context Switch) I f Condition Coud-Signal Mailbox 
MboxJWt B..%udl.w Protocol Dli?tk.SOP Interrupt Int.Handle 4 Data &#38;t wire .-.+, SOP hkmupt Figure 
3-2: Layers of abstraction for UDP has consumed a message and is waiting for the next message. If it 
is not possible to use the cached empty buffer, the mailbox module allocates space for the message using 
the generic memory allocation module. This roughly doubles the cost of placing a message in a mailbox. 
Placing a message in a mailbox and having the application read it and ffee the buffer costs about 25 
microseconds. This is relatively expensive, but all the operations that are performed (checking the address, 
allocating and freeing space, queueing and dequeueing the message, ...) are necessary. They are costly 
beeause they are memory intensive. One non-essential feature that adds overhead to the fast path through 
the mailbox module is the ability to reduce the size of messages in mailboxes. This increases the size 
of the message descriptor and adds overhead, even if the feature is not used. However, this feature makes 
it easy to remove transport protocol headers, and dropping it would increase the protocol cost. The fact 
that messages in mailboxes can be consumed by both host processes and CAB threads also adds a small cost. 
Specifically, the CAB has to signal both a host and a thread condition variable when it places a message 
in a mailbox. The main reason why buffer management is so expensive, especially for longer messages, 
is that messages have to be placed in memory contiguously since they can be read directly by applications. 
Traditional buffer management strategies such as placing messages in a sequence of fixed size blocks 
do not work since the application would not see a contiguous message. The only way to speed up buffer 
management is to eliminate some flexibility. For example, limiting the message size or restricting the 
order in which messages can be freed would simplify the mailbox and memory management. The primary use 
of mailboxes is to hold packets that were sent over Nectar, but mailboxes are used in other ways in the 
test programs. First, they function as retransmission buffers in the RR and UDP tests and second, messages 
are passed between the IP and UDP protocol layers through a mailbox. In both of these cases, some of 
the functionality of the mailboxes is not used, and the overhead could be reduced by using a simpler, 
speciat-purpose meehanism. 3.4. Communication protocols The communication protocols account for between 
25% and 40% of the CAB-CAB latency. For the Neetar-native protocol tests, this overhead is dominated 
by the datalink protocol. As discussed elsewhere [1 1], the datalink is mostly done in software for flexibility 
reasons, and most of it could be handled in hardwme, thus reducing the protocol overhead. The transport 
protocol cost ranges from less than 10 microseconds (datagram), to 25-30 microseconds (request足response 
and RMP), and 50 microseconds (UDP). The overhead for the reliable Nectar-native protocols is of the 
order of 200 instructions, i.e. similar to that reported in the literature for optimized standard protocols 
[7]. UDP is a lot more expensive, mainly because it has not been optimized. It is also more general than 
the Neetar-native protocols, since UDP packets can travel outside Nectar. 3.5. CAB-CAB latency summary 
Table 3-4 summarizes the results of the CAB-CAB latency analysis. We see that transport protocols are 
responsible for less than 25% of the latency and that both context switching and buffer management are 
more expensive. The table also shows clearly that a thread-based protocol implementation is substantially 
slower than an implementation that does protocol processing in an upcall, at least for a processor that 
uses register windows. Using a flat register file would reduce the difference between the two implementations 
by about 50%. Dgram RR RMP UDp Datalink prot 32 (33%) 36 (23%) 65 (44%) 37 (16%) Transport prot 6 (6%) 
25 (16%) 31 (24%) 50 (21%) Mailbox 30 (31%) 52 (34%) 27 (21%) 60 (26%) Context sw .,. 13 (10%)87(37%) 
29 (30%) 41 (27%) I II Total 97 I 154 127 234 1 1 II I1t Table 3-4: Breakup CAB-CAB latency (microseconds) 
 If we would reimplement the CAB architecture today as a computing node in a multicomputer, we would 
be able to reduce the latency in several ways. First, implementing the datalink in hardware would reduce 
the Malink overhead, Second, transport protocol and buffer management would benefit from more efficient 
implementations and faster hardware. The context switch overhead is the most troublesome. Although this 
cost can be reduced by using a flat register file, adding caches and extending the runtime system (e.g. 
add virtual memory) would increase the cost of context switching. Context switching has traditionally 
also Ixmefited little from increased CPU speed [2]. 4. Host-host breakup A comparison of Figures 2-2 
and 2-3 shows that the behavior of the threads on the CAB is the same for the CAB-CAB and host-host roundtrip 
tests. As a result, we can use the CAB-CAB measurements to analyze the CAB component of the host-host 
roundtrip times. The host-CAB interaction overhead was measured separately on the hardware using a microsecond 
clock on the CAB. The results are shown in Table 4-1. The bottom line shows that our estimates are very 
close to the measured latency. Dgram RR RMP UDP Host to CAB 52 52 52 52 Send Interrupt handling 7 7 7 
7 Conditions 10 10 10 10 Datalink protocol 14 12 12 14 Transport protocol 6 7 22 23 Mbox 8 8 8 8 Register 
windows 0 0 0 24 Thread switch 0 0 0 6 Receive Interrupt handling 7 7 7 7 Conditions 0 0 0 10 Datrdink 
protocol 18 24 24 23 Transport protocol 0 18 7 27 Mbox put 18 25 18 38 Register windows 6 18 12 24 Thread 
switch 0 0 0 5 CAB to Host 26 26 26 26 Total estimate 172 214 205 304 Measured latency 169 225 213 308 
Table 4-1: Estimated breakup host-host latency (micro&#38;onds)  In comparison with the CAB-CAB tests 
(Table 3-l), the number of register underflows and overflows on the CAB on receive is reduced by one 
for most tests, because the protocol threads are one call less deep than the user threads. The RMP protocol 
processing overhead on receive is substantially smaller than in the CAB-CAB test because the application 
on the host can execute while the packets is being acknowledged. The anomaly in the RMP CAB-CAB measurements 
caused by the acknowledgement does not occur in the host-host test. 4.1. Analysis of host-host latency 
The main difference between the host-host and CAB-CAB latency is the addition of the host-CAB interaction. 
The host sends a message by placing it in a mailbox in CAB memory and receives a message by reading it 
from a mailbox in CAB memory. Both operations are expensive because they have to be performed across 
the VME bus. Host accesses to CAB memory take about 1.1 microseconds, and two thirds of the host time 
is spent reading and writing across the VME bus. Note that the time to read and write individual words 
across more recent IO busses such as Turbo Channel [19] is still about 1 microseconds, so single word 
accesses across IO busses are not getting much faster. Sending and receiving messages requires so many 
host accesses to CAB memory for a number of reasons. First, transport protocols are invoked indirectly 
through mailboxes, a general-purpose mechanism for host-CAB communication. An alternative is to give 
transport protecols a privileged status on the CAB, and to invoke them through a special-purpose mechanism. 
Requests for the transport protocols could for example be placed in a special-purpose queue, that is 
always checked by the CAB when it is interrupted by the host. This would eliminate seveml operations, 
such as various mailbox checks and the building of a request for the CAB interrupt handler to wake up 
the protocol thread. This optimization would reduce the host-to-CAB overhead, but the cost would be a 
more complex host-CAB interface since there would be two mechanisms for invoking services on the CAB. 
A second reason for the large number of host accesses to CAB memory is that buffer management is done 
entirely in software. The data structures used for the management of memory and mailboxes are located 
in CAB memory and queueing or dequeueing a message or empty buffer requires a certain number of memory 
accesses. Hardware support for message queues would reduce this cost: enqueue and dequeue operations 
could be performed with a single access across the VME bus. The flexible CAB runtime system also contributes 
to the high cost of host operations on mailboxes. The CAB is a computer system in its own right, and 
can for example destroy mailboxes or alter their properties. As a result, the host has to check for every 
operation on a mailbox whether the status of the mailbox has changed since the last operation; this is 
not complicated but it does requires CAB accesses. The host and CAB currently form an asymmetric multiprocessor, 
If the CAB were purely a slave, the mailbox structure could be simplified. 4.2. Cost of flexibility The 
flexible runtime system on the CAB increases the host-host latency in several ways, and it is interesting 
to consider how the latency would change if we used the CAB as a hardwircd protocol engine. This CAB 
controller could for example continuously poll the interrupt lines to detect network events, send requests 
from the host, and timeout events for the communication protocols. The available CAB data memory would 
be organized as two pools of fixed-sized buffers, one for outgoing and one for incoming packets; note 
that this places an upperbound on the packet size. Messages would be received in simplified mailboxes, 
i.e. FIFOS with a network address. Table 4-2 shows rough estimates for the host-host latency in a Nectar 
system with hardwired protocol engines, assuming the same hardware and protocol processing costs. Dgram 
RR RMP UDP Host to CAB 20 20 20 20 Send Interrupt handling Datalink Protocol Transport Protocol Invoke 
transport 2 14 6 3 f 2 12 7 3 2 12 22 3 2 14 23 3 Receive Interrupt handling Mailbox put Datalink Protocol 
Transport Protocol 2 10 18 o 2 10 24 18 2 10 24 7 2 10 23 27 CAB to Host 20 20 20 20 Total dumb CAB 95 
118 131 144 Total smart CAB 172 214 205 304 Speedup 45% 45% 35% 53% Table 4-2: Estimated host-host latency 
using a hardwired protocol engine (microseconds)  Table 4-2 show that the latency would be reduced by 
35%-53%. Most of the saving is the result of the elimination of the saving and restoring of state on 
the CAB, and of the simplification of the host-CAB interface. The highest speetiup is for UDP, which 
was making most use of the CAB rtmtime system. The cost for host-CAB interaction remains relatively high 
because of the high cost of VME accesses. On transmit, the cost includes taking a block from the free 
queue in CAB memory, writing a header and a data word, and queueing the packet for transmission. Locks 
are required at least for the tlee queue since it is shared by all host processes. A receive operation 
consists of dequeueing a message, reading the data, and enqueue the buffer on the free queue, i.e. the 
fast path in the original mailbox implementation. The results in Table 4-2, as tilt host-host latency 
results reported, are for the case where the message arrives shortly after the application on the host 
tries to read it, i.e. the ideal case. Once the host process has been put to sleep, the host-host latency 
increases. The CAB-CAB latencies reported in the previous section do not have that problem. 4.3. Host-host 
latency summary The host-host latency is significantly higher than the CAB-CAB latency because of the 
high cost of host-CAB interactions. The host-host communication latency can be reduced in several ways. 
First, using a special-purpose mechanism to invoke transport protocols could reduce the cost of sending 
messages. Second, adding hardware support for queue management can minimize the impact of the high overhead 
of accessing individual words across the IO bus. Finally, making the CAB a hardwired protocol engine 
would signillcantly reduce the overhead on the CAB and would also reduce the complexity and cost of the 
host-CAB interface. We would of course also lose the ability to move application code tQ the CAB. 5. 
Other performance measures The estimated host-host latency using a hardware protocol engine are similar 
to the CAB-CAB performance numlxxs. One could conclude that it would be better to use the CAB as a hardwired 
protocol engine, instead of implementing a flexible CAB runtime that supports applications. This conclusion 
is misleading and the reason is that we take into account only the best case latency for short packets 
as a performance measure. If we consider other performance measures, such as throughput and the latency 
when the receiving host process has been put to sleep, the host-host numbers are worse than the CAB-CAB 
numbers.  Besides latency, two other important performance measures are throughput and the overhead 
associated with sending and receiving messages, i.e. how many cycles does art application lose when it 
communicates. The message overhead for Nectar is low compared with that of other networks: it consists 
only of the cost of placing a message in or retrieving a message from a mailbox in CAB memory (Table 
4-1). All other operations associated with communication are performed on the CAB, in parallel with application 
processing on the host. Inexpensive communication is important for many applications. The host-host throughput 
with 8KByte packets [8] is 3 MByte per second; it is limited by the VME bus. The CAB-CAB throughput with 
8KByte packets is about 11 MByte per second. The bottleneck created by the VME bus was one of the main 
motivations for supporting applications on the CAB, since this gives applications access to the network 
without having to cross the VME bus. For example, we have observed cases where a server on the CAB handled 
10000 request per second this performance would not have been possible on the host. We have looked at 
several host-network interfaces in this paper. First we considered the CAB architectures. The network 
interface does not provide any support for protocol processing, but it is closely integrated with the 
CPU-memory system: it has its own fast path into memory (Figure 2-1) and CPU accesses to the network 
device are as fast as memory accesses, so the CPU can control the network interface very quickly. This 
network interface offers the best results for two of the three performance measures: latent y for short 
packets and throughput. We then considered the interface of Nectar hosts: the hosts communicate over 
Nectar using an intelligent network interface that handles protocol processing. This interface has a 
higher latency for short packets, even if we give up the flexible runtime system on the CAB (Table 4-2) 
and it also has a lower throughput because of the VME bottleneck. Sending and receiving (short) messages 
is however less expensive on Nectar hosts than on CABS, since most of the communication overhead (protocol 
processing and buffer management) are performed in parallel with application processing. It should not 
be a surprise that a tight coupling between the CPU and network interface, as we find on the CAB, allows 
us to get good latency and throughput. This is for example how dedicated multicomputers achieve good 
performance. Workstations consist of a core that includes the CPU and the memory system, and all other 
components are relegated to an IO bus. This organization makes building high-performance network interfaces 
much more challenging. For example, host accesses across the IO bus are expensive, and if DMA is used, 
there is a lot of interaction between accesses to host memory by the network interface and the CPU, in 
part because the cache and memory have to be kept consistent in software. 6. Earlier work Other work 
analyzing the overhead associated with network communication includes TCP and UDP communication between 
two Vax 11/750 machines [5], the performance of the Firefly RPC mechanism [161, the performance of the 
remote accesses over Ethernet [181, the x-kernel roundtrip time [10], and the performance of the Amoeba 
RPC [14]. Since all these systems are organized differently and often use different protocols, it is 
hard to compare the results, but we can make some general observations. First, all measurements seem 
to agree that protocol processing is only one part of the overhead other costs such as interrupt handling, 
dealing with the hardware controller (included in the datalink processing overhead in our case), buffer 
management and thread or process scheduling are more significant, certainly for short packets. Second, 
the cost of buffer management for Nectar is typically higher than for the other implementations (if reported), 
with the exception for the TCP/UDP measurements reported in [5]. The reasons are the flexibility of the 
mailbox module, and the requirement that messages have to be contiguous in memory. 7. Conclusion We presented 
an analysis of host-host and CAB-CAB communication latency in Nectar. The CAB-CAB measurements give some 
insights in communication latency between nodes using light-weight runtime systems. We found that four 
sources of overhead are each responsible for about one quarter of the latent y: context switching, buffer 
management and the datalink and transport protocols. A significant component of the context switch overhead 
is the saving and restoring of register windows on the SPARC CPU. Faster hardware and more optimized 
implementations can probably reduce the cost of the last three components. The context switch overhead 
is not likely to drop significantly and will be significant bottleneck in low latency communication. 
Host-CAB interactions form a significant component of the Nectar host-host latency. The primary reason 
is that single word accesses across the IO bus (VME bus for Nectar) are expensive. Provide queueing hardware 
would speed up the host-CAB interaction, since messages and empty buffers can be exchanged using a single 
transfer over the bus, The best solution would of course be to integrate the network interface closely 
with the CPU and memory system of the workstation, as is done on the Nectar CAB. Acknowledgements [ 
would like to thank all the people who contributed to the Nectar project, especially the people involved 
in the development of the communication software: Eric Cooper, Robert Sansom and Brian Zill. I would 
also like to thank I-Chen Wu, Fred Christianson and Denise Ombres for making some of the measurements. 
 References <RefA>1. Special Report. Gigabit Network Testbeds . IEEE Computer 23,9 (September 1990), 77-80. 
 2. Thomas E. Anderson, Henry M. Levy, Brian il. Bershad, and Edward D. Lazowska. The Interaction of 
Architecture and Operating System Design. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Architectural 
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ACM, April, 1991, pp. 108-121. 3. Emmanuel 
Amould, Francois Bitz, Eric Cooper,  H. T. Kung, Robert Sansom and Peter Steenkiste. The Design of Nectac 
A Network Backplane for Heterogeneous Multicomputers. Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ACM/IEEE, Boston, April, 1989, 
pp. 205-216. 4. D. H. Bailey, E. Barszcz, R. A. Fatoohi, H. D. Simon, and S. Weeratunga. Performance 
Results on the Intel Touchstone Gamma Prototype. Proceedings of the Fifth Distributed Memory Computing 
Conference, IEEE, April, 1990, pp. 1236-1245. 5. Luis-Felipe Cabrera, Edwani Hunter, Michael J. Karels, 
and David A. Mosher. User-Process Communication Performance in Networks of Cc)mputers . IEEE Transactions 
on Sofmare Engineering 14, 1 (January 1988), 38-53. 6. David D. Clark. The Structuring of Systems Using 
Upcalls. Proceedings of the Tenth Symposium on Operating System Principles, ACM, December, 1985, pp. 
171-180. 7. David D. Clark, Van Jacobson, John Romkey, and Howard Salwen. An Analysis of TCP Processing 
Overhead . IEEE Communications Magazine 27,6 (June 1989), 23-29. 8. Eric Cooper, Peter Steenkiste, Robert 
Sansom, and Brian Zill. Protocol Implementation on the Nectar Communication Processor. Proceedings of 
the SIGCOMM 90 Symposium on Communications Architectures and Protocols, ACM, Philadelphia, September, 
1990, pp. 135-143.  9. Eric C. Cooper and Richard P. Draves. C Threads. Tech. Rept. CMU-CS-88-154, Computer 
Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, June, 1988. 10. Norman C. Hutchinson and Larry L. Peterson. 
Implementing Protocols in the x-kernel. Tech. Rept. 89-1, University of Arizona, January, 1989. 11. 
H.T. Kung, Robert Sansom, Steven Schlick, Peter Steenkiste, Matthieu Amould, Francois J. Bitz, Fred Christianson, 
Eric C. Cooper, Onat Menzilcioglu, Denise Ombres, and Brian Zill. Network-Based Multicomputer,x An Emerging 
Parallel Architecture. Proceedings of Supercomputing 91, IEEE, Albuquerque, November, 1991, pp. 664-673. 
 12. H.T. Kung, Peter Steenkiste, Marco Gubitoso, and Manpreet Khaim. Parallelizing a New Class of Large 
Applications over High-Speed Networks. Third ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel 
Programming, ACM, April, 1991, pp. 167-177. 13. Samuel J. Leffler, Marshall Kirk McKusick, Michael 
 J. Karels, and John S. Quarterman. The Design and Implementation of the 4.3BSD UNIX Operating System. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 1989. 14. Sape J. Mullender, Guido van Rossum, 
Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Robbert van Renesse, and Hans van Staveren. Amoeba A Distributed Operating System 
for the 1990s . ZEEE Computer 23,5 (May 1990), 44-53. 15. Larry Peterson, Norman Hutchinson, Sean O Malley, 
and Herman Rae. The x-kernek A Platform for Accessing Internet Resources , IEEE Computer 23,5 (May 1990), 
23-34. 16. Michael Schroeder and Michael Burrows. Performance of Firefly RPC . ACM Transactions on Computer 
Systems 8,1 (February 1990), 1-17. 17. MB86900 RISC Processor -Architecture Manual. Fujitsu, 1987. 
18. Alfred Spector. Communication Support in Operating Systems for Distributed Transactions. Tech. Rept. 
CMU足CS-86-165, Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, November, 1986. 19. TURBOchannel 
Overview. Digital Equipment Corporation, 1990.  </RefA>
			
