
 <~ Computer Graphics, Volume 24, Number 4, August 1990 A Lighting Model Aiming at Drive Simulators Eihachiro 
Nakamae*, Kazufumi Kaneda*, Takashi Okamoto* and Tomoyuki Nishita't *Hiroshima University Saijo-cho, 
Higashi-hiroshima, 724 Japan  1"Fukuyama University Higashimura-cho Fukuyama, 729-02 Japan Abstract 
 Many techniques for rendering natural objects such as the sea, terrains, and trees have been developed; 
they are in-dispensable for flight simulators. In this paper, techniques for rendering road surfaces 
under various conditions are dis- cussed. Rendering road surfaces is quite useful for the eval- uation 
of driving safety, and it will play an important part in the development of drive simulators. Light sources 
with high intensity often disturb drivers especially under wet road surface conditions. This paper proposes 
two models, a reflection model for road surfaces taking into account weather conditions, and a model 
on streaks of light taking into account both refraction and diffraction of light. Some examples demonstrate 
the possibility of applications for drive simulators in the future. CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: 
1.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation; 1.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics 
and Realism. General Terms: Algorithms. Additional Key Words and phrases'. Photo-realistic image rendering, 
Drive simulator, Rendering wet roads, Rendering puddles, Reflection model, Streaks of light, Refraction, 
Diffraction, Optical filter.  Introduction Realistic image synthesis, including road surfaces under 
var- ious weather conditions, is an indispensable technique in traffic engineering, especially for the 
development of drive simulators aiming at ensuring safety levels. For example, we are often disturbed 
when driving by complex reflections from both puddles and boundary areas between dry and wet regions 
on a road, and streaks of light (an effect similar to that found in photography when using a special 
camera filter called a 'cross-screen filter', also caused naturally by the eye- lashes) due to high intensity 
lights such as automobile head- lights and street lights also disturb drivers especially under dense 
fog conditions. Photo-realistic image synthesis taking account of these phenomena is quite useful not 
only for drive Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted providedthat the 
copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyrightnotice and the title 
of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
simulators but also road design and simulation of a 'light up' effect on buildings such as when floodlights 
are used. This paper proposes a lighting model for photo-realistic image synthesis considering these 
two phenomena; discussions on other natural phenomena such as rain and snow are not in- cluded here. 
In order to render objects with complex surfaces the following mapping techniques have been developed: 
Tex-ture mapping [3], bump mapping [1], solid texturing [12], displacement mapping [5], and texel mapping 
[6]. These techniques are useful for realistic image synthesis, but not enough for rendering regions 
with different attributes such as dry and wet regions on a road. Concerning high intensity lights, most 
traditional meth- ods cannot give appreciations of these high intensity effects because of saturation 
of display intensities; full color CRTs usually have only 256 levels for each primary color, R, G, and 
B. In order to address the problem Shinya, et al. [13] created streaks of refracted light, but no streaks 
of diffracted light are taken into account. Moravec [9] proposed a wave model considering diffraction, 
however, he didn't discuss the streaks of light found when observing objects with high in- tensity. Taking 
into account both diffraction and refraction makes it possible to display the following phenomena: Ef-fects 
of a diffraction grating and a cross-screen filter used in photography to generate radial streaks of 
light when ob- serving objects with high intensity, a blooming effect around objects with high intensity, 
and several streaks of light emit- ted from the objects. In order to solve these two problems; rendering 
road sur- faces under various conditions and rendering various diffrac- tion effects, a new image synthesis 
technique based on the following ideas is proposed. 1. Road surfaces are modeled using procedural bump 
map- ping consisting of several undulation data. The road surfaces are classified into four regions with 
different characteristics of reflection by using a combination of the undulation data. * A two layer 
reflection model consisting of both wa- ter and road surfaces is introduced for rendering puddles. 2. 
Streaks of light are modeled by taking into account both diffraction and refraction. Streaks of light, 
created when using a diffraction grating in photography, are rendered by the use of a diffraction model. 
 @1990 ACM-0-89791- 344-2/90/008/0395 $00.75 395 @SIGGRAPH '90, Dallas, August 6-10, 1990 Figure 1: Transverse 
section of a road. Blooming effect and streaks of light are rendered by employing a diffraction model 
of the pupil and eyelashes, respectively. The proposed models realize the displaying of the follow- 
ing various lighting effects including sky light [10] and a fog effect. 1. Realistic images displaying 
such aspects as the relation- ship between road heights and wet regions (e.g., pud- dles obviously usually 
gather in low-lying sections), and road surface conditions changing with the passage of time (e.g., wet 
regions becoming gradually dry) can be created. 2. Photo-realistic images with various lighting effects 
un- der various conditions can be generated by taking into account both refraction and diffraction of 
light emitted from objects with high intensity.  2 Modeling and Rendering for Wet Road Surfaces 2.1 
Modeling of road surfaces As is well known, the center of a road is usually higher than the shoulders 
to allow for effective drainage (see Fig. 1 and Appendix A), and the smoothness of road surfaces are 
of- ten far from perfect being somewhat undulating, especially in those sections well worn by automobiles, 
and the length of these sections can vary considerably. A closer look at road surfaces may also reveal 
small undulations of asphalt or concrete. Using Fourier series or fractals for modeling road surfaces 
may seem to be useful, but employing Fourier series can be difficult because of lack of local control 
on the height of the road surfaces. We therefore employed fractals as the basis for one of our methods. 
In most approaches using fractals, several undulations at different levels are re- cursively generated, 
and in the final step, one undulation data is calculated by compositing the previous data. In the proposed 
model four types of undulation data are stored separately, as shown in Fig. 2, in order to classify road 
con- ditions into four types mentioned later. These data are then composited to render the road surface 
by using bump map- ping techniques. The conditions of road surfaces depend to a great extent upon the 
weather. For instance, at the onset of rain wet regions on road surfaces are very sparse, but as the 
rain continues whole regions become uniformly wet, and puddles form in any hollows on the surface. After 
the rain road  /b/k  (a) (b) A £  (c) (d) Figure 2: Several undulation data of a road surface. surfaces 
gradually become dry, and the speed of this drying depends upon the height of the road surface; the higher 
the surface, the quicker the drying. Puddles remain for a longer period. Road surfaces are classified 
into the following four types in order to render various road surface conditions; Type 1: 'a dry region', 
Type 2: 'a wet region'; i.e., the region where the road surface is wet but no water gathers, Type 3: 
'a drenched region'; i.e., the region where water remains to some extent but no puddles are formed, or 
the region of the margin of a puddle, and Type 4: 'a puddle region'. Traditionally, both some thresholds 
and only one height data, which does not take into account the varying types and scale of undulations, 
are commonly used for classification into several regions (e.g., classification of a terrain model generated 
by using fractals into two regions, land and sea); this has several disadvantages. For example, let's 
consider how to classify road surface conditions for the beginning of drying just after rain (see Fig. 
3), assuming the road sur-face condition to be that shown in Fig. 3 (1); there are 'dry regions' in the 
high area and 'puddle regions' with different height in the low area, and both 'wet regions' and 'drenched 
regions' exist between these areas. Fig. 3 (2) shows the clas- sification using one height data and some 
thresholds; 'puddle regions' with different height cannot be generated, because with this method of classification 
all 'puddle regions' have the same height. Moreover, the width of the section (B) where 'dry regions' 
and 'wet regions' exist together, the dis- tance from P to Q, is fixed only by the height data. There-fore, 
the height data has to be modified for every change of the width of the mixed region. In order to solve 
these problems, several undulation data as shown in Fig. 2 are used for classification. Several groups 
of undulation data are formed; each group corresponds to each road surface condition such as big puddles 
and mixed areas of 'dry regions' and 'wet regions'. Each group con-sists of an appropriate combination 
of several height data and a threshold of height for the classification. In order to determine which 
regions road surfaces belong to, the num- ber of groups which satisfy the condition that the height, 
composed of all the undulation data in the group, does not exceed the threshold is specified. Again, 
taking as an example, the classification of a road surface at the beginning of drying just after rain 
(see Fig. 3);  @SIGGRAPH '90, Dallas, August 6-10, 1990 Table 2: Example of the classification of road 
surface con-ditions for heavy rain. (1) number of groups satisfying the condition. I number of groups 
saris- region group No. lying the condition puddle 1 1 drenched 1, 2 1 wet 1, 2 I combination of undulation 
data and thresholds. group undulatmn threshold [ram] road surface con- No. data dition el,2 ei,s el,4 
b, d 27.0 12.0 7.0 large 'puddle re-gion' c, d 30.0 4.0 -- mixed area of 'drenched region' and 'wet region' 
(el,2 :wet, ei,3 :drenched, el,4 :puddle) 2.2 Reflection model for road surfaces The Cook-Torrance model 
[4] is employed for rendering road surfaces because of its ability to generate high-fidelity im- ages. 
The procedural bump mapping technique described in the previous section is also employed for calculating 
the direction of reflection on the road surface. With the pro- posed method it is possible to calculate 
reflection of sky light taking into account spectral distributions [7]. Colors of direct sunlight, sky, 
and clouds are calculated by using an atmospheric scattering model [8], and the scenes on the ground 
can be rendered considering sky light [10]. Reflec-tion models for each classified region are discussed 
in this section. For convenience of explanation the reflection model of a 'drenched region' is discussed 
last. 2.2.1 Reflection model for a 'dry region' Diffuse reflection from dry road surfaces is usually 
high, while specular reflection is very low. Road surfaces are rel- atively smooth, and the area of highlight 
is small. 2.2.2 Reflection model for a 'wet region' When road surfaces become wet, the ratio of specular 
reflec- tion increases, while that of diffuse reflection decreases, so that the intensity becomes generally 
lower. From this, we assume that specular reflection and diffuse reflection coeffi- cients in the 'wet 
region' are 5 to 10 times and 0.1 to 0.3 times those of the 'dry region', respectively. For rendering 
mirror images on road surfaces, a ray tracing technique is employed.  2.2.3 Reflection model for a 'puddle 
region' A 'puddle region' is defined as an area where one can recog- nize water staying on a road surface. 
As shown Fig. 4, a two layer reflection model, horizontal surface of water, L1, cov- ering road surface, 
L2, is introduced. The 'puddle regions' are rendered by considering the following conditions: (1) Puddle 
surface, L1, is completely flat, and distributions of microfacets on road surface, L2, are taken into 
account. (2) Both refraction and transmission at points PI and Qi  light source reflected ray at Qx 
viewpoint Figure 4: Two layer reflection model for a 'puddle region'. are taken into account. (3) The 
ray reflecting again at road surface L1 and returning back to road surface L2 is ignored for the purpose 
of simplifying the calculation. (4) Mirror images onto puddles are taken into account. (5) Incident rays 
onto points Pt and Q1 are the same regarding both their strength and direction because the distance between 
these points is very short as puddles are usually very shal- low. (6) Interference of light is ignored. 
In order to calculate reflection onto puddles (item (4)), a ray-tracing technique, casting rays from 
point Qi in the di- rection of regular reflection for the viewpoint, is employed. Puddles are not always 
clear; they are sometimes muddy. In this case scattering and absorption of light due to mud particles 
should be taken into account. Scattering and ab- sorption due to particles in the air [11] can be employed 
for mud particles in puddles; the component of the intensity of light in the direction 7o is expressed 
by _p.._M__ H I = (Iie .... i + h)re-PZzn~~ (1) ~0 H h _ p_._h.__ + (Iie-P~'~';'~¢(8) +.[a)wpe "°" ~o 
dh H H = (/ie-P~-~" + Is)re -p~°~-~o p H + w&#38;(t-e-~z') -r_.Ai_+I1.__~ H u, Ii¢(6) [1 -- e-" .... 
-v, ¢0,~o, ], + l + 1 cos 'Yi cos 70 where p is particle density; li, intensity of light just after transmission 
into Li; I~, intensity of an ambient light; 7i, angle of the incident light; 7o, angle of the reflected 
light; r, reflection coefficient of L~; w, reflection coefficient of parti- cles; 8, angle of reflection; 
¢(8), phase function. Let's assume that (1) mud particles are considerably larger than the wavelength 
of light, (2) particles have per- fect diffuse reflection surfaces, and (3) the shape of particles is 
spherical. The phase function of mud particles is then expressed by the following equation [2]: 8 ¢(6) 
= ~[sin ~ --F (r -~)cos 6]. (2)  2.2.4 Reflection model for a 'drenched region' The intensity of a 'drenched 
region' is calculated by using a weighting function for the reflection models of a 'wet re-gion' and 
a 'puddle region', because the 'drenched region'     O SIGGRAPH '90, Dallas, August 6-10, 1990 . 
Acknowledgment The data on light sources are courtesy of Matushita Electric Works Ltd. We would like 
to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. References <RefA>[1] Blinn, J. F. Simulation of Wrinkled 
Surfaces. Proceed- ings of SIGGRAPH '78 (Atlanta, Georgia, August 23- 25, 1978). In Computer Graphics 
12, 3 (August 1978), 286-292. [2] Blinn, J. F. Light Refection Functions for Simulation of Clouds and 
Dusty Surfaces. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '82 (Boston, Massachusetts, July 26-30, 1982). In Com-puter Graphics 
16, 3 (July 1982), 21-29. [3] Catmull, E. A Subdivision Algorithm for Computer Display of Curved Surfaces. 
UTEC-CSc 74-133 (1974), University of Utah. [4] Cook, I~. L. and Torrance, K. E. A Reflectance Model 
for Computer Graphics. ACM Trans. on Graphics 1, 1 (1982), 7-24. [5] Cook, R. L. Shade Trees. Proceedings 
of SIGGRAPH '84 (Minneapolis, Minnesota, July 23-27, 1984). In Computer Graphics 18, 3 (1984), 223-231. 
[6] Kajiya, J. T. and Kay, T. L. Rendering Fur with Three Dimensional Textures. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 
'89 (Boston, Massachusetts, July 31-August 4, 1989). In Computer Graphics 23, 3 (1989), 271-280. [7] 
Kaneda, K., Okamoto, T., Nakamae, E., and Nishita, T. Highly Realistic Visual Simulation of Out- door 
Scene under Various Atmospheric Conditions. Proe. CG International '90 (1990) (to be appeared). [8] Klassen, 
R. V. Modeling the Effect of the Atmosphere on Light. ACM Trans. on Graphics 6, 3 (1987), 215- 237. [9] 
Moravec, H. P. 3D Graphics and the Wave Theory. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '81 (Dallas, Texas, August 3-7, 
1981). In Computer Graphics 15, 3 (1981), 289-296. [10] Nishita, T. and Nakamae, E. Continuous Tone Rep- 
resentation of Three-Dimensional Objects Illuminated by Sky Light. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '86 (Dallas, 
Texas, August 18-22, 1986). In Computer Graphics 20, 4 (1986), 125-132. [11] Nishita, T., Miyawaki, Y. 
and Nakamae, E. A Shading Model for Atmospheric Scattering Considering Lumi- nous Intensity Distribution 
of Light Sources. Proceed- ings of SIGGRAPH '87 (Anaheim, California, July 27-31, 1987). In Computer 
Graphics 21, 4 (1987), 303-310. [12] Peachey, D. R. Solid Texturing of Complex Surfaces. Proceedings 
of SIGGRAPH '85 (San Francisco, Cali- fornia, July 22-26, 1985). In Computer Graphics I9, 3 (1985), 279-286. 
[13] Shinya, M., Suite, T., and Takahashi, T. Rendering Techniques for Transparent Objects. Prec. Graphics 
In- terlace '89 (1989), 173-182.</RefA>  Appendix A Gradient of Road Surfaces for Drain- ing The outer edge 
of a curved road is higher than the inner edge for reasons of driving safety. The center of a straight 
road is higher than the shoulders for draining. The gradient of the transverse section of a straight 
road is given in Table 3 and is the Japanese standard, having a parabola or a hyperbola shape. B 2D Filter 
Taking as an example the optical image formation system as shown in Fig. '7, let's assume that the angle 
from the incident light to the optical axis of the lens is small, the distance be- tween the lens and 
the focal plane is d, and the ratio of rays diffracted to the direction (c~,,8) is f(c~,/~). The effect 
of an optical filter can be rendered by employing a linear filtering using function f(a, fl) for an image 
without an optical filter. The procedure of 2D filtering is as following: 1. An image without an optical 
filter, E0(x, y), is created. 2. A linear filtering using function f(x, y) is employed.  El(oc, y) 
= / / Eo(xo,Yo).f( x-x° , Y ~Y°)dxodyo ~" (la) The filter is employed only to pixels with a high in- 
tensity. For plural optical filters corresponding linear filterings are employed in order. 3. In order 
to calibrate output images for a display moni- tor, 3, correction is employed. Table 3: The gradient 
of the transverse section of a road for draining. material gradient asphaltconcrete less than 1.5 others 
less than 2.0 %  
			
