
 ALTERNATIVE EMPLOYMENT STRICTURES IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS: A CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS Soon Ang Information 
Management Research Center @MARC), School of Accountancy and Business, I%nyang Technological University, 
Nanyang Avenue 2263, Republic of Singapore Sandrn Slaughter Department of Information and Decision Sciences, 
395 Hubert H. Humphrey Center Carlson School of Management University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 
 ABSTRACT Prior research on information systems (1S) personnel has focused on managing human resources 
from an internal labor market perspective. The fundamental worker-orgaui­zation arrangement under this 
perspective iis the traditional employer-employee relationship where the worker enters into a long-term 
association with the employer. However, with increasing worker diversity, improvements in telecom­munications 
infrastructure, IS outsourcing ~anddownsizing, organizations are adopting alternative staffing strategies. 
These alternatives represent methods through which an employer offers work, and workers perform it, in 
ways that depart from the traditional employee-employer relationship. In this paper, we develop a taxonomy 
of IS employment structures that encompasses both traditional and alternative staffing arrangements. 
In the taxonomy, specific dimen­sions that differentiate among the varying forms of em­ployment structures 
are discussed and elaborated. For the IS practitioner, this taxonomy offers an array of human resource 
strategies to address severe skills shortages and downsizing pressures. For the IS researcher, the taxonomy 
provides a framework to organize research on personnel and guide future investigation. INTRODUCTION Managing 
human resources in information systems (1S) is one of the most critical issues facing IS management in 
the 1990s (Niederman, Brancheau, and Wetherbe, 1991). In the past extensive research h,as been conducted 
on the IS Permission to copy without fee all or pari of this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
{ofComputing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
SIGCPR 95, Nashville, TN, USA @ 1995 ACM 0-89791 -712-x19510004...$505O workforce (e.g., Ives and Olson, 
1981; Goldstein and Rockart, 1984; Bartoi and Martin, 1982; Couger, 1990; Bartol, 1983; Ferratt and Short, 
1986; Guimaraes and Igbario, 1992; and others). The major assumption in this literature about the worker-organization 
relationship is the traditional employer-employee structure where work is largely subjected to internal 
labor markets or hierarchical control. As a result, many studies on IS personnel focus on examining issues 
related to the organization s perma­nent internal IS workforce. Issues such as how to moti­vate, develop, 
and train IS personnel, turnover, and internal career pathing are prominent themes. However, more recently, 
there have been challenges to this internal labor market perspective. Pfeffer and Baron (1988) in particular 
suggest that organizations are exter­nalizing a buffer of workers against the permanent work­force. Externalization 
refers to the degree of detachment of a worker to the organization. Buffers in the form of alternative 
work arrangements are viewed as necessary responses to an environment that is becoming increasingly dynamic, 
competitive and uncertain (Handy, 1989). As empirical support for Pfeffer and Baron s assertions, Slaughter 
and Ang (1994) found that there was a signifi­cant trend toward greater externalization of IS workers 
as organizations adopt outsourcing and downsizing strategies (Lob and Venkatramau, 1992). In this paper, 
we examine the etiology of alternative work armngements in 1S. We begin with a general discussion of 
the traditional employer-employee relationship, identify forces that encourage evolution toward external 
forms of control, and outline specific motivators to externalization unique to the IS workforce. We then 
propose a taxonomy of IS employment structures that spans beyond the tradi­tional employer-employee relationship 
and offer proposi­tions predicting the selection of particuku employment structures. As depicted in Figure 
1, our taxonomy depicts a spectrum of IS employment structures ranging from the traditional internal 
form to external arrangements. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of this myriad of work 
arrangements for managing an IS work­force and with suggestions for further research. INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
FORMS OF EMPLOYMENT STRUCTURES The Traditional Employer-Employee Relationship According to the classic 
economic view of labor markets, workers move frequently and freely between jobs to take advantage of 
better employment opportunities (B akke, 1954). However, historically, hierarchical or internal control 
of the workforce supplanted the open labor market for various reasons. In the seminal research on internal 
labor markets, Doeringer and Piore (1971) observed that information, opportunities, mobility, and rewards 
could be differentially structured internally within a fm and shaped by varying occupational, industry, 
and organizational ar­rangements. Thus, they argue that internal governance structures emerged as a means 
of controlling or influencing the open labor market. This suggests that an important motivation for an 
internal employment relationship is that it enables greater control by the principal (the employer) over 
the agent (the employee). Based on authority appro­priated from the legal basis of an employment relation, 
the employer enjoys and controls a zone of indifference over the employee. By a zone of indifference, 
we mean a set of activities that workers perform under the authority and direction of the employer in 
exchange for their wages (Simon, 1957; Stinchcombe, 1990). The caricature of an employee in this traditional 
employer­employee relationship is one who, except for vacations and holidays, works all year-round at 
the employer s place of business. Furthermore, unless they resign or have their ser­vices terminated, 
employees are assumed to remain with the employer until death or retirement. In terms of remu­neration, 
employees receive additional fringe benefits designed in part to reward and encourage continued service 
(Nye, 1988). From the legat perspective, both parties have rights and responsibilities accorded to them 
by both com­mon law and employment statutes governing the employer­employee relationship. In sum, upon 
entering an employ­ment relationship, an employee accepts an implied obliga­tion to yield obedience to 
all reasonable rules, orders, and instructions of the employer (Masten, 1991). Besides enabling principals 
greater control over the agents, several other justifications have been offered for an inter­nal labor 
market. One argument advanced by Williamson (198 1) is the specificity of the assets embodied in the 
worker. Human asset specificity is increased as the skills and knowledge of the worker become more specialized 
and less transferable to other employers, Thus, internal organi­zation of labor benefits both worker 
and employer where assets are specific because it provides the employee with prospects of upward mobility 
through regularized career advancements, and enables the employer to recoup invest­ments in training 
the worker. Another potential explanation for internal markets is an efficiency argument: internal forms 
of control lower transaction costs by reducing informational requirements and the need for recurrent 
contracting (Williamson, 1980). Under this view, where there is a monopoly situation of workers with 
firm-specific skills, the result is higher transaction costs because firm-specific skills and knowl­edge 
create small numbers bargaining situations between employer and employee, favoring opportunistic behavior 
on both sides. Thus, it is more advantageous for the organization to put the worker under internal managemen~ 
because the costs of contracting are high. A final related explanation of the evolution toward internal 
forms of control is the size argument (Edwards, 1979). Where there are large, powerful fhms that are 
in a monopoly situation, and as these fhrns grow in size and complexity, it is more cost-effective to 
shift towards bureaucratic controi of employees. Thus, bureaucratic control becomes embedded in the social 
and organizational structure of the firm and establishes the impersonal force of the company rules or 
policy as the basis for control. A common thread linking these arguments for internal labor market arrangements 
is the reduction of costs related to controlling workers. Motivating Factors toward External Forms of 
Labor Control Despite the advantages afforded by long-term employment and internal labor market arrangements, 
there are corre­sponding costs and disadvantages associated with these structures. In fact, it can be 
argued that the recent visible and prominent trends of alternative work arrangements are evidence of 
organizations responding to costs and disad­vantages of the traditional internal labor market structures 
accentuated by dynamic changes in economies, organiza­ tions, technology, and labor compositions. To 
illustrate, costs of permanent workers can exceed those for temporary workers because of the additional 
expenses for benefits, training, and recruiting. A recent bulletin published by the United States Chamber 
of Commerce indicates that while organizations reported paying health, retirement and vacation benefits 
to 1009?oof permanent employees, only 17% of part-time or temporary workers received paid benefits from 
these firms (Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 1991, p. 32). In addition, the cost of these benefits 
for permanent workers, in partic­ular, has been rising dramatically in recent years. For example, the 
United States Chrunber of Commerce also reports that employee benefits increased from 17.O?ZOto 37.9% 
of total payroll costs fkom 1955 to 1990 (Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 1991, p. 36). This 
provides significant cost incentives for organizations to reduce the number of permanent employees. Another 
potential motivation for choice of an external control mechanism for labor is to protect resources that 
are critical to the firm s survival. A resource dependency perspective (Pfeffer and Sakmcik, 1978) suggests 
that one mechanism by which organizations gain control over critical dependencies is environmental buffering. 
Under this view, externalized workers can be seen as a flexible buffer that can easily expand and contract 
to absorb fluctu­ations in environmental demand. A relaled view is ad­vanced by Scott (1992) who argues 
that establishing control mechanisms for workforce management is similar to establishing boundaries between 
the fwm and the envi­ronment. A key objective in boundary setting is to protect or insulate the key technical 
core activities of the organiza­tion from environmental disturbances (Thompson, 1967). Thus, organizations 
would be likely to externalize less critical workers in conditions of environmental uncertainty, i.e., 
where there is a lack of specific, needed information to effectively accomplish work. There are indications 
that organizations face increasing uncertainty in labor and product markets and are limited in their 
ability to effect direct control over these sources of uncertainty. Several key economic and demographic 
trends have the potential for increasing turbulence in the environ­ment (summarized in Johnston and Packer, 
1987). One trend is the integration of the world economy which reduces the organization s ability to 
control outcomes because outcomes are tightly linked to a world economy that cannot be easily influenced. 
Integration into a world economy also increases competition in produc~ service and labor markets, with 
the result that for both firms and nations, increased competition means that there will be relentless 
pressure to change and adapt to new markets and technologies (Johnston and Packer, 1987, p. 48). Another 
important trend is the proliferation of rapidly advancing technologies such as those in information storage, 
process­ing and communications. These new technologies induce complex changes such as overcoming the 
barriers of time and distance that have organized work for cxmturies. Thus, Johnston and Packer conclude 
technology will introduce change and turbulence into every industry and every job (1987, p. 37). A final 
important trend is the changing demographics of the workforce which is, in general, growing more slowly 
and composed of aging workers. By the year 2000, the median age of the U.S. population will be 36-higher 
than at any time in the history of the nation (Johnston and Packer, 1987, p. 79). In addition, a higher 
proportion of the workforce wilt be composed of female, minority and immigrant workers who tend to less 
well-trained. How­ever, at the same time, the job mix is changing such that the fastest growing jobs 
require higher skill and education­al levels. This suggests that organizations may need to make costly 
investments to train key personnel. Overall, these trends imply that organizations may find the traditional 
structure of the internal labor market mechanism or internalization unduly restrictive and inoperative 
(Davis- Blake and Uzzi, 1993). In contrast, externalization may increase a fro s flexibility in dealing 
with changing labor market conditions and organizational requirements in the following ways. First externalization 
may reduce employ­ment costs. Firms can hire externalized workers without increasing the cost of health 
insurance and other fringe benefits (Christopherson, 1989). Second, externalization may reduce administrative 
costs. In cases where external employers of independent contractors plan and manage external workers, 
the administrative burden of the client organization is greatly relieved (Belous, 1989). Third, externalized 
workers are hired without expectation of long­term employment. Contracts with externalized workers may 
be allowed to lapse without tarnishing a firm s image or fear of discriminatory employment practices 
(Osterman, 1988). Despite the advantages of externalization, we do not expect fms to externalize their 
workforce completely. Rather, we anticipate that fms will rely increasingly on a dual em­ployment structure 
strategy where there is an internal core of permanent workers and a buffer of external workers to absorb 
environmental fluctuations. Cost and resource dependency arguments imply that the internal core of workers 
would most likely consist of those with firm­specific skills, involved in core or critical activities 
to the firm s survival, and in whom the firm has invested a significant amount of training. Externalized 
workers would tend to be those involved in less central activities, and would possess skills that are 
less firm-spec~lc and can be more rapidly obsoleted. Forces for Externalization of IS Work Arrangements 
In the IS context, devising work arrangements other than the traditional employment relationship is even 
more critical because of increasingly rapid evolution of techno­logy. Cutting-edge technologies typically 
enjoy lifespans of only about two years (Appleton, 1994). Skills of 1S personnel therefore erode very 
rapidly. Operating in short windows of stable technological environments, IS organi­zations with a static 
workforce anchored in traditional employer-employee relationships continually face the problem of needing 
to upgrade the skills of the workforce. In light of competence-destroying technological develop­ments, 
commitment to training the internal workforce may even be self-defeating. For example, because technologies 
move so rapidly, by the time an organization invests in and trains its IS staff on a certain technology, 
that technology may already become obsolete (Mead, 1994; Appleton, 1994; Martin, 1992). In addition to 
rapidly changing technologies, IS also faces severe skills shortages (Unwin, 1990; Yourdon, 1992). Shortage 
of skilled labor is acute because tie IS industry is relatively new and a very quickly growing sector 
(Connor and Pearson, 1986). In the U. S., demand for software is projected to be growing at 20-26% per 
year, but the supply of trained information systems professional is growing at only 3-4% (Zawila, 1985). 
The result is a large backlog of software requests which is estimated at almost 2 years (Gallant, 1986). 
For specific skills, shortage of labor is particularly pronounced. For example, Casey (1988) found that 
programme~ and halysts with software and hardware skills in specific hardware and operating systems were 
extremely rare. Skills scarcity is exacerbated because organizations no longer invest in training IS 
personnel because high turnover rates mean they would not have the chance to amortize the training investment. 
For example, Nolan lamented that organizations spend only an average of 12 days per year in training 
an IS employee (James, 1992) when the frequency of education and training should increase to about 52 
days per year. Training should intensify because the repertoire of skill sets associated with the IS 
professionals of the 1990s are more multifaceted than those of the past. While technical skills and systems 
development were the fundamental skills sets of the past IS professionals, the ideal IS professionals 
of the 21st century must possess a combination of techni­cal and practical knowledge, skills and abilities 
(KSAS). These include technical, interpersonal, teamwork, manage­ment and business skills sets necessary 
at each echelon of the IS career hierarchy (l%rwell, Kuramoto, Lee, Trauth, and Winslow, 1992; Ryan 1991; 
Trauth, Farwell, Lee 1993; Davis 1993). Another unique characteristic of the IS industry is that organizations 
outside the computer services industries tend to experience higher IS turnover than those within it. 
As argued by Casey (1988), computer services employers have very flexible salary systems that make it 
much easier to pay the rate the market requires for the skills in question. On the contrary, those outside 
the computer services industry have salary systems tied to those for the industry in which they are operating. 
If that industry is not expand­ing, as the computer services industry is, its overall salary levels, 
and hence those of the IS staff, are likely to be below those obtained in computing services. Thus, staff 
shortages arise due to the inability of non-computer ser­vices industries to compete on salary terms. 
While at­tempts have been made to restructure IS satary systems or to add special supplements in an attempt 
to attract and retrain IS staff, such adjustments are complicated to implement. Moreover, as observed 
by Casey (1988), these adjustments also risk pressures to follow on from non-L$ staff. The inabitity 
to compete on salary terms is compounded i~ many cases by an inability to offer sufficiently satisfying 
work to attract labor with the skills that are desired. Organizations with established IS departments 
require staff who are able to take on software development work as required and who in the interim will 
zdso undertake main­tenance work. Maintenance work is, however, often not considered suftlciently interesting 
or challenging by many of those who are qualified to perform development work (Swanson and Beath, 1989). 
The problem is compounded by the continuing maturity of the applications development portfolio of organizations. 
Over the last several decades, maintenance work has been requiring a large and increas­ing proportion 
of IS resources, often as high as 80-95% in many organizations (Lientz, Swanson and Tompkins, 1978; Nosek 
and Palvia, 1990). Thus, development work in proportion to maintenance work continues to diminish considerably. 
Yet, from the IS worker s point of view, there is less incentive to remain in position once the development 
tasks have been completed. Especially in a fast moving industry where technological obsolescence is prevalen~ 
IS workers fear that unless they are continuously involved in development work, their skills will deteriorate, 
and this will not only affect their future earning power, -but also their ability to take on the sort 
of work they enjoy (Casey, 1988). At the extreme, the inability of non-computing services industries 
to attract sufficiently quatilied staff to run their IS departments has led to outsonrcing where organizations 
contract out the entire IS department (Gershkoff, 1990). The service-provider is able to staff up more 
successfully since it can offer higher salary levels and a sufficient variety of tasks, by being involved 
in development work for a number of different clients. An outsourcing strategy necessitates disbanding 
of the internal IS staff, and in­creases the organization s reliance on externalization. Thus, forces 
toward externalization appear to larly strong in the context of IS. In order to this externalization 
phenomenon, we develop of alternative IS employment structures as wetl propositions predicting the conditions 
under structure will be adopted. be particu­understand a taxonomy as a set of which each ALTERNATIVE 
FORMS OF EXTERNALIZING IS EMPLOYMENT STRUCTURES According to Pfeffer and Baron (1988), externalization 
refers to the degree of attachment or, mofle appropriately, detachment of a worker to the organization. 
Three dimen­sions of externalization are (1) physical proximity between the worker and organization (Locational 
detachment); (2) the duration of employment (temporal detachment); and (3) the extent of internal control 
over personnel related activi­ties (administrative detachment). Based on these dhnen­sions, externrdization 
occurs when the worker is physically removed from the workplace for non job-related reasons, when the 
duration of employment is diminished, and when the employer reduces administrative control over the employee. 
Figure 1 depicts a spectrum of work arrange­ments between worker and organization that varies along each 
dimension of externalization. Locational Detachment Locational attachment refers to the geogmphical proximity 
betsveen the workers and the organization. In traditional work amangements, workers perform their activities 
on the physical with the restricted remote combines premises of organizations. In contrasc especially 
advent of telecommuting, workers need not be to the place of work. They may be placed at work sites such 
as their homes. Telecommuting the use of information and communication technologies with the concept 
of the flexible workplace. Thus, telecommuting may be defined as work carried out Figure 1 ~TAXONOMY 
OF EMPLOYMENT STRUCTURES l raditionat Employment Stnlctule 7 IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS I R On LQcatioMt 
Temporal Addnistmtive htachmmt Detachment Detachment QEg, :, ~­ mmleWorkels Peutl inlem 1 Ptacement~t 
-b = Agencies contractor ­  in a location where, remote from central ot%ces or produc­tion facilities, 
the worker has no personal contact with co­workers there, but is able to communicate with them using 
information technology. From the worker s point of view, locational detachment is advantageous because 
it reduces commuting costs, allows workers to work in familiar environments such as their homes, and 
allows workers to balance roles in employing organizations and family. Balancing work and family is important 
with the increasing trend of employing women, particularly married women with children (Kraut, 1989). 
For employers, locational detachment can save overhead costs, especially in large cities such as London 
and Tokyo where office space is premium. Moreover, there is wide­spread consensus that productivity gains 
can result from telework because of fewer interruptions, improved concen­tration, increased motivation 
and job satisfaction, and elimination of wasted time and frustration of commuting. In the IS context, 
locational detachment is especially vital in cases where the necessary skills span national bound­aries. 
In places such as India, the Philippines, and the People s Republic of China, large numbers of qualified 
software engineers exist to relieve IS labor shortages in the United States (Apte, 1991). While there 
is a steady flow of the best software engineers to the United States, such influx of foreign talent is 
not without political and admin­istrative implications. For example, tight visa requirements and regulations 
render recruitment of foreign talent prohi­bitive. Telecommuting therefore presents an excellent alternative. 
As discovered by organizations such as Citi­corp and Texas Instruments, foreign talent can be har­nassed 
via locational detachment. In other words, rather than uprooting a software engineer from a foreign country 
and moving the person to the United States to perform services on-site, the services could be rendered 
on foreign soil, with communication aid provided by a dedicated satellite link with a combination of 
fax, electronic mail, and data communications. This leads us to advance the following propositions: PI: 
Organizations in geographic areas where com­muting or relocation costs are high are more likely to adopt 
locational detachment IS work arrangements. P2: Organizations with empathy toward workers balancing of 
work and family responsibilities are more likely to adopt locational detachment IS work arrange­ments. 
P3: Organizations located on premium property are more likely to adopt locational detachment IS work 
ar­rangements. Despite its advantages, locational detachment has its accompanying disadvantages. For 
example, difficulties in control and supervision of teleworkers, accompanied by decreasing loyalty to 
the company are often cited as constraints to telework. From the workers point of view, remuneration 
and benefits tend not to be equivalent be­tween teleworkers and normal salaried employees. For example, 
in a research study carried out in the United Kingdom by the Low Pay Unit in 1983, computer profes­ sionals 
performing telework were found to be earning between 19 to 29% less than on-site workers performing similar 
activities. The study also revealed that overtime compensation, which makes up a considerable proportion 
of many wage packets in the computer industry, is not usually paid to teleworkers (Martino and Wirth, 
1990). Moreover, telework has also been found to affect the physical and psychological well-being of 
workers. Conse­quently, by separating workers from their co-workers, telework generates isolation and 
stress, and reduces the stimulation of exchanging ideas with colleagues. The lack of day-to-day interaction 
may gradually isolate teleworkers from a professional as well as a social point of view and affect their 
career development (Martino and Wirth, 1990), Thus, we propose the following: P4: Organizations that 
vatue social interaction among workers are less likely to adopt locational detachment IS work arrangements. 
Temporal Detachment Temporal detachment refers to the length or duration of employment. Externalization 
on the temporal dimension can be achieved by employing part-timer workers or full­time workers for fixed 
contract periods. Traditionally, part-time workers are defined as those who work for less than 35 hours 
per week (Hotchkiss, 1991). There are a number of advantages in using part-time workers as part of a 
human resource strategy. The major rationate for part­time work is flexitillity in scheduling workers 
to meet peak demand periods. To illustrate, Nollen and Martin (1978) found that part-time work is more 
critical in service indus­tries, including IS services, than in manufacturing or goods-producing industries. 
The rationale is that while goods can be produced at an even pace and held in inven­tories to meet demand, 
services cannot be inventoried and must be provided on demand. When demand is uneven or must be met outside 
normal working day or on weekends, as in the case of systems or data center operators, employ­ers favor 
part-time employment as a means of fitting the work force more efficiently to the workload. This suggests 
the following propositions: P5: Organizations in which work demand is uneven are more likely to adopt 
temporal detachment IS work arrangements. P6: Organizations in which services must be provided outside 
normrd working hours are more likely to adopt temporal detachment IS work arrangements. From the perspective 
of the employee, opportunities for part-time work can be perceived as a boon with the demo­graphic shifts 
in the work force in the form of a greater influx of women, students and retirees (Tiny, 1991). For example, 
computer science students often provide their programming services to organizations on a part-time basis 
as they work their way through college. Similarly, parents with child care responsibilities often opt 
for part time jobs in order to balance work and family ccmcerns. This suggests that P7: Organizations 
are more likely to adopt temporal detachment IS work arrangements if their human resource pool is predominantly 
composed of workers who cannot offer full time service. Despite the advantages of part-time work from 
both the employer and employee perspectives, the status of part­time work compared to full-time jobs 
is still considerably low. In addition to receiving lower pay ancl benefits, part­time workers are stereotyped 
as having less commitment to their jobs. Hence, they face more difficult career paths (Granrose and Applebaum, 
1986). Administrative Detachment Administrative detachment refers to the extent of internal control over 
personnel-related activities. Administrative detachment occurs when firms remove tasks from their own 
administrative control (Pfeffer and Baron, 1988). Included in major administrative tasks related to personnel 
are (1) hiring and selection, (2) evaluating performance and administering remuneration, and (3) developing 
train­ing and skills. Detachments along one or more of these administrative dimensions characterize different 
forms of alternative arrangements including placement agencies, contract workers, and employee leasing. 
Table 1 distin­guishes the different forms of administrative detachments and contrasts them with the 
traditional emplloyer-employee relationship. In the traditional employer-employee relationship, there 
is a direct worker-organization arrangement on a non-fixed term basis. Control and administrative aspects 
of hiring, remuneration, and training are handled by the organization itself. Figure 2(a) depicts such 
a relationship. In the case of using placement agencies, selection and recruitment are handled by the 
agency. As depicted in Figure 2(b), these agencies advertise the required positions, select and recruit 
potential employees for the client organi­ zation for a fee. After a successful match, the client organization 
often enters into a traditional employer-em­ ployee relationship with the worker (in the case of a permanent 
position), or a contract worker relationship. One immediate benefit for relying on placement agencies 
is the cost and effort saved in recruitment. Considering that recruitment costs include preparing or 
reviewing specifications for both the job to be done and person to be recruited, briefing of the personnel 
oftlcer with the manag­ er, preparing recruitment programs, search and promo­ tionalfadvertisement costs, 
evaluating candidates, inter­ viewing including traveling, hospitality, university/college job talks, 
selection tests, induction, medical examination prior to establishment, etc. (Evans and Walker, 1986), 
outsourcing the task of hiring or selection to a professional head-hunter or placement agency relieves 
considerable administrative overhead associated with human resources management. Thus, we advance the 
following proposition: P8: Organizations are more likely to adopt the place­ment agency form of administrative 
detachment IS work arrangement if placement agencies have a comparative cost advantage in IS worker selection 
and recruitment. Contract workers are typically independent and self-em­ployed. They are hired on a fried 
term basis through an agreed-upon contract. The contract may provide a fixed duration of service or on 
a job-by-job basis. As depicted in Figure 2(c), contract workers are often hired and remu­nerated directly 
by the client organization. A primary distinction between the traditional employer-employee relationship 
and the independent contractor work arrange­ment is the absence of training provided by the client organization 
in the contractor work arrangement. Rather than training internal personnel, client organizations often 
hire contract workers because they possess skills and expertise necessary to complete a task immediately 
at hand. Suitably labeled as an elite corp of temporary workers, independent contractors include a wide 
range of professionals such as systems analysts, programmers, and engineering researchers (Lewis and 
Molloy, 1991). From the workers point of view, contract work provides an opportunity to establish a special 
expertise or professional status withh an industry. In fact, it is often regarded as a way for workers 
to focus on aspects of their profession that they most enjoy (e.g., programming instead of manag­ing 
software projects) without having to deal with corpo­rate politics or pressures to move up the expected 
career ladder (Lewis and Schuman, 1988). For example, a programmer comments: I m financially and emotionally 
secure ... I never needed to be a company man (Lewis and Schuman 1988, p. 34). Table 1. Dimensions of 
Administrative Control by Client Organizations Alternative Work Arrangements in Administrative Detachment 
Traditional Employer-Employee Placement Independent Employee Relationship Agencies Contractor Leasing 
Hiring and Selection d J Remuneration d d J J* Training and Skills d Development  Note # administrative 
task performed by client organization (i.e., organization requiring the services of the worker). #* if 
client organization enters into a permanent employee relationship with the worker, then training and 
skills development are typically provided by the organization. Otherwise, if client organization enters 
into an independent contractor arrangement with the worker, training is typically not provided. While 
contract staffing offers many advantages, there are company (Mayan and Nelson, 1982; Bennett, 1986). 
The also disadvantages associated with this strategy. As IS outsourcing strategy of the Kodak-IBM partnership 
is elaborated in Causer and Jones (1992), wages of main-the quintessence of employee leasing. In that 
arraugemenq taining contract staff are higher than permanent employees. Kodak fired about 200 of its 
permanent IS staff who The higher wages are also perceived as de-motivating were bought over by IBM, 
who in turn leased the staff factors for permanent staff and cause potential tension back to Kodak. In 
other outsourcing arrangements, the between the two groups. Second, the quality of contract leased workers 
have never been employees of the client workers is not tested as compared to permanent employees. organizations. 
Instead, workers are employed by the Third, in positions which require company-specific kuowl-service 
organizations (often consulting firms) to provide edge, contract staff will be inefficient as time is 
needed to specific services to the client organizations. In both of the groom them for the job. Finally, 
some believe that exper­ these situations, leased employees are formally on the payroll of another entity, 
the service organization, but thetise developed within the organization should be retained direction 
and control of their work is left largely in theas far as possible. This leads us to propose the following: 
hands of the client organization. This leads us to adwmce our final proposition: P9: Organizations are 
more likely to adopt the con­tract staffing form of administrative detachment IS work Pll: Organizations 
are more likely to outsource thearrangement if contract workers are less costly to adminis­entire IS 
function if the administrative costs of managingter than permanent workers. an internal workforce exceed 
the cost of services charged by an IS service provider. P1O: Organizations are less likely to adopt the 
contract staffing form of administrative detachment IS work ar-The number of organizations adopting externalization 
of rangement if the job requires organization-s~cific skills. administrative control for IS work is 
growing dramatically as evidenced by Howe (1986) who observed that the Employee leasing is the most radical 
transformation of the number of service organizations providing computer and traditional employer-employee 
relationship and is depicted information services is the most rapidly growing business in Figure 2d. 
In the pure form of employee leasing, an service industry. Such trends imply an increasing interor­ arrangement 
is made where a business formally fries its ganizational division of labor, as work formerly conducted 
 regular workers, who are then hired by an employee within the boundaries and under the administrative 
control leasing company, who in turn leases them back to their of a single enterprise is parcelled out 
to more specialized original employer. In this case, the administrative hiring, organizational entities. 
The implications for internal fiing, payroll, day-to-day personnel management selection human resource 
management include the reduction of ease and implementation of benefits, worker compensation and with 
which workers can build careers via the internal labor insurance premiums are all the responsibility 
of the leasing market of moving upwards in single organizations. Figure 2a TIU4DITIONAL IS EMPLOYMENT 
RELATIONSHIP hiresand PIIYS ORGANIZATION WORKER provi servicesdirectly ) REQUIRING THESERVICE h. Figure 
2b IS PLACEMENT AGIENCY RELATIONSHIP ~---------------------­ ................................................................................ 
 hiresand PfiJW (&#38;Wtly w ORGANIZATION  REQUIRING ................................ ................................. 
 WORKER providesServkesTHE SERVICE directly A recruits and selects PuK13-AGENCY pays a fee F.@.ue 
2C IS CONTRACT WORK ~LATIONSHW paysdirectly v  ORGANIZATION REQUIRINGWORKER ) provides service via 
a THE SERVICE contract for a iixed term Figure 2d IS EMPLOYEE LEASING WORK RELATIONSHIP paysindirectly 
v SERVICE  CoMPJmm hiresand pays v  ORGANIZATION REQmG  WORKER > provides service directly THE SERVICE 
 CONCLUSION In the previous sections, we have outlined the different forms of externalized structures 
organizations can adopt for flexible human resource strategies. Although dimensions of locational, temporal, 
and administrative control were discussed separately, in reality, these dimensions are not mutually exclusive. 
A managerial implication is that innovative attemative work arrangements can be formed by combining different 
dimensions of detachments. For example, organizations offering locational detachment in the form of telecommuting, 
can also offer temporal detach­ment in the form of flexi-time telecommuting. Similarly, contract workers 
(administrative detachment) can be hired on a part-time basis (temporal detachment). We propose a taxonomy 
of alternative IS work arrange­ments created by specifying the different dimensions of externalization 
in the IS context. The taxonomy offers organizations a spectrum of new human resource strategies to combat 
IS skills shortages. However, when implement­ing these alternative work arrangements, organizations need 
to be cognizant of (1) legal ramifications; (2) the ability to control or monitor performance; and (3) 
work­place attitudes. In terms of legal ramifications, any deviation from the traditional employer-employee 
arrangement means that the legal obligations and risks for both the employer and employee become ill-defined. 
Generally, courts, tax authorities, worker compensation boards, and administra­tive agencies that enforce 
employee protection statutes cover only cases where a worker is an e]mployee in the traditional sense. 
Comprehensive legal protection for both worker and organization in cases of part-time work, tempo­rary 
work, or independent contracting is less well defined. Another concern relating to externalization is 
the erosion of the organization s ability to control workers. Monitor­ing and control become problematic 
when the execution and control of the tasks are not co-located a.sin the case of locational detachment 
(Beath and Straub 1989), or when control of the work lies in the hands of the service com­pany s own 
supervisory staff. Explicit and specific out­come measures must be negotiated and implemented at the 
beginning of the contract to ensure quality job perfor­ mance. Finally, the social and psychological 
effects of alternative workforce arrangements on the existing permanent work­force in an organization 
must be examined to ensure a smooth co-existence of two separate classes of workers. For example, Pearce 
(1993) found that tihe presence of contractor co-workers was associated with employee reports of lower 
organizational trustworthiness. Lack of trust is problematic because prior research indicates that distrust 
leads employees to reduce levels of performance (Organ, 1988), to leave the organization (Porter and 
Steers, 1973), to reduce cooperation (Gembet@ 1988), and also to exhibit dysfunctional behavior such 
as lying, cheating, and stealing (Rotter, 1980). Thus, while the variety of attemative workforce arrange­ments 
offers IS managers considerable flexibility in re­sponding to labor shortages, there is potential for 
negative impacts of these arrangements on organizational climate and working relationships. This is w 
important area for future research. REFERENCES <RefA>Appleton, E. L. Staffing up? Here s what you ll pay, 
Datamation, October 15, 1994, pp. 53-56. Apte, U. Globat Outsonrcing of Information Systems and Processing 
Services, ~ (7), 1991, pp. 287-303. Bakke, E.W. ~ rtunit MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1954. Bartol, K.M. 
Turnover Among DP Personnel: A Causat Analysis, Communications of the ACM, 26(10), 1983, pp. 807-811. 
Bartol, K. M., and Martin, D.C. Managing Information Systems Personnel: A Review of the Literature and 
Mana­gerial Implications, MIS Quarterly, Special Issue, 1982, pp. 49-70. Beath, C.M., and Straub, D.W. 
Managing Information Resources at the Department Level: An Agency Perspec­tive, Proceedings of the 22nd 
Hawaii International Confer­ence on Systems Sciences, Kailua-Kona, HI, 1989. Belous, R.S. The Contingent 
Economy: The Growth of the Temporary , Part-Time, and Subcontracted Workforce, Washington, D.C.: National 
Planning Association, 1989. Bennett, A. Tax Legislation Puts Leasing of Employees in New Light, ~ 22, 
September 1986, p. 7. Casey, B. Temporary Employment Practice and Policy in -Policy Studies Institute, 
London, UK, 1988. Causer, G., and Jones, C. Responding to Skills Short­ages : Recruitment and Retention 
in a High Technology Labor Market, ~ 3(3), 1992, pp. 1-21. Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 
Employee Benefits: 1991 Edition, Report #A3840-1, Publication #0289, 1991.  Christopherson, S. Flexibility 
in the U.S. Service Eco­nomy and the Emerging Spatial Division of Labor, Trans­actions of the Institute 
of British Geography, 14, 1989, pp. 131-143. Connor, H., and Pearson, R. Information Technology Manpower 
into the 1990s, Institute of Manpower Studies, University of Sussex, April 1986. Couger, J.13. Motivating 
Analysts and Programmers, ComputerWorld, 24(3), January 15, 1990, pp. 73- 76. Davis, D.B. Hard Demand 
for Soft Skills, Datamation, January 15, 1993, pp. 28-32.  Davis-Blake, A., and Uzzi, B. Determinants 
of Employ­ment Externalization A Study of Temporary Workers and Independent Contractors, ~ 38(2), 1993, 
pp. 195-223. Doeringer, P.B., and Piore, M.J. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis, Heath, Lexington, 
MA, 1971.  Edwards, R. Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the w~ Basic Books, New York, 1979. 
 Evans, A., and Walker, L. Sub-Contracting, in Flexible Patterns of Work, C. Curson (cd). United Kingdom: 
Institute of Personnel Management 1986.  Farwell, D.W., Kuramoto, L., Lee, D., Trauth, E.M., and Winslow, 
C. A New Paradigm for IS: The Educational Implications, Information Systems Management, 9(2), Spring, 
1992, pp. 7-14. Ferratt, T.W., and Short, L.E. Are Information Systems People Different? An Investigation 
of Motivational Differ­ences, MIS Quarterly, 10(4), December 1986, pp. 377-387. Gallant, J. Survey Finds 
Maintenance Problem Still Escalating, ComputerWorld, 20(4), January, 1986, p. 31. Gembat@ D. Mafia The 
Price of Mistmst, in D. Gem­batta (cd), ~, Basil Blackwell, New York, 1988, pp. 158-210. Gershkoff, 
I. The Make or Buy Game, Datamation, February 15, 1990, pp. 73-77. mer/Analysts, MIS C)uarterlv, 8(2), 
June 1984, pp. 103­ 115. Granrose, C. S., and Applebaum, E. The Efficiency of Temporary Help and Part 
Time Employment, Personnel Administrator, Vol. 31, January 1986, pp. 71-83. Guimaraes, T., and Igbaria, 
M. Determinants of Turnover Intentions: Comparing IC and IS Personnel, Information ~ 3(3), 1992, pp. 
273-303. Handy, C. ~ Harvard Business Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989. Hotchkiss, J.L. The Definition of Part-Time 
Employment A Switching Regression Model with Unknown Sample Selection, International Economic Review, 
32(4), Novem­ber 1991, pp. 899-916. Howe, W.J. The Business Service Industry Sets Pace in Employment 
Growth, Monthly Labor Review, April 1986, Pp. 29-36. Ives, B., and Olson, M.H. Manager or Technician 
? The Nature of the Information Systems Manager s Job, MIS QL!@@L 5(41 December 1981> PP. 49-63. James, 
P.N. Richard L. Nolan: On the Importance of Continuous Education, Information Systems Mana.gemen~ 9(2), 
Spring, 1992, pp. 85-88. Johnston, W.B., and Packer, A.E. Workforce 2000: Work and Workers for the Twenty-First 
Century, Hudson Insti­tute, Indianapolis, IN, 1987. Kraut, R.E. Telecommuting: The Trade-Offs of Home 
Work, Journal of Communication, 39(3), Summer 1989, pp. 19-4 7. Lewis, W.M., and Molloy, N.H. How to 
Choose and Use Tenmor ary Services, Amacom, New York, 1991. Lewis, W. M., and Schuman, N. The Temp Worker 
s ~ Amacom, New York, 1988. Lientz, B. P., Swanson, E.B., and Tompkins, G.E. Charac­teristics of Application 
Software Maintenance, Communi­cations of the ACM, 21(6), 1978, pp. 466-471. Lob, L., and Venkatraman, 
N. Diffusion of Information Technology Outsourcing: Influence Sources and the Kodak Effectj ~ 3(4), 1992, 
pp. 334­ 358.  Goldstein, D. K., and Rockart, J.F. An Examination of Martin, J. Reskilling the IT Professional, 
Software Ma.ga­Work-Related Correlates of Job Satisfaction in Program--, 12(14), October, 1992, pp. 139-140. 
Martino, V.D., and Wirth, L. Telework: A New Way of Working and Living, International Labor Review, 129(5), 
1990, pp. 529-554. Masten, S.E. A Legal Basis for the Fm, in The Nature ~ Williamson and Whmx (eds.), 
1991, pp. 196­ 212. Mayill, D., and Nelson, K. The Temporary Help Supply Service and the Temporary Labor 
Market, Final Report submitted to Office of Research and Development, Em­ployment and Training Administration, 
U.S. Department of Labor, 1982. Moadj J. The Training Crisis: School s Clw4 Datamation, August 1, 1994, 
pp. 46-48. Niederman, F., Brancheau, J., and Wetherlbe, J. Informa­tion Systems Management Issues in 
the 1990s, MIS Quar­*, 15(4), 1991, pp. 475-495. Nollen, S.D., and Martin, V.H. Alternative Work Sched­ules, 
Part 2: Permanent Part-time Emt)loy= Amacom, New York, 1978. Nosek, J. T., and Palvia, P. Software Maintenance 
Man­ agement Changes in the Last Decade, ~mal of Software ~ 2(3), September 1990, pp. 157-174. Nye, D. 
Alternative Staffing Strategies, Wi~hington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1988. Organ, 
D. Organizational Citizenship Behavior The Good ~ Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, 1988. Osterman, P. 
Employment Futures: Reorganizationsz Dislocations, and Public Policy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1988. Pearce, J.L. Toward an Organizational Behavior of Con­tract Laborers: Their Psychological Involvement 
and Effects on Employee Co-Workers, Academv of Manage­ment Journal, 36(5), 1993, pp. 1082-1096. Pfeffer, 
J., and Baron, J. Taking the Workers Back OUE Recent Trends in the Structuring of Employmen~ Research 
in Ormnizational Behavior, 10, 1988, pp. 2!57-303. Pfeffer, J., and Salancik, G. The External Control 
of organizations: a Resource Dependence Pers-Harper and Row, New York, 1978. Porter, L.W., and Steers, 
R.M. Organizational Work and Personal Factors in Employee Turnover and Absenteeism, Psychological Bulietin, 
80, 1973, pp. 151-176. Rotter, J.B. Interpersonal Trust, Trustworthiness, and Gullibility, ~ 35, 1980, 
pp. 1-7. Ryan, N.I?. Educational Needs as Perceived by IS and End-User Personnel: A Survey of Knowledge 
and Skills Requirements, MIS Quarterly, 15(4), December, 1991, PP. 502-525. Scott, W.R. Organizations: 
Rational, Natural and Open _ 3rd ed. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Simon, H. A Formal Theory 
of the Employment Relation, in Models of Man, Social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human 
Behavior in a Social Settin~ John Wiley, New York, 1957. Slaughter, S., and Ang, S. Employment Structures 
of Information Systems Professionals: A Comparative Study of the United States and Singapore, in proceedings 
of the 1994 ACM SIGCPR Conference, March 1994, pp. 35-45. Stinchcombe, A.L. Information and Organizations, 
Uni­ versity of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1990. Swanson, E.B., and Beath, C.M. Maintaining Information 
Svstems in Orwmizations, John Wiley, New York, 1989. Thompson, J.D. organizations in Action: Social Science 
Bases of Administrative Theory , McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967. Tiny, C, Reasons for the Continuing Growth 
of Part-Time Employment, Monthly Labor Review, March 1991, pp. 10­ 18. Trauth, E., Farwell, D.W., and 
Lee, D. The IS Expecta­tion Gap Industry Expectations versus Academic Prepara­tion, MIS Quarterly, 17(3), 
September, 1993, pp. 293-307. Unwin, G. Tackling the IT Skills Shortage, Long Range Planning, 23(5), 
October, 1990, pp. 63-70. Williamson, O. The Organization of Work: a Comparative Institutional Assessment, 
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 1980, pp. 5-38. Williamson, O. The Economics of Organization: 
the Transaction Cost Approach, American Jo&#38;al of SocioIo­gy, 87, 1981, pp. 548-577. Yourdon, E. Decline 
and Fall of the American Promwn­ ~ Yourdon Press Computing Series, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 
Inc., 1992. Zavala, A. Research on Factors that Influence the Produc­tivity of Software Development Workers, 
Final Report 4677-85 -FR-68, SRI International, June 1985</RefA>.  
			
