
 An Interactive Online Processfor Developing and Producing Policy and Procedure Documentation EiwinN.McKellar,Jr.,Ginger 
Dwyer,ThomasLaJemesse, Jeffrey Liimatta, Dana R@on Computing Technology Services M@h~n Technological 
University 1.0 Our Experience W~ the Process ADD(X stands for ADminisfnzfive DOCumenfutiotz and we developed 
the process (o produce task-oriented documen tation of the policy and p­cedurechangeswmught by implernentationof 
new administrative software at Michigan Technological University. Michigan Tech maintains what is essentially 
a db tributed computing environment on multiple plat­fomNewmti~~t~~tigkpl~td for Student Services, Financial 
Services, Financial Aid, Alumni/Development, andHumanResources. The resulting changes in policy and procedures 
affect the entire campus. In January 1992, MickMcKelkw(ElwinN. McKellar, Jr.) was assigned to developa 
style guide for writing procedumldocume ntation. From the first interview, it was appanmt a style guide 
would not suffice. There was too much to document and he couldn t learn it all in time to write it himself. 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this makial is granted provided that thecopieaarenot made 
or distributed for ti~~ddvmta~,tieAWq@@tnotimmd the title of the publication and its date appear, and 
notice ia given that copyingia bypermkaion of theAaaociation for Compting Machinery. To copy otherwise, 
or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permiaaion. @1993ACM 0-89791-630-1/93/0010/0199 $1.50 
He couldn t ask the staff to write all the documenta­tion, they wcxe busy learning the system, imple­menting 
the system, and doing their regular pbs. Even with a style guide, consistency could not be main tainedoversucha 
variety of tasks, systems, and hardware. Hepmposeda processhehadbeen work­ing on for yearn. It divides 
the responsibility for docunwntationbetweenthestaffmemberwhoknows the subject matter and the technical 
writer who knows the mechanics and the art of writing and editing documentation. FromJulytoSeptember 
1992, fourgraduate students (seeauthom)pined theADDOCteam,charged with producing documentation of thepoliciesand 
proce­dures impacted by the administrative systems. This documentation had to be accurate, uptodate, 
and maintainaconsistent look and format.l%efollowing were our rnapr challenges Many tasks cross system 
boundaries.  Various pieces of the system are going live at different times.  Staff must do their 
regular pbs while imple menting the new system in their areas, so documentation is very low priority 
for them at the pment time. Many staff members are unfamiliar with or haven t U* electronic mail. The 
new software is under development and is subject to frequent up-gmdes. 9 No applicable style guide or 
previous docu­mentation exists to use as a guide.  Getting in Touch Stuyingin Touch McKelktr, Dwyer, 
Laleunesse, I.iimulla, and F&#38;don We am now beghning our second year, having written d ocumentation 
for four of tlw six systems implemendngthenewadministrativesoftware. Our team works with Student SeMces, 
Financial Serv­ices, FinmcialAid,and timputingTechnology Serv­icesinb+dminktration andStudentServices 
Build­ing. Human Resources and Alumni/Development will soonbeginirnplernentationof theirsystemsand wewillbe 
themtohelpd ocurnent policies and procedures effected by the new software. We have generated several 
hundred pages of new documen­tation for some systems, new forms and tmining materials for others. Our 
team is smaller by one student this fall and the pace of incoming tasks is increasing. 1.1Our Strategy 
We met with the technical leaders, department rep­resentatives, and management representatives to pkmourapproachto 
applying the ADDOCpmcess. We pmposd and theyacmpted the following strat­egies 9 Make the d ocumentation 
modular to allow staff members to create pxsonalized manu­als. e Develop documen tation concurrent with 
im­plementation of the software to benefit from the learning process. 9 Promote the use of wnail, training 
staff if necessary, to reduce time spent in meetings and m-typing iIlfOIlXU3tiOI% Gati information in 
a variety of ways to accommodate the staff experts. e Produce a Style Guide. 0 Stick with paper documentation 
for now. 1.2 Meeting ihe challenges We found that the Mind Mapping sessions and the Topic Diagrams 
werevaluabletools. Ineachcase,the groupdynamicshelp usobtaindetailed information about the full range 
of tasks to be d ocumented and gave us sufficient information to produce the initial Topic Diagrams The 
Topic Diagrams, once reviewed by the depart­ mentmpresentativesand technical leaders, provided a mad 
map for the development of d ocumentation. We had a potential outline,a list of experts, and a list of 
taSkS to be docurnented in priority order. The Topic Diagrams Changed often, as implementa­tion pmgmssed 
in each depmtment, reflecting new priorities and new levels of expertise. The use of e-mail, spotty 
at first, increased with the speed of turn-around on reviews of text. Some staff still refuse to wee-mail 
and we found it expdient to use whatever method they find convenient, includ­inginterviewsand use of 
personal notes Many staff rnernbm am now using ~rnail to send first drafts  Now that the Style Guide 
is available to staff mem­ bersand copies of formatted pages are widely avaih able, the first drafts 
ammoreconsistent in format and content, making our editing pb easier. We designed the paper documentation 
to provide easy conversion to on-line screens, with icons and navigational devicesprinted onthepages. 
Wedonot yet know what form on-line documentation will take, but wewillbeorganized and ready to make the 
conversion Though we call ourselves technical editors, we still doa large part of the writing and we 
now know that we yvill never be divorced completely from writing pQrtions of the text. However, as staff 
members become familiar with the style and format, some write very complete documentation requiring only 
moderate editing. The tions Mow describe why we decided we needed a proces for documentation writing+ 
a gen­ eral description of the process, and a description of sug@ed stepsin the process. This material 
defines a bestese scenario. Our experience demonstrates that flexibility is needed in most steps. This 
means that these are goals to be attained. For example, if a staff member cannot use e-mail, we have 
to modify the process to accept tasks on disk or even on paper.  2.0 why Dowe Wed a IDocumentation Process? 
Policies and procedures change, hardware and soft­ware change, and pmple change positions and ca­reers. 
For these masons, and more, we document our polices and procedures In the traditional approach 1 to procedure 
and policy documentation, we make  SIGDOC 93 someonean expertin apb, functiom or skill, we ask that 
person to wdte down the steps followed to accomplish each task, and we save those notes for reference 
and training. Wefeelthetraditional approachisinadequate forthe task of d ocumenting Univmity-wide policies 
and procedures for these masons Experts tendtochunk data, usespechbd jargon, and skipinterrnediatestepsunknown 
to l~en~ u-  Documentation produmd by the traditional method lacks consistent language, style, and format. 
 Procedural documentation producedbysys­tem experts tends to foIlow patterns in the documentation received 
with softwam,mak­ing it more systems-oriented than task-oriented. Distribution and revision of documentation 
are Iimittxi and SIOW. Avenuesforfeedbackandquality-control am limited or nonexisttmt. Responsibility 
for accuracy and content m­remainUIlfiXed and uncertain. Staff give documentation efforts low priority 
because of work pmsures. 3.0 What is ihe ADDOC Process? The ADD(3C process is a method for developing 
documentation of procedures, policies, tasks, steps, or processes and communicating the result to staff, 
fad~, or students. To apply the ADDOC p~, the following must exist Information that must be documented. 
 Staff who know or are learning this informa­tion. A team of technical editors (or even one edi­tor). 
 Networked computers. Access to Electronic Mail forstaffandeditors. Desktop Publishing software (i.e., 
FrameMaker). @ Highquality laser printers (preferably du­ plex). Management support for the effort. 
This process is designed to produce task+riented documentation. Staff generally approach work as a series 
of tasks to be completed. It follows that&#38; most usable d Ocumentation would be organizd by task, 
cross+efemncing nemsary @ems-oriented d ocumentation.1 he technicaleditcmdetermm what tasks amtobed 
ocumented by asking the staff. Throughout the process, the technical editors rnain­taincontactwithdepartment 
staff, supervisors, man­agers, and technical leaders to ascertain their needs and design the documentation 
to meet those needs. Documentation may be in print mdia or on-line media. Communicationmay bebyperscmd 
contact, telephone, mail, or electronic mail. Contact maybe acmmplished individually or in groups. The 
technical editors create and maintain a sense of tearnrnembershipbothamongthemselvesand with the staff. 
Constantcontactby electronic rnailpermits editing and communication to take place in small chunks rather 
than large chunks, making changes and mcommen dations easier to handle. Face to face contact and telephone 
discussions lend a sense of immediacy and facilitate communication. The time-displacement capabilities 
of e-mail facilitate cmationof virtual work-groupsof individuals whose schedules would not normally permit 
regular con­tact E-mail also removes some of the pressures of face to face contact, making it more likely 
that a reviewer will take a frank and open approach to discussing content. It is important to arrive 
at a useful and comfortable mix of technologies, allow­ing e-mail s strengths to compensate for the weak­nessesinpemoml 
contactand allowingthestnmgths of personal contact tocompensateforinherent weak­rUxw2s in email.  Getiing 
in Touch-Staying in Touch McKellar, Dwyer, Lckkxmesse, Liimatta, and Rkdon Mind Dmft Mapping Section6 
I I Bm Final Review Editing Document I FIGURE 1. The ADDOC Process 4.0 How Does the Process Work? 4.1 
step 01-MXMCkiing what to Docwnent and Negotichg a Formut. Before listing tasks and meeting with staff, 
the tech­nical editor(s) involved with the project should meet with the appropriate administrators to 
determine the scope of the documentation proja% The overall project should be divided into manageable 
sections composed of similar task groups We refer to these groups as systems. Ihe systemsmay contain 
one or more taskgroups, but all contain one or more task. Duringthisfimtmeeting thekxhrkaleditor(s) should 
present several possible page formats to the appro­priate administrators. Unless an existing format is 
mandated, it is wise to come to an agreement on at least the general page format for the documentation. 
Thkwillreducethenumberof changes made during the proms and helps elimtnate debate over page format from 
later discussions. Although most administmtive software document­ation aligns closely with our definition 
of system, we often part company with their d ccumentation organization at the task gToup or task level. 
System documentation is organiaxl as their software is or­ganizedandourd ocumentation is organized as 
the client s workfiow is organized For example, a staff member may use forms from both the student sys­tem 
and the fimmckd aid system to accomplish a task One or more technical editors meet with staff and management 
for a brain-storming session to list as completely aspossible,all potential topics or tasks to be documented. 
No attempt is made to organize or evaluate the mntributions to the list. The effort here is to cover 
as many of the potential tasks and topic groups as possible. We mll this process Mind Map­ping. The actual 
form Mind Mapping takes is dependent upon the subject matter and the experience level of the group. The 
form will also be affected by how remntlythesoftwareorprocedunxmd Policy Changes were implemented. Most 
implementation processes invoke lists of tasks, and these task ktS IT@W wed as part of the Mind Mapping 
prcmss. The most common form of Mind Mapping involves printing the name of the overall topic category, 
i.e., ChapterElernents,at thecenterof alargeboard or on the top of a series of large sheets of paper. 
Next, the group identifies all the tasks and task groups under that topic.No one judges the value of 
a listed item or whether the item identified is a task or task group. The main idea is to list everything. 
After the group feds the list is exhaustive, they should connect tasks to task groups (usually by drawing 
lines from tasks to the proper task group title). If the staff participating in the Mind Mapping had 
tasklistsfmmimplementation of procedurechanges or a new software system, these impkrnentation steps were 
most likely be organized into groups. It was important to use these lists, but to fed free to violate 
the groupings if different groupings made moresensefroma task-oriented approach. Although many tasks 
involved mom than one system in the newdtware package, the task mayhavebeenlisted under only one, so 
we had to be careful to note the additional links to other systems.   202 SKZX2C 93 An Interactive 
Onliie Process Well-Written f Detailed t) step-by-step Inst. ii E Clearly Marked !J Suggestion Mechanism 
Integral to Doe. Updates 9 Improvements Figure 2A Mind Map of the ADD(X Process 4.2 Step Two Crealing 
a Topic D~ran. The technical editor(s) will take the output from the Mind Mapping session(s) and prepare 
a topic dia­gram fmmthelists.Thediagram isachartthat looks like a hiermhical pexsonnel diagram presented 
on its side. Level one is the main topic heading. Level two contains the names of the task groups and 
level three the klSkS tidves The technical editor presents the topic diagram to management and staff, 
usually in a meeting or by wnail.l%ey will discuss thegroupingsand evaluate each entry in the diagram. 
As eachentryisappmved, they identify a staff expert, name the expert on the diagram, and assign a development 
priority to each task grOUP. l%etopicdiagram will Serveasabasicoutlinefor the documentation and a convenient 
stmtingpoint fora table of contents. This diagram provides a helpful project management tool and a filing 
system for input and notes. The technical editor may also exam­ine the levels and sublevels to determine 
if proper  E Usefid Each Chapter Cross-referred \ \ \ \ \  \ - Different Stock Tabbed Interfiled 
 1- Separate balance of length and content maybe achieved for each section. One may expect the Topic 
Diagram to Changeoftenas the technical editors, staff, and mana­ gement become familiar with the organization 
of thed ocumentation, evaluate tasks groups, and as they then reassign priorities. The topic diagram 
is also a tool for developing an IndexControl Lo&#38;a tool to assist inthelaterproduc­ tion of a comprehensive 
index Getting in Touch-Staying in TouctI McKelbr, Dwyer, LaJ@unesse, Urnd kx, and l?ixbn , _ReaOZUch 
Organization ard --c Mind ToPic napping Diaq== _rir8t and QrDrtit 9 R@vi9ws Collaboratim Vs Ir@.avidua 
TM DOcumOntatian writing ?rocaas IJltroduc tion _ _nOeOtype and Review + Xuk and oraatTaxt usO wOtOe~O 
and Report I r Creata Test. Fleld­J.iocuaent Figure .3.ADDOC Process Topic Diagram 4.3 Step Three Gather 
Information About Two or Three Tasks. The technical editor(s) should contact two or thee staff members 
to collect notes, obtain d~t copies of proposed docume ntation, or conduct interviews to sample the type 
of information to be gathered. Irifor­rnation about audience, purpose, and expected use forthed ocuments 
should beobtained.Thisinforma­ tion is used as sample information to design page layout, formats, etc. 
During this start-up period, the technical editorts) should work with staff members to determine the 
most efktive communication methods and ascer­tainiftrainingwill be needed on the meof &#38;mail for text 
submission, editin&#38; and review. 4.4step RXmuseftWklt ommtion Gattterect to Design Pre&#38;ninay Fcmcds 
for Text Orgcmizdtin, Page layout, and a Styte Guicte. Once preliminary data is @hered, the technical 
editorts)establish thetearnditingformat, and write staruiards for preparing the written documentation. 
The technical editor(s) write a Style Guide or adopt an existing one and decide on a formal page layout 
for the formatttxl ted. The amount of work nded here will depend upon the detail achievtxt in format 
negotiations in step one. Unless the technical editor(s) have no option, they shcndd decide on the desktop 
publishing package they will use. We found FrameMaker to be the most effective because of its ability 
to cress platforms (UNNDOS,andMac), itsabilityto handlelargeand complex files, ik ability to import text 
and graphics fromawwietyof formats, and itsWYSIWYG display capability. The technical editing process 
evolves as the docu­mentsdevelopand new and interesting editingchal­lengesarise. Flexibility is central 
to the editing proc­ess in the early stages of the ADD(X process. The technical editor(s) may do much 
mom of the actual writing early in the process, but as the staff become familiar with the style and format, 
the technical editor(s) eventually will do more editing than writ­ing. As the documentation develops, 
the standards become more certain and the format becomes less changeable. 43 Step Fwe Expkain the P@mincsy 
Text Or@ni~m, Styte Guide, and Infoimatbn Gathering Methods to the Staff. his meeting continues relationship 
building with thestaff,establishes what you expect from them and explains what they can expect from you. 
Timetables should beset. Formats for intewiews, draft reviews, and data gathering should be discussed. 
Use of e-mail for editing and communication should be encouragd. E-mail may prove to be a lifeline to 
busy and over­worked staffbecauseit may helpreducemail delays, missed phone messages, multiple meetings, 
and multiple printed copies of the sarnedocument. Tech­nical editors should also schedule faceto-face 
edito­rial meetings with staff.  204 SK3D(2C 93 An Interactive Oniine Process Thestaffisprovided 
withhsndoutsshowinghowto prepare and to send draft documentation to the technical editor(s). Atargetedandsimplified 
version of the Style Guide may assist interested staff in preparation of documentation and will help 
foster undemanding of the writing process. 4.6 Step Six Gatiw Dataand Editltlntolhe Text Drdt Style. 
 l hernethod of datagatheringdepends more on the preferences of the staff providing the information than 
on the preferences of the technical editor(s). Some staff will be most comfortable writing a first draft 
and mailing it to the technical editor. Others will respond best to an interview (tape or notes) or will 
provide many notes and copies of personal documentation. Staff members may resist ~mail initially, or 
not have e-mail capability. If so, work with available technology to provide the fastest method of information 
transferal and the one that requires the least re-typing of text, but keep moving toward electronic submission 
of text. The technical editor is responsible for editing the copy (or data) fmm the staff member into 
the speci­fied textdraftstyleand Sendingthisdraftbackto the staff member for review and correction. The 
statl member is msponslble for the content and the tech nical editor for style and readability. Because 
the technical editor is not a system expert and because the staff expert is (usually) not a documentation 
expert, thedynarnicsof thiscollaboration force each partiapant to carefully think through each step, 
so the Other can understand. Until the staff member and the technical editor am familiar witheachother 
s style and thewiitingproc­ess, it might be best to forward the fimt drafts to the staff member directly 
and explain what has been ChWlgtXi and why. 4.7 Step Severx Wiiting and Edting in Plain Text -Get the 
Text Rqht Fimt. The process of rapid editing in plain text means to send as many copies of the text in 
draft style (ASCII format) without mgad to fonts, formattin&#38; and page layout. The idea is to make 
the text as under­standable as possible without special typefaces, type-sizes, and icons. l he technical 
editor sets short deadlines for review and sends asrnanycopiesback and forth as are necesswy to arrive 
at consensus about the content and the text organization. E-mail is the most useful tool for this type 
of editing. Most e-@ Ody SUppCXtS ~ ChalWterS, SO Spe­cial typefacesor boldin~ etc., are not an issue 
yet. Most email editors allow copy editing without m­retyping the entire text. Fiially, it is easy to 
keep electroniccopiesof each version until the final one is agreed upon. Editing on-line saves paper 
and time by mduaitg the need for protracted editorial meet­ings. l hisisanideal goal. Staff mayresist 
draftinginplain text because they want to use their own word-processing packages or IYI P packages and 
demonstrate their own emphasis and style ideas. They will send handwritten and photocopied notes and 
text. Ife-rnd isnot used extensively inaparticu­lar organization, many may resist using electronic media. 
Some just feel more comfortable dictating copy or interviewing face to face. Be flexible, but stms the 
advantages of the electronic media. Most word-processing packages permit easy preparation of an ASCII 
format file from the writer s docume nt. This ASCII format file may bee-mailed. 4.8 Step Ei@ Rapid Prototyping 
of Formatted Pagea At this point, the technical editor should have an accurate and readable draft in 
plain text. The tdni­caleditornowshmdd import thattextinto adesk-top publishingpackage and format the 
text according to the guidelines and standards in the Style Guide, The technical editor addsemphasisand 
clarity with typefacesand fonk,chartsand graphs, navigational devices and icons, etc. Notes, hints, warnings, 
and known cms.s references am identified and empha­sized. The text is clearly marked DRAFT in a promi­nent 
place on the first page or screen of each task description. An index control log is started, based on 
the topic diagram, but no index is yet attempted. A table of contents is set up, based on the section 
headings and task headings. Thetopicdiagram may also help plan the table of contents.  Getting in Touch 
Stayingin Touch McKellar, Dwyer, LaJeunesse, Llmatta, and Risdon The formatted pagesareprinted and distributed 
toa prede&#38;mined audience, basal on conversations with the Staff member and management. Those m ceiving 
the pagks are asked to nwiew them first for content then forstyleand readability. Reviewexsam asked to 
add cross-references, notes, warnings, error-recovery suggestions, and other helpful hints to the text. 
Commen ts about page format am taken under adviserne nt, but massive changes in page format should be 
held until a fair number of users have had the opportunity to work with the docu­ mentation Each iteration 
should allow about one week for review and commen t. The forms am to be returned to the tdmical editors, 
so the audience for early reviews should be relatively small. Several iterations of this stage maybe 
necessay to achieve some consensus about the pages. After each iteration, the technical editods) decide 
whether or not to incorporate suggested changes to style and format, and ascertain whetherornot text 
changesam accurate by confenmce with the staff expert(s). Style and format changes will be ram at this 
stage, but comments fmm the staff should not be ignored. The additional warnings, hints, cross-references, 
etc., am added to the document. When a sufficient number of such documen tsam collected and edited, a 
table of contents should be created and the Field Test Documents printwi. 4.9 Step Nine FieM Test Documls 
The collection of prototype documents that m-n­prise a section (based on the topic diagram) and the corresponding 
table of contents axe collected and printed again, as a Field Test Document. Based on discussions with 
staff and management, an audi­ence is determined for testing and the field test document is distributed 
to selected Staff. The se­lected staff will use the documentation for at kas.t one month, marking cmnments 
and suggestions in the margins or sending c+rnail messages to the tech­nical editor(s) as ideas or comments 
arise. Sugges­tions for index words, glossary terms, hints, notes, cross-references are penned or sent 
via e-mail. At the end of one month, a questionnaire about the readability and usability of thedocumen 
t(s) is sent to each member of the selected staff group. The techni­cal editors collect the marked texts, 
comments via email,andthecomplehxi questio nnairesandcollate theinformationforanother editingmeedngto 
deter­mine what additional changes need to be made. A fonmd table of contents is prepared and, if suffi­cient 
data is available, a glossary is attached. Index­ing is done according to the size of the total package 
and the scope of the inde% In any case, the index control logiscontinually maintained throughout the 
v 4.10 St@P Tem Formal Documents cmd Usability Testing. Once field testingiscomplete for the current 
version of thedocumen ts, a formal copy ispmduced. J%cu­ments produced in this process are subjcxt to 
con­stant review and update, and therefore, the docu­ment is never final The documents are modular in 
form and will be printed on-demand, section-by-section foreachstaffmemberneedingthe documents.l%iswill 
result inpersonah.ed IIWNldS for all staff, targeted to their specific needs. Each recipient of each 
section will receive updated copies of the section as they am produced. On a regular basis, usability 
testing will be under­ taken by questionnaire to those maintaining certain sections of the documentation. 
4.11 step *VW Dcdd$clse Publishing Control of multiple copies of multiple sections of documentation going 
to various combinations of staff members is managed by database publishing. Staff information, including 
name, department, e-mail address, date of release, and a list of sections printed is saved to a database 
each time the sections are printed and released. Whether or not the storage of this data is automatic 
or manual depends on the sophistication of available systems and technical - The data stored is used 
in the following ways 0 Asnewversionsof sectionsarepmduced, the technical editor queries the database 
to deter­mine who should receive the updates. e The project s technical editor queries the da­tabaseto 
determine who should receive us­ability questionnaires and to stem the e Spcmses.   An interactive 
Onliie Process o Technhd editors may query the database and send accurate reports of official docu­ment 
n+ases to man&#38;ers. . Technical editors may quexy the database, sorting by person to determine which 
staff members have received which sections. 4.12 Step Twelve Wsandbd Documents The method of ordering 
personalized documen ts should be simple. Photocopies of the table of con­tents with selectionscircled 
and the nameand n= sary information printed at the top of the page will work for an order form. Better 
yet,twnail providesa perfect avenue to rquest a printout of a specific section or sections. Depending 
on availability of high-quality duplex Iaserprinters, it mayalsobepossible to give author­ized department 
personnel read-only access to a central directory ofpost-script files from which they could print their 
own copies of needed wctions. The responsibility for record keeping then belongs to the authorized departments. 
Each staff member may select what he or she needs and should route the request to a supervisor so that 
some check can be made on sections released. A regular report may beissued to managers ona schedule or 
by request, listing each employee and the documentation sections he or she maintains. 4.13 Step Ihhken: 
File Maintenance and updates Staff in the departnwnts are responsible to report errors andcorrectionsto 
thetechnicaleditorsaccord­ing to a protocol set up with management in the depmtments. The most effective 
route would be through a depwtment coordinator who would col­late the information and double check its 
accuracy before forwarding it to the technical editor(s). Whenchangesam transmittwi ora request from 
the proper official for an upgrade is made, the technical editors will prepare new field test d ocuments 
and restart the field testing process. The text will move fromASCIImodedraftsto field testdocument stage, 
skipping the prototype stage (unless deemed n­sary). This should create opportunity for sufficient feedback 
during formal d ocument upgrades Files are maintained centrally by the technical edit­ing staff and printed 
as requested. Internal photo­copying of documen tation is not encouraged * cause original copies of the 
section are available upon wquest. Certain sections that am extremely popular or very basic and in much 
demand maybe printed traditionally and stockd for requests Access to the original files is restricted 
to the docu­mentation staff and certain administrators. This pr­otectsthe integrity of the text. Certain 
texts maybe sensitiveormshicted. In these cases authorization to Print andmail asection may be needed 
and the database should reflect this by restrictions based on depmtment and pb title. A system and a 
seaneback-up need to be regularly maintained. It might be proper to store the data on removable media 
and lock the media, so that stand-alone production capability may be maint­ ained.  5.0 References 
<RefA>Card, John M., The Nurnbag Funnd Designing Minimalist Instruction jbr Pmctical Computer Skill. (lunbridge, 
MA MIT Press, 1990. Bmckmann, R John, Writing Better Computer User Dmmmtatim From Paper to Hypertext, 
Vrxsion 2.0. New York, ~ John Wiley&#38; Sons, Inc., 1990. @Michigan Technological University September 
7, 1993 Gelfing in Touch Staying in Touch McKellar, Dwyer, La.Jeunesse, Liimaikf, and RWon . 208 SIGDOC 
93  
		</RefA>	
