
 AN INTENSIVE INSTRUCTION FORMAT FOR INFORrIATION SYSTEMS by John F. Schrage and Robert A. Schultheis 
Southern lllinois University At Edwardsville I1anagement Systems and Sciences Department Campus Box 106, 
Building II Edwardsville, IL 62026-1001 (618)-692-2504 Abstract military community #or its student supply. 
The name of the program has changed from For over fifteen years Southern the MAC-MBA Program to the Off-Campus 
MBA lllinois University at Edwardsville has Program to reflect the increased partici- offered management 
information systems pation of the general public in the stu-courses using an intensive weekend format 
dent population. Besides the traditional at locations around the United States. business core courses, 
instruction in Although a variety of information systems information systems is provided. The courses 
in the Masters of Business Admini- instructional areas of information systemsstration has been provided, 
the most fre-which have been included most frequentlyquently taught course has been Introduc-in the off-campus 
program are: tion to Information Systems. The intro- duction course combines elementary com-I. Introduction 
to Information Sys - puter and data processing concepts, pro-tems gramming, applications, and systems 
2. Advanced Information Systemsanalysis and design. However, the empha-3. Systems Analysis and Design 
sis of the course is analysis and design of systems from a manager, or user frame Qccasionally, other 
specialized cour-of reference. Because of the nontradi-ses in information systems have been pro-tional 
format of the course, a variety of vided when requested. For example, small instructional strategies 
have evolved to business computer systems has been offered insure successful student achievement of at 
off-campus locations. Some courses course objectives. Frequent comparisons have not been offered in the 
off-campusbetween the test scores of students fini-format because of the lack of computershing the off-campus 
program and students facilities sufficient for the typical completing the on-campus program indicate 
class size. that the achievement levels are equiva- lent. General Course Format Introduction The format 
for all off-campus courses includes five time periods: (1) registra- In 1969, Southern lllinois University 
tion, (2) the period between registration at Edwardsville entered into an agreement and the first weekend 
of direct instruc-with the United States Air Force Military tion (first preweekend), (3) the first Airlift 
Command (MAC) at various locations weekend of direct instruction, (4) the on the North American continent 
to provide period between the first weekend and the instruction leading to the Masters in second weekend 
of direct instruction Business Administration (MBA) degree in an (second preweekend) and (5) the second 
off-campus format. Today, the MBA is weekend of direction instruction. Regis-offered in eight centers 
in the United tration takes part of one day, each pre- States, but does not rely solely on the weekend 
period is three weeks in length, and each weekend of direct instruction is 2 1/2 days or approximately 
20 hours in Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted length. provided that 
the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and 
the title of the Each off-campus location has an publication and its date appear, and notice is given 
that copying is by office housing a base coordinator whose permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. To copy duties include maintaining student files, otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee 
and/or specific permission. providing instructional aids for student use, and providing coordination 
between the instructor and main campus administra- &#38;#169; 1984 ACM-0-89791-126-1/84/002/0174 $00.75 
tor. One business faculty member located 174 at the main campus is assigned the respon-sibility for supervision, 
recruitment, and advisement for each location. During registration, the student re-ceives an outline 
for the current course with reading assignments, papers, pro-jects, or case work to be completed during 
the first preweekend. The direct instruc-tional time for each weekend is organized into five, sequential, 
four-hour segments: 1. Friday evening, 6 pm to I0 pm 2. Saturday morning, 8 am to noon 3. Saturday 
afternoon, I tO 5 pm 4. Sunday morning, B am to noon 5. Sunday afternoon, I to 5 pm;  During the Friday 
of the first week-end, teams are organized to provide a group framework for the solution of a variety 
of class and second preweekend cases. The Sunday afternoon session is set aside for review and study 
followed by the mid-term or final examinations. At any point in the course, the stu-dent can contact 
either the base coordina- tor or the instructor for further informa-tion such as supplementary materials, 
clarification of assignments, or explana-tion of subject matter. The Courses Off-Campus With over ten 
different courses available for the program, the major course taught has been Introduction to Information 
Systems (MIS~5-T~- Although the course number has changed and the subject matter has been continually 
up-dated, the course basically provides an overview of introductory principles lead-ing to systems analysis/design 
from the user perspective. This course has been designed for the person with little or no background 
in the computer information systems area. The Advanced Information Systems (MIS 583) continues and expands 
the content offered in the first course and retains a user orientation. The course includes exploration 
of the use of application generators and decision support systems. Information pertaining to the contribu-tions 
these systems can and should make for a variety of application areas is provided. The Systems Design 
course (MIS 584) is used both as an elective in the MBA program and a required course for the Master 
of Science in Management Informa-tion Systems. The course is the first of a three-quarter design sequence 
and demon- strates the basic activities, experiences, and tools of the systems analyst using structured 
design. While a variety of structured concepts are discussed, the primary techniques used are drawn from 
Gane and Sarson's treatment of data flow diagrams and Wanier and Orr's treatment of input and output 
design. Introduction to Information Systems Course Objectives L The following course objectives have 
been specified for the student finishing material dealing with introductory con-cepts in information 
systems: I. recognize the meaning of a substantial amount of terminology and explain basic concepts relating 
to computers and compu- ter systems. 2. describe specific approaches to sys- tems analysis.  3. describe 
a variety of tools and tech- niques used in systems analysis.  4. select and use appropriate methods 
and strategies with alternatives based on a given set of conditions. 5. describe essential characteristics 
for effective systems in respect to organiza-tional training, testing, documentation, and maintenance 
for the information pro-  cess. 6. explain from a user's point of view the general process of detailed 
design, development, installation, maintenance, and auditing. Content: The content of the course, in 
gen-eral, allows the student to meet the specified course objectives and provides those topics on information 
systems as specified in the Common Body of Knowledge (CBK) in Business Administration required by the 
American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). The introductory course begins with an overview 
of traditional data processing concepts. This phase of the course typic-ally includes traditional data 
processing concepts such as hardware, application software, system software, internal and external memory, 
data base systems, com-munication systems, and distributed data processing. Because of the growth of 
microcomputers in business, considerable attention is paid to these systems in order to provide balance 
to the tradi-tional mainframe oriented content. De- pending on the location, some programming might be 
demonstrated on a microcomputer or a local business system. The computer concepts phase of the course 
typically is allocated the Friday 175 evening segment and both Saturday segments of the first weekend. 
Thus, computer concepts are allocated three of those segments, or 30% of the direct instruc-tional time. 
After the basic computer concepts have been presented, the systems area is emphasized including basic 
concepts per- taining to management information systems and decision support systems, the systems cycle, 
and the various tools used in sys-temsanalysis, design, and development. Each topic is presented in such 
a way as to allow students to appreciate the prob- lems of both the user and the systems staff. The approach 
of the manager-user in systems analysis, design, and develop- ment is the primary focus of the course. 
The systems phase of the course is allocated Sunday morning of the first weekend, and the remaining instructional 
time of the second weekend, or four seg-ments of four hours each, or 40% of the total direct instructional 
time, Two four-hour segments, one each on both Sun- day afternoons, are devoted to review, study, and 
testing. A total of 20% of the direct instructional time is therefore allocated to review, study, and 
testing. Met hodol ogy : In addition to the usual lecture-discussion format, a wide variety of in-structional 
strategies are utilized by instructors to deliver the introductory course content. The main strategies 
are: 1. Individual and Team Cases During the Friday segment of the first weekend, teams are organized 
to provide a group framework for the solution of a variety of class and second preweek-end cases. Group 
work is a heavily util- ized instructional strategy because it provides instructional support for stu-dents-who 
find they need help with subject matter, especially during the second pre- weekend. Team sessions also 
provide a source for the expansion and enrichment of subject matter needed to solve the cases. Many students 
find it very helpful to have the opportunity to discuss the subject matter with team members prior to 
the second weekend. Often, the teams formed remain active through the subsequent cour- ses taken at a 
given location. Cases are assigned to teams during both preweekends. The cases assigned during the first 
preweekend are completed by individuals and serve as catalysts for the synthesis of the large amount 
of factual material which the student must acquire in the computer concepts phase of the course. The 
cases assigned during the second preweekend are group cases and focus student attention on the analytical 
and synthesis approaches required in sys-tems analysis and design. 2. Role Playinq In approaching the 
group cases, one team of students may be asked to assume a manager-user group role while another team 
of students is asked to assume the role of systems analysts or consultants. The use of role playing is 
considered an important element in achieving the course objectives since it provides the managers or 
would-be managers opportunities to experience prob- lems from the user, consultant, and sys- tems analyst 
viewpoints. Often, the in-structor will have one group present their report, while another group is responsible 
for criticizing or taking an antagonistic approach to the first group's ideas. Having a team which plays 
the user role criticize a team playing the systems ana-lyst role, or vice versa, presents excel- lent 
opportunities for instruction in the kinds of organizational and communication structures needed for 
effective systems implementation. 3. Business Visits and Observations A number of business visits or 
obser-vations are used during the first and second preweekend periods. The devices are completed by individual 
students and not by teams. A practical activity, and one which usually has great appeal to most students, 
is to visit a local computer store and develop a specifications list which com-pares two microcomputer 
systems. This instructional device is usually assigned during the first preweekend to provide visual 
and concrete support for the large amount of computer concepts students must master during the first 
phase of the course. While much of the terminology included in the assignment is new to the student, 
the textbook chapters provide support for the visit and the computer salespersons provide a useful resource 
for student questions. The advantage of the activity is that students come to the first session with 
prepared questions about computer hardware and software which were generated by the visit. To complete 
the activity, students are expected to prepare a written report on two microcomputer systems including 
such details as: a. machine model numbers and brand names b. cost comparisons of the basic package and 
add-ons and peripherals c. memory capacity and storage options  176 d. computer languages standarJ 
~ith sys-tems and optional software packages and languages e. options and specifications of monitors 
and printers f. communication options g, graphic capabilities h. expandability of systems i. customary 
and optional maintenance for hardware and software  j. available warranties k. application packages 
available I. operating systems standard with sys- tems and optional operating systems avail- able Another 
visitation-observation stra- tegy usually included in the second pre-weekend period of the course is 
for stu-dents to visit the computer facility of an organization which uses computer support for business/administration 
applications. The purpose of the visit to a computer facility is the same as the computer store visit: 
to provide visual and concrete support for computer concepts, in this case concepts pertaining to mainframe 
h~rdware, software, and applications. In addition, students are given an opportun- ity to discuss other 
topics with the per-sonnel at the facility, such as career choices, problems of managing the facil-ity, 
and problems of dealing with system users. To be effective, the facility visited should employ at least 
eight or more com-puter people and student observation of the facility should be focused through the 
use of specific questions to be asked or tasks to be conducted to complete the report. Examples of such 
questions and tasks are: a. What is the organizational placement of the computers facility? Include an 
organizational chart. b. What are the titles of staff responsi-ble for operations, programming, systems, 
communications, and other major duties of the facility? c. Draw or obtain a layout of the comput- er 
facility with a description (list) of the hardware available. d. Describe briefly three major applica-tions 
for which the facility is used. e. List and describe five of the most important problems which the manager/di-rector/supervisor 
feels the center posses-  ses. Selected students will usually be asked to report on the visits during 
the first Friday of both weekends used for direct instruction. These oral reports frequently allow the 
instructor to iden-tify subject matter questions common to many students in the class and those topics 
which will need particular emphasis or explanation during the weekend. In the short presentations, students 
also become aware of the common problems associated with the different computer facilities (mainframe 
and micro). 4. P_Papers Usually, one or more papers on topics dealing with computer concepts and systems 
analysis are required. The papers might report on a technological innovation, pseudo-situation analysis, 
or real-world application analysis. The focus of the papers are normally slanted to the im-provement 
of the student's information systems awareness for present and/or future goals in a business related 
set- ting. The purpose of the papers is to pro- vide students opportunities to explore in depth one 
aspect of the topics included in each weekend. A secondary purpose is to provide a realistic means by 
which stu-dents can become acquainted with the periodicals and other resources available in management 
information systems. Demonstrations: Typical demonstrations include the display of a variety of computer 
systems, computer peripherals, application soft-ware, and system software. Some demon- strations of the 
BASIC programming lan- guage are also provided. While the faculty member selects the demonstrations, 
many students will actually provide them, based on their work experiences. Texts and Instructional Materials: 
The textbooks used in the information systems courses have been changed regular- ly. The information 
systems faculty use textbooks as a tools rather than as lec-ture material. The courses supplement heavily 
with cases from casebooks, text- books, and consulting experiences. Thus there has been some difficulty 
in finding materials which are relevant and practical to the needs of the courses. The quality and quantity 
of materials appears to be increasing. Some of the increase may be attributed to the better definition 
of information systems and its differeniation from the introduction to data processing orientation of 
the required common body of knowledge. 177 Once again, students in the class often have superior computer 
facilities at their place of work. Furthermore, their colleagues at work are often eager to demonstrate 
or assist them in the use of these facilities. Also, terminals are available to access at least two major 
computer systems via telephone for presen-tation of mainframe software. In addi-tion, the instructor 
has microcomputer support available for transport to the off-campus location, and these microcom- puters 
have a fairly large software li-brary associated with them. These facil- ities provide the instructor 
with oppor-tunities to demonstrate equipment and software. The major difficulty, however, is the insufficient 
facilities to allow individual access to computer equipment and software.. Currently under consideration 
by the Graduate Advisory Committee is a plan to purchase microcomputers and associated software to provide 
one work station for each three-person study team in all MBA courses. This proposal, which is almost 
certain of being implemented, in some form, will allow introductory course in- structors to provide hands-on 
use of the computer for programming, and use of ap-plication generators and application soft- ware. The 
work stations will also allow accounting, statistics, production, mar- keting, economics, and other faculty 
mem-bers to integrate microcomputer software into existing courses. 3. The off-campus environment does 
not allow for student contact with in-structors, or for ~estions about class content an___dd a ssi_g.nments. 
To overcome this difficulty, the program acquired many years ago a struc-ture utilizing base coordinators 
to pro-vide liaison between students and faculty. The program also installed low-cost lines between each 
base and the main campus so that students or the base coordinator may contact instructors when needed 
between sessions. Furthermore, the team structure of the student body provides considerable off-campus 
support for student questions related to content and assignments. To reduce study problems by students 
in the off-campus program to a minimum, faculty have learned to plan for assign-ments and for course 
sessions with con-siderable more care than had been the case for the on-campus program. After all, there 
really is no time to waste. The result has been that such careful planning has spilled over to the on-campus 
program and has resulted in better planned in-struction in the regular program as well. 4. The off-campus 
environment does not allow for student interaction. The team approach to solving cases and for studying 
has been found to provide greater student interaction than often obtained on campus, since the university 
is basically a commuter campus. Thus, student interaction has often been re-garded as a plus of the program 
by in-structors. 5. The off-campus environment may be staffed by ~ lar~ number of nonregular ~_ members 
because o_~_f convenience an__dd lower costs. When the program started fifteen years ago, the temptation 
to staff the courses with other than regular faculty was eliminated by adopting policies which demanded 
the deployment of regular faculty in the program. Those assigned to teach information systems classes 
have been full-time, terminally (doctoral) qualified faculty who have taught the same or simi-lar course 
material on the main campus. The asssignment to teach in the off-campus program is a regular part of 
the faculty member's schedule and does not receive extra compensation. Part-time staff have rarely been 
allowed to teach in the off-campus environment. In such cases, the Department policy has been to secure 
evaluations pertaining tD student reac~ tion, course organization and content, and testing used by a 
faculty member in a traditional classroom environment before sending that person into the concentrated 
weekend format. 6. The off-campus environment may utilize lower standards in an effort to lure students 
to the program. The problem of standards was a major concern of the faculty at the inception of the program. 
The Associate Dean for Graduate Programs and the various depart-ments have provided continual oversight 
to insure that students in this intensive program have been provided with as much content and been held 
to the same stan- dards as obtained on campus. To insure this equivalence, the same faculty offer the 
courses in all locations, the same syllabus content is expected in all loca-tions, and the same tests 
are used in all locations. To reassure faculty concern for stan-dards, continual testing of student achievement 
has occurred at all locations with comparisons being drawn between stu- dents on the off-campus and on-campus 
programs. The results of the testing has been consistent: student achievement of course objectives as 
measured by the tests indicate relative equivalence, although students on the off-campus program usually 
179 achieve slightly higher raw scores on all examinations. Other Concerns The Introduction to Information 
Sys- tems course is offered every term and normally at least once at each location per. year. At present, 
this is the only information systems course required of the MBA student. Such lean fare in the sys- tems 
area has created problems. Many students, because of undergraduate courses in the computer area, waive 
the course and thus, lose the opportunity to update their knowledge of systems concepts. Other stu- dents 
have taken an elementary course in information systems which emphasized al- most exclusively concepts 
pertaining to hardware "and software and skills in one programming language. For such students, the waiver 
of the introductory systems course leaves a large gap in their know- ledge base pertaining to systems 
and sys- tems analysis. While the introduction course pro-vides instruction in systems concepts with 
some overview of programming, insufficient time is available to develop anything but a cursory knowledge 
of programming lan-guages. Thus, students lack any apprecia- ble skill, even at a very elementary level, 
in programming using a specific language, or in the use of application generators. Since the introductory 
coure is the most frequently taught of all the MIS courses, the acquisition of knowledge and the overall 
success of students in this course has been analyzed the most. This analysis has lead to a faculty consensus 
for the need for another systems course as a requirement in the MBA. The department has recommended to 
the Associate Dean for Graduate Programs that a two-course se-quence of required courses in MIS be adopted 
for the MBA degree. This two-course sequence begins with a course em-phasizing general computer concepts, 
pro-gramming languages, application genera-tors, and decision support systems. The second course emphasizes 
the user approach to the topics of systems analysis, devel-opment, and design using structured design 
approaches. Summary The off-campus program has been use- ful in motivating faculty to explore a wider 
variety of instructional strategies and formats than those ordinarily deployed on campus. After many 
years of trial and error, the introductory course is becoming relatively standardized in content, in-structional 
methodology, and requirements. N~TE: a detailed course syllabus for the intensive course format is available 
on request from the authors. References <RefA>American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business. Policies, 
Procedures, and Standards, 1983-84. Ashenhurst, R. L. , editor. "Curriculum Recommendations for Graduate 
Profes-sional Programs in Information Sys-tems," Communications of the ACM, 15:364-398, May 1g72. Benjamin, 
James E.; Campbell, Wilbur L., Jr.; and Schrage, ,John F. "Career Driented Graduate Program in Manage-ment 
Systems," SIGCSE Rulletin, 11:10-13, February 1979. Couger, J. D. "Curriculum Recommendations for Undergraduate 
Programs in Infor-mation Systems", Communication of the ACM, 16:727-749, December 1973. Couger, J.n. 
"Information Systems Cour- ses for MBA Candidates, ( Part I, II, III)" Computing Newsletter for Schools 
of Business, 8:1, November 1979, February T9-80~- April 1980. Davis, Gordon B. "The Most Troublesome 
Information Systems Course," Inter-face, 1:12-16, Spring, 1979. Gorgone, John T.; Sondak, Norman E.; 
and Konsynski, Benn. "Guidelines for a Minimum Program for Colleges and Universities Offering Bachelors 
Begrees in Information Systems", SIGCSE Bulletin, 12:223-226, ~ry ~ Hoffer, Jeffrey; Merten, Alan G.; 
and Rockart, John F. "Teaching the Cur- rent or Future General Managers: A Critical Function for the 
MIS Facul-ty," Pro.ceedings o f_f the First Inter-national Conference on Information Systems, 1:187-195, 
December 1980. Ives, Blake and Olson, Margrethe H. "Manager or Technican: The Nature of the Information 
Systems Manager's Job," Proceedings of the Second In-ternational Conference on Information Systems, 2:405-407, 
Dec~b~. Nunamaker, Jay F., editor. "Educational Programs in Information Systems", Communications of the 
ACM, 24:124- 133, March 1981. Nunamaker, Jay F., Jr.; Couger, J. B.; and Davis, Gordon R., editors. "In-formation 
Systems Curriculum Recom-mendations for the 80s: Undergraduate and Graduate Programs," Communica-tions 
of the ACM, 25:781-805, Novem-ber lqB2. 180</RefA>
			
