
 An overview of HLTs for South African Bantu languages Aditi Sharma Grover Karen Calteaux , Gerhard van 
Marthinus Pretorius1, HLT RG, Meraka Institute, HLT RG, Meraka Institute, CSIR, P.O. Box 395, CSIR, P.O. 
Box 395, Pretoria, 0001, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa South Africa asharma1@ kcalteaux@ csir.co.za csir.co.za 
 ABSTRACT South Africa (SA) is one of the few countries in the world that boasts a large number of official 
languages. Due to the efforts of government and the local research and development (R&#38;D) community 
(comprising universities, science councils and a few private sector companies) all the official languages 
are to varying degrees enabled with regard to human language technology (HLT). We present in this paper 
the current status of HLTs for a few selected official South African languages, namely isiZulu, Sepedi, 
Tshivenda and, Xitsonga based on a national HLT audit covering all official languages of South Africa. 
We discuss the HLT position of the above languages in relation to other official South African languages, 
and also explore the types of data collections, technology modules and applications currently available 
in the R&#38;D community for these four languages. Categories and Subject Descriptors I.2.7 [Natural 
Language Processing]  General Terms Languages, Management.  Keywords Human language technology, language 
resources, language audit, language resource infrastructure, technology audit, Bantu languages, isiZulu, 
Sepedi, Tshivenda, Xitsonga. 1. INTRODUCTION Approximately 25 languages are spoken in SA, of which 11 
have been afforded official status. The South African National Language Policy Framework (NLPF), which 
provides guidelines for managing this linguistic diversity, mentions that human language technologies 
applications (e.g. machine足assisted translation, translation memories, spelling checkers) for the indigenous 
languages will play a major supporting role in language facilitation activities (Department of Arts and 
Culture, 2002:15). The aim of this paper is to give an overview Permission to make digital or hard copies 
of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SAICSIT 10, October 11 13, 2010, Bela Bela, 
South Africa. Huyssteen Graduate School of HLT RG, Meraka Institute, Technology Management, CSIR, P.O. 
Box 395, University of Pretoria2, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa South Africa, tinus.pretorius@ Centre 
for Text Technology up.ac.za (CTexT), North-West University gvhuyssteen@ csir.co.za of HLT work that 
has been done for a selection of Bantu languages to date, based on a technology audit of the HLT landscape 
in South Africa that was completed in 2009. In order to provide an overview of HLTs for South Africa 
s Bantu languages, we have selected four languages that represent the various language groupings in the 
country, namely isiZulu (from the Nguni language group), Sepedi (also known as Sesotho sa Leboa from 
the Sotho language group), Tshivenda (a smaller language not related to either of the above groups) and, 
Xitsonga (also a smaller language unrelated to either group). These four languages, together with English 
and Afrikaans correlate with the six language groupings proposed in the NLPF.  2. OVERVIEW OF AFRICAN 
HLTs IN SA Most of the work on HLTs for the African languages began with efforts relating to machine 
translation, as this was seen as a way of managing the linguistic diversity in our country. In 1986, 
the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) commissioned the LEXINET investigation to determine the extent 
to which computer processing of languages abroad might be relevant to South Africa, and to formulate 
proposals for possible local developments (Bosch, 2007: 171). The 1988 report on this programme indicated 
that only two University departments of African languages were involved in computational linguistics 
at that stage (University of Stellenbosch and Rhodes University), with only one publication on computer-assisted 
research in the African languages being reported till date. The report also indicated that although several 
researchers had data corpora at their disposal, very few of these were computerised (Bosch, 2007: 171). 
In 1990, the Department of Computer Science at the University of Pretoria developed a uniquely South 
African machine translation device, named Lexica which rendered comprehensible translations from Setswana 
to English. However, this project ended in 1997, possibly due to poor results in translation accuracy 
(Bosch, 2007: 172). Since the mid-90s, pockets of expertise in developing HLTs for the African languages 
have been nurtured at various universities and research institutions. The new millennium saw the launching 
of a project called African Speech Technology (AST), executed by a consortium of researchers lead by 
the University of Stellenbosch and completed in 2004. The project involved developing a prototype of 
a fully automated telephone-based multilingual query and booking system for the hotel industry which 
would function in five languages viz. South African English, isiZulu, isiXhosa, Sesotho and Afrikaans. 
 Over the past decade, the Centre for Text Technology (CTexTTM) at the North-West University has also 
become a leading role player in the development of text-based technologies for the official languages. 
A noteworthy highlight of their work is the Autshumato project which is aimed at developing a terminology 
management system, word translators for ten South African language pairs (covering eleven languages), 
machine-translation systems for three South African language pairs (covering four languages), and a basic 
document management solution. CTexT has also developed spell checkers for all official languages; the 
first-ever Afrikaans grammar checker; multimedia language acquisition software packages for isiZulu, 
isiXhosa, Setswana and Afrikaans that enable a learner to acquire the basics of a new language in less 
than 48 hours; web search engines; and translation programs (CTexT). Since 2003, the Human Language Technologies 
Research Group (HLTRG) of the Meraka Institute at the CSIR has emerged as a leading role player in the 
development of speech technologies. Its flagship project, known as Lwazi, was completed in 2009. Lwazi 
delivered a telephone-based information service which has been piloted in various locations in SA in 
the eleven official languages. Lwazi packages automatic speech recognition (ASR), pronunciation dictionaries 
and text-to-speech (TTS) technologies on a telephony platform to make information available to users 
in spoken form. The HLTRG has also developed various data resources as well as tools which enable the 
faster and more efficient development of speech technologies. These include the Lwazi ASR and TTS corpora 
for all the official languages, and tools such as ASR-Builder, DictionaryMaker, and Speect (Meraka Institute). 
The late 1990s and early part of the 21st century were also marked by attempts by academics and researchers 
to encourage government to develop policies with regard to HLT research and resource management in South 
Africa. Most notably, this lead to the establishment of the National Centre for HLT (NCHLT) in 2009, 
which could play a significant role in the development and management of HLTs for all South African languages 
in future. Note, this section is intended as a brief illustrative overview of South African HLT efforts 
for the processes that are usually required to create HLT applications and products, and include items 
such as part-of-speech taggers, tokenisers, and language and acoustic models for speech recognition. 
Applications refer to the categories of different end-user or enterprise application areas where HLT 
is used, and may include domains such as computer-assisted language learning, document production, proofing/authoring 
tools and machine translation. The primary means of the audit data collection was a questionnaire that 
was sent to all major HLT role-players in the country, with the request to supply detailed information 
regarding LRs and applications developed at their institutions. Twenty seven organisations were approached, 
and feedback from sixteen was received. See Sharma Grover et al. (2010) for a more comprehensive overview 
of the SAHLTA process. 3.2 Language Index Based on the questionnaire, a number of indexes were designed 
to give a comparative overview of the position of the South African languages in the local HLT landscape 
see (Sharma Grover et al. 2010). The HLT language index provides an impressionistic comparison on the 
overall status of HLT development for the eleven official South African languages. This index allows 
the South African languages to be compared on the basis of the total quantity of HLT activity (data, 
modules, applications) within a language, whilst also taking into account the stage of maturity and accessibility 
of the outputs of the HLT activity in South Africa; see Figure 1. From this we see that Afrikaans scores 
the highest, followed by South African English, then isiZulu, isiXhosa, Sepedi, Setswana, and Sesotho 
(languages with more native speakers) and finally, the smaller languages such as Tshivenda, siSwati, 
isiNdebele, and Xitsonga. HLT Language Index 80 70 60  African languages and does not attempt to encompass 
all efforts, for example, smaller instances of isolated work on African languages occurring internationally. 
  3. HLT STATUS OF AFRICAN HLT Language Index 50 40 30 20 10 LANGUAGES In 2009, the South African National 
HLT Network (NHN; an informal online community of HLT role-players in SA), undertook a large-scale technology 
audit for the HLT landscape in SA (henceforth SAHLTA), which was sponsored by Department of Science and 
Technology (DST). In this section we further expound on the audit findings specifically related to isiZulu, 
Sepedi, Tshivenda, and Xitsonga. 3.1 SAHLTA process The concept of a BLaRK (Binnenpoorte et al., 2002 
and Maegaard et al., 2009) was used to guide the audit, which provides a well-defined classification 
of the different HLT components that were to be audited, namely language resources (LRs, which include 
data and modules), and applications. Data refers to text or speech data sets in a machine readable form, 
and which are used to create, evaluate and improve HLT technology modules and includes items such as 
corpora, lexica and grammars. Modules refer to the basic software units or 0 Afr Eng Zul Xho Sep Sts 
Ses Tsv Ssw Ndb Xit Lang. independent Langauges Figure 1. The South African HLT language index.  3.3 
Availability of HLT Components We present in Table 1 (at the end of this paper) a detailed overview of 
the HLT components (data, modules and applications) available in South Africa for isiZulu, Sepedi, Tshivenda, 
and Xitsonga for both text and speech-based HLT. Under text applications we see that across the four 
languages some of the most significant work has been done in the development of proofing/authoring tools 
(i.e. spelling checkers and hyphenators). Currently, there are both open source and Microsoft-based spelling 
checkers available for all of these languages. South Africa also has text-based computer-assisted language 
learning (CALL) in all the languages, though isiZulu has three items in this area (an interactive PC-based 
software CD, an open-source CALL game for children, and a proprietary multilingual illustrated dictionary 
with interactive games). Sepedi, Xitsonga and Tshivenda, on the other hand, only have an open source 
CALL game for children to date. In terms of machine-aided human translation we find that only isiZulu 
and Sepedi have some activity, specifically in the context of the Autshumato project. In the speech 
domain, all the languages have two telephone足based information services, with the exception of isiZulu, 
which also has another legacy IVR demo. In addition, under the accessibility area, isiZulu has two ongoing 
projects in beta stages, one of which is a communication device for the visually impaired and the other 
an augmentative and alternate communication (AAC) device that allows speech to be generated through icons. 
Focusing our attention on HLT modules, we observe that there are text-based modules such as grapheme-to-phoneme 
converters, tokenisers and language identification modules for all four languages. Again, we observe 
that isiZulu and Sepedi have a wider variety of modules such as sentencisers, hyphenators and morphological 
parser/decomposers. In the speech domain, all the languages have basic ASR and TTS due to the recently 
completed Lwazi project. However isiZulu has slightly more activity in TTS compared to the other languages, 
since some prior South African TTS efforts focused on isiZulu and currently multiple research institutes 
are active in it. Finally, for data, isiZulu leads in terms of text corpora/data set size, closely followed 
by Sepedi and finally Xitsonga and Tshivenda (the size of the largest resource type is indicated in brackets 
for each entry where available). On the speech side, all the languages have some basic annotated ASR 
speech corpora, pronunciation dictionaries and models, phoneme sets and TTS corpora. However, Sepedi 
and Tshivenda have a slightly larger speech corpora since there is some developmental work (beta and 
alpha stages respectively) occurring in these languages at multiple research institutions. In general, 
these findings highlight that the majority of the HLT activities in isiZulu, Sepedi, Xitsonga and, Tshivenda 
in SA are currently focussed on building basic and core LRs and applications and not so much advanced 
LRs and applications.  3.4 HLT Component Index The HLT component index provides an alternative perspective 
on the quantity of activity taking place within each of the data, modules, and applications on an HLT 
component grouping level (e.g. pronunciation resources can consist of phoneme sets, pronunciation dictionaries, 
pronunciation models, intonation models, etc). This index is calculated by summing the maturity index 
and the accessibility index (Sharma Grover et al, 2010). It is plotted in a grid using a bubble plot 
and highlights the gaps in the availability of HLT LRs which in turn provides HLT stakeholders with the 
necessary information to align their future R&#38;D activities accordingly. Figure 2 shows this index 
for data for isiZulu, Sepedi, Tshivenda, and Xitsonga. The value of the component index for a particular 
component grouping determines the size of the bubble (i.e. the higher the index the larger the bubble). 
Note, the size of the bubbles within a plot is proportional to the highest value of the HLT component 
index within the entire plot. From this figure it can be seen that in areas such as unannotated monolingual 
text corpora and lexica the four languages seem to have similar quantities of work (and maturity/accessibility 
thereof), whereas in areas such as semantic networks and aligned multilingual text corpora , isiZulu 
and Sepedi have far greater activity taking place as opposed to Xitsonga and Tshivenda. In general, we 
see that speech data resources (in red) have less activity compared to text resources (in blue). The 
figure also reveals that although there may be activity in many of the data sub-categories (e.g. semantic 
networks and formalised grammars ), it is very small (implying less maturity and accessibility), or is 
not uniform across all the languages. We note here that, many of the data collections available currently 
are of a very basic quality (small sizes, developmental stages, and restricted use), for example, aligned 
multilingual corpora and lexicons for text domain and annotated speech corpora and intonation models 
on the speech side. Figure 3 shows the HLT component index for modules. Within the speech modules (in 
red) we see that basic ASR and TTS are available in these four languages; however, these have only recently 
come into existence, and thus the activities here are still very much in their formative years. Many 
other speech modules statistical language models, non-native SR, confidence measures, advanced pre-processing 
and prosody generation for TTS are unavailable.  Figure 3. HLT component index for modules. Similarly, 
in the text domain numerous important modules are unavailable such as part-of-speech-taggers, shallow 
parsers, compound analysers and word meaning disambiguators. Many of the other text modules cited as 
currently available (Table 1) are also of a basic nature and many a times still in developmental stages. 
Note, L.I. in figures 3 and 4 refers to language independent HLT components. From Figure 4 which illustrates 
the HLT component index of applications, we observe that (document production) (proofing/authoring tools) 
and telephony-based services are the only applications that are currently available across all four languages. 
In general, we see that for majority of the other applications, there is barely any activity which spreads 
across the four languages.   4. DISCUSSION Based on the audit findings1 for isiZulu, Sepedi, Xitsonga 
and, Tshivenda discussed, not surprisingly, we find that isiZulu has the greatest amount of HLT activity, 
very closely followed by Sepedi, and then the two smaller languages of Xitsonga and Tshivenda that lag 
behind. Overall, we see that very few basic HLT LRs and applications exist in these African languages. 
There are a great many areas (as identified in the gap analysis) that lie bare in terms of HLT development 
of these languages as compared to Afrikaans, South African English and other world languages. Some of 
the differences across the four languages in question can be ascribed to a combination of the following 
aspects: Firstly, the availability of expert knowledge (both in linguistics and HLT) for a certain language 
has a significant influence on the HLT profile of that language; based on the proportionate sizes of 
the languages investigated, we see that there is usually a greater likelihood of finding experts for 
the larger languages as opposed to the smaller languages like Xitsonga, Tshivenda, isiNdebele, and siSwati. 
Secondly, the availability of data collections, such as text sources (e.g. newspapers, books, periodicals, 
documents) and speech sources (e.g. audio recordings) for the larger languages is far greater than that 
for the smaller languages. Also, the sheer fact that the larger languages are spoken in the economic 
hubs of South Africa where the largest research institutions are located (e.g. Gauteng and Western Cape), 
makes the recruitment of native speakers and data collection tasks practically much easier for these 
languages in contrast to the smaller languages (which tend to be spoken more generally in remote areas 
such as the northern parts of Limpopo and eastern parts of Mpumalanga). Thirdly, the market needs of 
HLT in a particular language can be viewed as i) a combination of supply and demand factors; and ii) 
the functional status of the language in the public domain. The former refers to the size and nature 
of the target population for the language (e.g. number of people who use the language, demographic and 
socio-economic profile of users, needs of end-users, etc.), whilst the latter refers to the usage of 
a language in various public domains (e.g. by government, in business sectors, in education, in the media, 
and for various cultural activities). In South Africa, English (and to a somewhat lesser extent Afrikaans) 
is by and large the lingua franca in the business domain, while the African languages (even more so for 
the smaller languages) are less widely used in such commercial environments. This significantly lowers 
the economic feasibility of HLT endeavours for the smaller African languages. The slow pace at which 
the African languages are responding to their new official status has been a cause for concern for academics, 
researchers and government role players, such as PanSALB, for some time. A 2001 survey of language use 
and language interaction [PanSALB] in SA confirmed that English is seen as a language of upward social 
mobility and the language of business, while the African languages are mainly relegated to community 
and social use. The South African government will therefore have to play a significant role in order 
to enable all languages in the HLT domain. Ironically, higher levels of illiteracy among the speakers 
of the smaller languages make these languages ideal candidates for 1 The audit data is currently being 
made available through an online database at www.meraka.org.za/nhnaudit. HLT-enabled applications such 
as speech-driven telephone足based information systems aimed at improving access to government service. 
Ensuring uptake of HLT applications for the African languages in a developing world must take cognizance 
of this phenomenon, and this should receive particular attention in the short term. Lastly, relatedness 
amongst language families could also play a role; isiZulu and Sepedi are members of the Nguni (others 
are isiXhosa, isiNdebele and siSwati) and Sotho (related to Setswana and Sesotho) language groups respectively, 
and thus to some extent have also benefited through any HLT development within their language groups, 
as opposed to Xitsonga and Tshivenda, which are unrelated to the above language groups. Often local researchers 
also tend to work with a particular larger African language and then naturally expand their work to the 
other languages within that language group (in contrast to solely focusing on one of the smaller languages). 
This implies that HLT efforts for the smaller languages commence from the bottom of the development lifecycle, 
and start by investing in basic LR and linguistic knowledge generation.  5. CONCLUSION The socio-economic 
and political background of South Africa in combination with the above aspects has shaped HLT efforts 
and resulted in significant differences in the level of HLT activity across the eleven official languages 
of South Africa. Whilst there is noteworthy HLT development occurring in SA, much still needs to done 
to HLT-enable all of the South African languages and additional effort is needed for the smaller African 
languages. Foremost on the agenda, should be HLT resource collection initiatives. Here not only government 
but also industry needs to be tapped into, for example, sources such as television and radio broadcasts, 
parliamentary speeches, and other media channels should be more intensely leveraged on, to gather data 
for the African languages. Furthermore, to encourage innovation, these LRs should preferably be made 
available in the open source domain. Also in these formative years of HLT for the African languages, 
it is essential that Government continues to play a crucial role in enabling the development of these 
languages and more so stimulate industry participation in these languages. This may require further in足depth 
studies into determining the market needs of the African [12] languages and how best to tap into and 
service them. Lastly, a greater investment needs to be made in generating HLT practitioners who can feed 
into the emergent HLT industry s pipeline.  6. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] Binnenpoorte, D., De Friend, F., Sturm, 
J., Daelemans, W., Strik, H., &#38; Cucchinari, C. (2002). A Field Survey for Establishing Priorities 
in the Development of HLT Resources for Dutch, In: Proceedings LREC 2002, (3rd International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation), Spain 2002. [2] Bosch, S. 2007 African languages is the writing 
on the screen? , Southern African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, 25: 2, 169-181. [3] CTexT, 
Centre for Text Technology. www.puk.ac.za/fakulteite/lettere/ctext/index_e.html. [Accessed 31 May 2010] 
[4] Department of Arts and Culture. 2002. National Language Policy Framework. Final Draft. Unpublished 
policy document. Pretoria. [5] Maegaard, B., Krauwer, S., &#38; Choukri, K. (2009). BLaRK for Arabic. 
MEDAR Mediterranean Arabic Language and Speech Technology. http://www.medar.info/MEDAR_BLARK_I.pdf. 
[Accessed June 2009] [6] Meraka Institute,CSIR. Human Language Technologies Projects, http://www.meraka.org.za/hlt_projects.htm. 
[Accessed 31 May 2010] [7] PanSALB, Pan South African Language Board. 2001. Language Use and Language 
Interaction in SA. Unpublished language survey report. Pretoria. [8] Roux, J.C. and Bosch, S. 2006. Language 
resources and tools in Southern Africa. Paper presented at a workshop of the African Language Association 
of Southern Africa, Special Interest Group for Language and Speech Technology, 22 May 2006. [9] Sharma 
Grover, A. 2009. Technology audit: The state of Human Language technologies R&#38;D in South Africa. 
Unpublished Masters Thesis. Pretoria: University of Pretoria. [10] Sharma Grover, A., van Huyssteen G.B, 
Pretorius, M.W. 2010. The South African Human Language Technologies Audit. In: Proc. LREC 2010, Malta, 
2847-2850. [11] Statistics South Africa. 2001. Census 2001. Key Results. http://www.statssa.gov.za/census01/html/Key%20results_files/Ke 
y%20results.pdf. [Accessed 20 May 2010] </RefA>Table 1. Overview of HLT components available for isiZulu, Sepedi, 
Tshivenda, and Xitsonga. Language isiZulu Sepedi Tshivenda Xitsonga      
			
