
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G. W. Evans, eds. ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION OF PASSENGER FLOWS IN AN AIRPORT TERMINAL Michel R. Gatersleben 
 Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, Logistics Competence Centre (LCC) P.O. Box 7501 1118 ZG Schiphol, THE NETHERLANDS 
 ABSTRACT As human behavior is often thought to be hard to define in models, simulations of processes 
with people involved are less common than industrial simulations. Nevertheless simulation has been very 
valuable in passenger logistics to study bottlenecks and test potential solutions. This paper describes 
a project concerning the analysis and redesign of passenger handling at an airport, in which dynamic 
modeling played an important role. Simulation has been applied here to gain insights into the relations 
between the distinguished processes, the presence of bottlenecks and their causes. With the simulation 
models future situations were represented, through which long-term expectations can be posted. In this 
way critical aspects in the passenger flow through the airport terminal have been explored and studied. 
All potential bottlenecks have to be suppressed by apt arrangements. These can consist of an expansion 
of the availability of resources or floor space, but many times improving the processes can be a more 
effective or more efficient solution. Several supposed measurements have been tested in a quantitative 
way, to examine whether they fulfill the expectations, are robust and do not create new problems. The 
overview of bottlenecks and the comparison of measurements formed the required results of the simulation 
project. However, some other effects of the study turned out to be just as useful. As detailed simulation 
studies require exact descriptions of processes and representative data, a large amount of information 
had to be collected and laid down. Process control and management will take advantage of it. Furthermore 
the modeling of he complete chain of processes supplied an increased insight in the dynamics and the 
intra-organizational relations. So in the future sub-optimal solutions can be avoided and communication 
improved. Simon W. van der Weij Incontrol Business Engineers Planetenbaan 21 3606 AK Maarssen, THE NETHERLANDS 
 1 INTRODUCTION The airport concerned is one of the major European airports, accommodating over 33 million 
passengers annually. On busy days 120 thousand people arrive at and depart from the airport. Approximately 
half of them will transfer to a connecting flight to resume their journey. Having short connection times 
between the individual flights is a key selling point for the airport. Another key selling point is a 
secure operation, free of disturbances. The traveler should be able to catch his flight on time, while 
still having enough time to do some shopping and other pleasant time killing activities. Therefore performance 
of the different handling processes is important and monitored. The time passengers have to spend on 
queuing at check-in, walking, security-check, boarding, etc will be compared with the service levels 
agreed upon. Furthermore different quality levels for waiting areas and maximum throughput are defined. 
Due to the annual growth of passengers and flights, terminal capacity is imposed to heavy performance. 
So in order to manage the handling process and the present facilities, a new method had to be found to 
ensure that future requirements can be met. Especially as the airport does not only suffer the consequences 
of the growth, but also has to cope with many social and political changes that have an impact on the 
passenger handling. For instance the development of the European free trade zone, the Schengen zone, 
and new flight patterns partly due to increasing attention to noise reduction and environmental effects 
of air traffic. To be able to deal with the impacts of an expanding market and many other developments 
in time, it is necessary to evaluate critically and constantly the gearing between the current organization, 
the available infrastructural capacity and future needs. With this in mind a few years ago the project 
Logistics Development Terminal (in Dutch: Logistieke Ontwikkeling Terminal, LOT) has been started and 
Incontrol Business Engineers was asked to join in the studies. 2 PROJECT GOALS The LOT project has been 
initiated for two main goals (Gatersleben et al. 1996): 1 Identification of logistic bottlenecks in the 
passenger handling within a time scope of five years. 2 To provide integral solutions for these bottlenecks, 
which support the process of making decisions about future airport developments. The search for logistic 
bottlenecks in the passenger handling comprised a study of both the passenger flow and congestion in 
the buildings and the staying time in waiting areas or recreational facilities. In this study exact locations 
of bottlenecks and their causes had to be pointed out. Furthermore the needed amount of airport resources 
like immigration desks, check in counters and baggage reclaim belts have to be estimated. The intention 
to provide integral solutions was stated as another important goal, because changes in any process may 
influence the total performance and quality of the passenger handling. It had been proven in the past 
that it was difficult to gain a clear understanding of the integral consequences of modifications. Other, 
less explicitly stated, but not unimportant objectives concerned gaining commitment of all parties involved 
and the possibility to reuse the developed approach, method and tools. The commitment is required to 
reach consensus with the involved about the results of the project and its settings. In that way resistance 
against consequences will be reduced and communication simplified. Since the airport is exposed to air 
traffic developments and external influences, it is desirable to validate and repeat the project results 
frequently, which creates the wish to reuse the methods and tools. For all those reasons it was decided 
to use modeling and simulation in the project. 3 APPROACH OF THE PROJECT The first step in the project 
was to understand and describe the current situation completely, as it is yields as a reference for model 
validation. All processes involved with passenger handling have been analyzed and the numbers of resources 
estimated. Process times, waiting times, queue lengths, numbers of people in all areas, etc have been 
measured and compared to the information supplied by airport experts. Furthermore the general human behavior 
in the airport had to be examined, to determine how long before departure time passengers arrive at check 
in, why passengers prefer certain routes, for what reasons they spent a certain time in shops, etc. This 
is a necessary phase, but it turned out to be very intensive and time-consuming, for only few data were 
available and there was hardly any insight in the exact dynamical process characteristics and facility 
usage. Right from the start experts of several departments and directly involved companies were invited 
to participate in the analyses in order to assist the project team and to support the chosen approach 
and the final results. In the following phase all expected trends, future developments and infrastructural 
building plans were mapped and discussed with experts. This was just as intensive as the previous phase, 
particularly as special tools had to be developed to translate the acquainted knowledge into usable data. 
Correct data is essential to get valid and valuable results about bottlenecks in future situations and 
to define relevant scenarios and moments of timing. A self­developed new software tool generates future 
flight schedules, with expected flight characteristics and numbers of passengers, based upon various 
growth-related parameters. With these schedules the impacts of air traffic growth and other developments 
can be evaluated. Complementary, all international enforced service levels and all quality levels the 
airport wants to comply with were collected. For a selection of the most prominent performance indicators 
had to be determined if the performance of the future handling process would meet these levels. In discussions 
with experts of the passenger handling process, the aspects that were critical already or that were expected 
to become critical in future were drawn up. Such aspects, like congestion in walkways, long queue lengths 
or walking distances got extra attention in the several tools and models that had to be built to perform 
the calculations and the evaluation. 4 MODELING 4.1 Classification The subjects of investigation have 
been divided into two categories. First the airport resources that can be assigned to airlines or specific 
flights, e.g. gates, check in counters and baggage reclaim belts. Second the flow related and non-assignable 
facilities, for example immigration desks, shops or lounges. The relation between both types of aspects 
is a result of passenger routings and facility location and reveals it self by presenting planning results 
of the first to the latter. 4.2 Static Modeling Airport resources that can be assigned to flights or 
airlines are planned on a daily basis in an operational planning. On behalf of the LOT-project static 
modeling tools have been built to represent the function of planning, as it was not possible to use the 
existing instruments in completely modified situations with a redesigned Terminal building, new infrastructure 
and future flight schedules. The static model produces a future resource planning and demonstrates whether 
the process control and the foreseen equipment are sufficient to guarantee a qualitative passenger handling. 
Figure 1 provides the result of the computation model for check in counters. Figure 1: Check in Counter 
Computation Model.  4.3 Dynamic Modeling Analyses of the passenger flow through the Terminal building 
and the utilization of non-assignable facilities have been carried out using simulation models. Several 
reasons led to the decision to use simulation as the method to look for bottlenecks in the future operation: 
 Process interdependency: The processes at an airport can not to be treated as fully individual. They 
form a chain of processes that must be geared for one another to create a smooth handling of the passengers 
within limits. Taking into account the process interdependencies it is possible to notice influences 
and to avoid sub optimization. In simulation these interdependencies can be showed and quantified. Also 
the integral effects of a modification of one element can be easily judged. In the past insight in the 
quantitative aspects of these interdependencies was lacking. Every departments had its own interests 
and tried to perform as well as possible, what resulted in local improvements and moving bottlenecks. 
 Dynamics: As the airport is transfer oriented, the flight schedules are set up in a way to create short 
connection times. These short connections cause peaks in arriving and departing of planes. On its turn 
this implies a  strong time-dependency of the number of passengers walking through parts of the Terminal 
building. This dynamical behavior can be seen in a simulation model, which makes it possible to find 
the right combination of process organization and infrastructure, for even in peak situations it must 
be achievable to get to your plane on time. Future scenarios: During the phase of collecting building 
plans and flight data it became obvious that there were many uncertainties about future developments. 
It is no option to wait until a bottleneck comes into being, then it often takes a long time to react 
through altering the processes or increasing capacity. To leap on possible effects of the number of passengers 
and other developments efficiently, effectively and on time requires timely insights in these consequences 
and proactive acting. By building scenarios for several combinations of potential developments, situations 
with minimal, maximal and expected passenger flow and the resulting occupation of accommodations can 
be created. The range to expect for future logistic performances is provided by the simulation models. 
 Evaluation of solutions: If the simulations indicate that some bottleneck will occur in the passenger 
handling, this should be solved. Every potential solution must be evaluated on influencing logistic performance 
and the integral effects. Simulation is known as a fine method to compare different strategies for problem 
solving and estimate the robustness of a solution in a quantitative way.  Changing the way of thinking 
and acting: A less habitual reason for the application of simulation models in the LOT-project was the 
intention to change the way of thinking and acting, concerning dealing with problems regarding the capacity 
of the Terminal infrastructure. The traditional method existed of translating a specific percentage of 
growth of passengers into an equivalent percentage of required additional capacity, without studying 
more efficient handling methods. Growth can express itself in various ways however, with various effects. 
Besides, existing handling methods can be obsolete or redundant. In that case adding extra capacity is 
no efficient solution. So the lack of clear  insight in the dynamics of the passenger flow and the 
impossibility to calculate the integral effects could result in a very expensive manner to deal with 
these subjects. Through the simulation models the insights should be gained. This makes it possible 
to change this habit and handle both growth and environmental developments by thinking about ways to 
do more with the available resources in stead of implicitly expanding the existent situation. CONTENTS 
OF THE SIMULATION MODELS 5.1 Demarcation The complete passenger flow in the terminal building, from 
check-in to boarding and from deboarding to baggage reclaim, as seen in Figure 2, has been modeled into 
the simulation environment ARENA. Three subsystems have been distinguished, based on the origin and destination 
of the passengers: Departs: This subsystem starts with the description of entering the departure hall 
at a certain time before departure and walking to the check in desks. Hereafter passengers have to pass 
immigration to get into the lounge and pier areas. These areas were hard to describe in a model, since 
passengers have a number of options, like shopping, walking or waiting in several locations. The decision 
depends on remaining time, type of flight, etc. Finally, the passengers go to boarding and leave the 
airport.  Arrivals: After aircraft arrival and deboarding passengers walk through the piers and lounge 
areas in the direction of the immigration. If passengers have to collect their baggage, they will walk 
to the reclaim area. Otherwise they will directly go through customs. In the simulation model, the doors 
of the arrival hall indicate the end of the process arriving.  Transfer: The transfer process contains 
elements of both arriving and departing. From deboarding till walking in the piers and lounge areas is 
equal to the arrival process. Starting at this point, transfer passengers are in the same state as departing 
passengers.  1229    Check in Immigration Lounges &#38; Piers Boarding Reclaim Customs Arrival 
Hall Deboarding Lounge &#38; Piers Yes No Immigration Figure 2: The Processes in the Passenger Handling. 
 5.2 Realization On its way to an aircraft or airport exit a passenger has to experience several processes, 
which are represented by restricted resources. The required throughput times are a result of process 
times and potential delays, which might exist if queues arise. As process times and process capacities 
are often time-dependant, they are modeled as variable parameters. Other elements of the handling process, 
for example immigration, are subject to the characteristics of the individual passengers or their flight. 
In that case individual properties will cause different behavior. In the model information about resource 
utilization, the number of passengers in all waiting and shopping areas, process times, waiting times 
and queue lengths is collected. This information will serve as performance indicators for the passenger 
handling. Links interconnect the process locations and all distinguished sections. At arriving time, 
every passenger is assigned a route, connecting the origin and the final destination. This route is composed 
of several links. After completing a process step or at the end of a section, the route contains information 
about the succeeding link. Entering a process or a period of waiting implies a temporary interruption 
of the route, but after processing the passenger will reenter its route to the final destination. The 
length of the link and the passenger speed determine the travel time in a link. This speed is varied 
according to natural variation in walking speeds and is dependent on the calculated number of passengers 
in the segment at that time. The total travel time, the route length and the passenger flow per minute 
in a link are also performance indicators. For several stages in the development plans separate models 
were built. New elements were added to the model of the previous situation, others were modified. Also 
the number of possible routing paths had to be altered and expanded. In this way new infrastructural 
models of future situations were created and represented in the animation of the model (see Figure 3). 
 Figure 3: The Simulation Model: Overview of the Terminal Building. Experts of the airport organization, 
airlines and handlers were also consulted during the modeling process, to provide their opinion and expertise 
about the quality of the passenger handling and to help validate the models. These comments and ideas 
were incorporated into the models and caused model modifications and the introduction of extra performance 
criteria. Finally, every resource planning and all developed flight schedules files have been combined 
and these packages were added to the models. This is repeated for every distinguished future scenario. 
RESULTS AND EFFECTS The models resulted in huge quantities of output, which were translated into overviews 
of flows, resource utilization, waiting times and all other performance criteria. Since information about 
the performance indicators is written to output files continuously, time-dependant graphs of throughput, 
utilization and waiting times are set up. This shows the dynamics in the passenger handling and the variance 
between the occupation of the segments of the terminal building. From these overviews and graphs the 
bottlenecks and their urgency for solving, expressed in the extent of exceeding a quality level, were 
distilled. By comparing the results of the different scenarios, the likelihood of an arising bottleneck 
can be judged. This also estimates the boundaries between which the performance of the passenger handling 
is considered to vary. In experiments combinations of solutions have been proved subsequently. This provided 
quantitative insights in both the consequences of solutions for the bottleneck and the side effects for 
other components of the integral passenger handling, as a result of the interdependencies. Some proposed 
solutions turned out to be very effective, whereas others showed no effect or resulted in major disadvantages. 
This quantitative information serves as supporting material in making decisions about the development 
of the airport. Expectations for the future quality of the passenger handling are now available. Furthermore 
the timing of arising bottlenecks and corresponding solutions can avoid premature of even inconvenient 
arrangements, which can reduce risks and investments. Other aspects coming with the study were also valuable. 
With respect to the reusability all collected process information was documented and a template for building 
similar models was developed based on the simulation models. This template, PaxSim, consists of several 
building elements that contain logic structures as used in the original models and simplifies future 
simulation studies. As several departments were involved in the study from the beginning it was relative 
easy to gain commitment about the results and to apply them to the operation. The animation accompanying 
the simulation model was an extra support in simplifying the communication. 7 CONCLUSIONS The LOT project, 
regarding analysis and simulation of passenger handling at Schiphol Airport, turned out to be quite successful. 
The successes could be attributed to a large extent to the employed approach including simulation. First 
of all insight in the present and future situations was gained and solutions for bottlenecks were judged 
on their simulated improvement of performances. These insights make pro-active measurements possible 
in order to prevent future bottlenecks. Furthermore the experts involved learned about their own and 
dependant processes, as they all are part of the complete handling chain. The simulation models and the 
results of it acted as independent referee in discussions about performances and causes of problems. 
The animation played a very important role in this communication between different parties. The live 
visualization showed clear the problems that had to be encountered. As a result, all parties accepted 
the solutions found and supported the overall view needed to keep performance up. Also performance indicators 
and process management was adapted based on new information concerning the handling process. The simulation 
models and information gathered during the study is well documented for future use. Several projects 
enclosing simulation succeeded the LOT, including repetitions of this study. Since models, tools and 
information are ready to be used again, the necessary time can be reduced dramatically, which decreases 
expenses and increases the profits.   REFERENCES <RefA>Gatersleben, M.R., H.R. Eebes, M.N.F. Babeliowsky 
and S.W. van der Weij. 1996. Logistieke Ontwikkeling Terminal, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, The Netherlands 
(in Dutch).  </RefA>AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES MICHEL R. GATERSLEBEN is Manager of the Logistics Competence Center 
at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. He is working in the field of airport logistics and long term capacity 
planning and is involved in several projects concerning airport development. SIMON W. VAN DER WEIJ is 
a Business Engineer at Incontrol Business Engineers, a consulting firm specialized in improving businesses 
by using quantitative methods. He is involved in several projects in the field of transportation and 
logistics. He holds an M.Sc. in Mechanical Engineer­ing, Production and Operations Management at University 
of Twente. 
			
