
 Analysing Information Flows and Key Mediators through Temporal Centrality Metrics * John TangMirco 
Musolesi Cecilia Mascolo University of Cambridge University of St. Andrews University of Cambridge Vito 
Latora Vincenzo Nicosia University of Catania University of Catania ABSTRACT The study of in.uential 
members of human networks is an important research question in social network analysis. How­ever, the 
current state-of-the-art is based on static or ag­gregated representation of the network topology. We 
argue that dynamically evolving network topologies are inherent in many systems, including real online 
social and techno­logical networks: fortunately the nature of these systems is such that they allow the 
gathering of large quantities of .ne­grained temporal data on interactions amongst the network members. 
In this paper we propose novel temporal centrality metrics which take into account such dynamic interactions 
over time. Using a real corporate email dataset we evaluate the impor­tant individuals selected by means 
of static and temporal analysis taking two perspectives: .rstly, from a semantic level, we investigate 
their corporate role in the organisation; and secondly, from a dynamic process point of view, we mea­sure 
information dissemination and the role of information mediators. We .nd that temporal analysis provides 
a better understanding of dynamic processes and a more accurate identi.cation of important people compared 
to traditional static methods. Categories and Subject Descriptors C.2.1 [Network Architecture and Design]: 
Network Topol­ogy; C.2.0 [General]: Data communications General Terms Measurement, Algorithms, Theory 
* This work was carried out in part when Mirco Musolesi was at the Computer Laboratory, University of 
Cambridge. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro.t or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the .rst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci.c permission and/or a fee. SNS 10, 
April 13, 2010, Paris, France. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0080-3 ...$10.00.  Keywords Temporal Graphs, 
Temporal Metrics, Temporal Centrality, Key Mediators, Social Networks, Complex Networks, Infor­mation 
Di.usion 1. INTRODUCTION Identifying key nodes has become an essential part of analysing and understanding 
networked systems with ap­plication to a wide range of .elds including .nding the best person to target 
in a viral marketing campaign [15, 22], lo­cating key neurons in cortical networks [5], protecting im­portant 
species in ecological systems [14] and .nding bottle­necks in tra.c networks [13]. The position of a 
node with respect to other nodes can be classi.ed and exploited: one could argue that people with the 
most friends are popular and hence important; a node with high geodesic locality to other nodes could 
spread information quickly to high num­bers of nodes; and a person who lies between the most paths of 
communication could act as a mediator among groups of people. These concepts are more commonly known 
as de­gree, closeness and betweenness centrality [22, 4]. Existing centrality metrics for the study of 
real online so­cial networks (OSN) are based on a static network model where edges that appear (and disappear 
over time) are ag­gregated into a single static graph [1, 9, 10]. In particu­lar, if we consider a graph 
of interactions over time where each edge corresponds to an interaction (such as posting of a message) 
between two users represented by the nodes, we observe a continuous change of the graphs corresponding 
to the dynamic user activity. Examples are instant messenger systems and email where also the interactions 
often happen in bursts [17]. With this in mind, the key contribution of this paper is the introduction 
of temporal centrality metrics for the identi.ca­tion of key nodes in OSNs based on temporal shortest 
paths. Tang et al. [20] proposed a temporal network model to study real dynamic dataset. The idea is 
that the behaviour of dy­namic networks can be more accurately captured by a se­quence of snapshots of 
the network topology as it changes over time (Figure 1). Using this model, a temporal version of shortest 
path was also de.ned. Since static closeness and be­tweenness centrality metrics are derived from static 
shortest paths, we extended these metrics to temporal graphs by in­troducing the de.nitions of temporal 
closeness and temporal betweenness. Naturally, both these temporal extensions are Figure 1: Temporal 
Graph showing a typical week of activity during Nov 2001 using 24-hour windows (left) and aggregated 
static graph (right). Nodes represent employees; a link between two employees exists if an email was 
sent by one of them to the other in that 24-hour window. associated to the identi.cation of central nodes 
in the net­work with application to dynamic processes over an OSN. In particular, temporal closeness 
quanti.es how fast a user can disseminate a piece of information. Therefore, applications of this metric 
include viral marketing and the study of ru­mour spreading. On the other hand, temporal betweenness distinguishes 
individuals who act as key mediators between the most communication paths over time. Hence, to evaluate 
our proposed temporal centrality met­rics, we apply them to separate dynamic processes. First, an information 
dissemination process captures the notion of speed and reachability of a piece of information spreading 
through a network starting from a subset of nodes. Thus, we can compare the important nodes selected 
by static and temporal closeness centrality. Second, since we observe that if certain individuals lie 
between the most communication paths, their removal from the network will impact the over­all communication 
e.ciency. We provide a preliminary evaluation using the publicly available Enron email dataset [19], 
describing corporate com­munication over time between 151 known employees during the height of the company 
s accounting scandal. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: Based on temporal path lengths 
proposed by Tang et al. [20] we de.ne novel temporal centrality metrics for the study of key nodes in 
OSNs (Section 2).  We evaluate these temporal metrics using two dynamic processes, applied on the Enron 
email dataset. The temporal analysis consistently .nds that employees who worked as energy traders ful.l 
both these roles. This gives us an interesting insight not only into the En­ron scandal but also into 
the di.erences between static and temporal analysis (Section 3.3). We also .nd that compared to existing 
static analysis, temporal metrics not only uncover important nodes that are better for information spreading 
but also individuals who play a vital role in mediating between the most communica­tion channels (Section 
3.4).  We provide initial insights into temporal dynamics which make temporal metrics more suitable 
for studying time­varying OSNs compared to static analysis (Section 3.5).   2. TEMPORAL CENTRALITY 
METRICS As discussed, the representation of a time-varying network by means of the associated static 
graph can convey mislead­ing information about the network itself. For instance, a static aggregated 
network usually has far more links than the network has at each time instant (or if the aggregation is 
performed over short time windows). Since the time or­dering of edges is not considered, the number of 
paths be­tween pairs of nodes is overestimated. This also leads to an underestimation of the length of 
shortest paths [20]. Following from this, since traditional static closeness and betweenness centrality 
are based upon static shortest paths, the estimation provided by these metrics is largely inaccu­rate. 
In order to overcome these problems, in this section, we introduce the de.nitions of temporal closeness 
and tem­poral betweenness centrality by employing temporal shortest paths, which do take into account 
time information. First we will present the basic de.nitions of the temporal graph model and temporal 
paths. 2.1 Preliminaries A temporal graph can be thought of as an ordered sequence of graphs. A state 
of the network topology is calculated by aggregating all the edges that appear inside a certain time 
window. An example is given in Figure 1: the temporal graph shown in the left panel is a sequence of 
seven graphs, each of them representing the contacts among nodes in a time window of 24-hours. The corresponding 
aggregated static graph (which reports all the links among nodes, with­out any information about time) 
is shown in the right panel. More formally, given a real network trace starting at tmin and ending at 
tmax, the temporal graph Gtw(tmin,tmax) is de.ned as the ordered sequence of graphs Gtmin , Gtmin+w, 
..., , where w is the size of each time window, ex- Gtmax pressed in some time units (e.g., seconds 
or hours). The number of graphs in the sequence is denoted as W = ((tmax- tmin)/w)= |Gtw(tmin,tmax)|. 
The contact function Rs ij be­tween nodes i, j at time s is equal to 1 if and only if there exists a 
link between i and j in Gt,t = s = t + w, otherwise Rs ij is equal to zero. All the graphs in the temporal 
graph have the same set of nodes V , while each of them has, in general, a di.erent set of edges Et, 
where an edge between i, j . V belongs to Et if and only if Rs = 1. From this time that a message forwarded 
from i has to wait on k be­ ij model a temporal path between two nodes i and j can be fore being passed 
to j, the higher the chance of disruption de.ned over Gtw(tmin,tmax) as a sequence of k hops via a removing 
the message which was destined to j. distinct node nktk at time tk: From this the temporal betweenness 
centrality of node i at time t is de.ned as: ht1 tk pij =(n1 ,...,n k ) (1) starting from node i = n1 
and .nishing at node j = nk, where tk-1 = tk, node nk is passed a message at time win­dow tmin = tk = 
tmax and h is the maximum number of exchanges between nodes within the same window t. We call Qh the 
set of all temporal paths between nodes i and ij j. If a temporal path from i to j does not exist i.e. 
Qh = Ø, ij we say that (i, j) is a temporally disconnected node pair, and we set the distance dij = 8. 
Using the function D(pij )= tk - tmin which returns the delivery time for the given path relative to 
t0, the shortest temporal path length is de.ned as: dh ij , min(D(qij )) (2) ij = .qij . Qh From this 
we de.ne the set Sij of shortest temporal paths between i, j as: hhh hh Sij = {pij . Qij | D(pij )= dij 
} (3) Notice also that, in general, dh ij is di.erent from the length of the physical path from i to 
j, expressed as the number of links to be traversed to reach j starting from i, since in a temporal path 
the message can be passed to up to h sub­sequent nodes within the same time window. The horizon of the 
temporal graph models the speed of message passing between nodes compared to the length of the time window. 
 2.2 Temporal Betweenness Centrality Static betweenness centrality of a node i is de.ned as the fraction 
of shortest paths between all pairs of nodes which pass through i [22]. In principle, the temporal betweenness 
centrality of node i could be de.ned as the fraction of tem­poral shortest paths that pass through i. 
However, for the study of OSNs, identifying nodes which mediate communi­cation between the most groups 
of nodes is of paramount importance. Such nodes represent members of society who both receive and are 
the source of gossip; individuals who negotiate between the di.erent groups of parties; and people in 
organisations who fall into middle management and bal­ance reporting to senior management and also command 
a large workforce. If such nodes provide an important media­tory role in a network then it stands that 
the complementary view would also hold; how does the removal of such nodes disrupt the overall communication 
e.ciency of the network? It is therefore important to take into account not only the number of shortest 
paths which pass through a node, but also the length of time for which a node along the short­est path 
retains a message before forwarding it to the next node. For example, let us consider the simple case 
of nodes i and j being connected by just one shortest path pij = (it0 ,kt1 ,jt2 ), so that a message 
from i to j has to pass .rst through k at time t1 before being delivered to j at time t2. Since the path 
through k is the only way for i to send a message to j, then we would say that k plays an important mediatory 
role and is central for communication between i and j. Nevertheless, the vulnerability of node k heavily 
depends on the intervals [t0,t1] and [t1,t2]: the longer the XX B 1 U (i, t, j, k) Ci (t) = (4) (N - 
1)(N - 2) |Sh | jkj]=ik]j.Vk.V =i k] =j de.ned when Sh Ø, where the function U returns the = number 
of shortest temporal paths from j to k in which node i has either received a message at time t or is 
holding a message from a past time window until the next node is jk ' met at some time t>t. In the case 
when Sh = Ø, i.e., jk node i is totally isolated, we set its betweenness to zero. Finally, the temporal 
betweenness for node i over the entire temporal graph G(tmin,tmax) is: W X CiB =1 CiB ((t × w)+ tmin) 
(5) W t=1  2.3 Temporal Closeness Centrality Two nodes of a static graph are said to be close to each 
other if their geodesic distance is small. In a static graph an estimation of the global closeness of 
a node i is obtained as the average static shortest path length to all other nodes in the graph. Similarly, 
we can extend the de.nition of close­ness to temporal graphs using the temporal shortest path length 
between nodes, which is a measure of how early a source node can deliver a message to all other nodes. 
Given the shortest temporal distance dij (tmin,tmax), the temporal closeness centrality can be expressed 
as: X 1 hh Ci = di,j (6) W (N - 1) j] =i.V so that nodes that have, on average, shorter temporal dis­tances 
to the other nodes are considered more central.  3. EVALUATION 3.1 Enron Email Dataset The Enron Energy 
Corporation started as a traditional gas and electrical utility supplier; however, in the late 1990s 
their main money making business came from trading en­ergy on the global stock markets [11]. In December 
2001, the Enron Energy Corporation .led for bankruptcy after it was uncovered that fraudulent accounting 
tricks were used to hide billions of dollars in debt [12]. This led to the eventual conviction of several 
current and former Enron executives [21, 7]. The investigation also brought to light the reliance of 
the company on traders to bring in pro.ts using aggres­sive tactics culminating in intentional blackouts 
in California in Summer 2001. With both control over electricity plants and the ability to sell electricity 
over the energy markets, Enron traders arti.cially raised the price of electricity by shutting down power 
plants serving the State of California and pro.ting by selling electricity back at a premium [6]. During 
the investigation into the Enron accounting scan­dal, telephone calls, documents and emails were subpoenaed 
by the U.S. government and as such the email records of 151 Figure 2: Ranked distribution of top 50 
statically (S) and temporally (T) central nodes. From top row: Closeness (C), Betweenness (B), and Degree 
(D). Top 5 node ID s listed under each plot. user mailboxes were part of the public record consisting 
of approximately 250,000 emails sent and received during the period between May 1999 to June 2002 (1137 
days), lead­ing up to the bankruptcy .ling. None of the emails were anonymised and so they provide unique 
semantic informa­tion of the owner of each mailbox.  3.2 Temporal Graph Construction In our analysis, 
we use the dataset prepared by Shetty &#38; Adibi [19]. Since we do not have a complete picture of the 
interactions of users outside of the subpoenaed mailboxes we concentrate on email exchanges between the 
core 151 users only. Taking this email dataset, we process the complete temporal graph from 1999 to 2002 
with undirected links, using windows of size w=24 hours and horizon h=1. If an email was exchanged between 
two individuals in a temporal window, a link between the two nodes representing those individuals will 
be added to the graph representing the tem­poral snapshot for that time.  3.3 Semantic Value of Temporal 
Centrality Figure 2 plots the static and temporal centrality rankings of employees calculated using closeness 
and betweenness. Examining the static centralities (left column) we note that there is little di.erence 
between the top .ve employees us­ing static closeness or betweenness. Also plotting the static ID Name 
Role Notes 9 Stephanie Panus 13 Marie Heard 17 Mike Grigsby 48 Tana Jones 53 John Lavorato 54 Greg Whalley 
67 Sara Shackleton 73 Je. Dasovich 75 Gerald Nemec 107 Louise Kitchen 122 Sally Beck 127 Kenneth Lay 
139 Mary Hain 147 Carol Clair 150 Liz Taylor (Unknown) Legal Senior Legal Specialist Manager Executive 
Trader President Former Head of Trading Vice President Enron Wholesale Services Trader Director of Trading 
Trader Head of Online Trading Managing Director Chairman &#38; CEO Director Trader Secretary Assistant 
to Greg Whalley Table 1: Roles of top centrality nodes. SB SC SD TB TC TD SB SC SD TB TC TD 1.00 0.57 
0.69 0.41 0.24 0.43 -1.00 0.70 0.36 0.22 0.31 --1.00 0.39 0.28 0.48 ---1.00 0.43 0.34 ----1.00 0.40 -----1.00 
 Table 2: Kendall-tau correlation coe.cients be­tween centralities. degree centrality of each node1, 
we notice similar rankings suggesting that static analysis only favours employees who interacted with 
the most number of other people. Temporal closeness and temporal betweenness yield di.erent rankings 
amongst the top .ve and the calculated Kendall-tau corre­lation coe.cient[16] (Table 2) con.rm that static-to-static 
metrics are strongly correlated (. 0.7). Also note that there is low correlation (< 0.4) between temporal 
metrics and static degree demonstrating that temporal analysis is not dependent on the number of people 
an individual interacts with. Cross referencing the top two employee identi.ers with their position within 
the organisation (Table 1) we identify a secretary (150) and managing director (122) as central nodes 
for both static closeness and betweenness; however, both temporal closeness and betweenness consistently 
se­lected employees in trading roles (053, 075, 107, 147). A secretary and a managing director are certainly 
important for information dissemination and central to many commu­nication channels, as detected by static 
measures. However, instead the top trading executives are exclusively favoured by temporal analysis. 
Moreover, cross-referencing with me­dia reports [8], we .nd a correlation between the top two bonuses 
received and the two employees identi.ed by tem­poral betweenness. To show that temporal analysis does 
not simply uncover nodes with the most interactions with other people, we also plot the temporal degree 
(TD) calculated as the total number of emails sent and received by each node i. Since there is a low 
correlation (< 0.4) with temporal close­ness and betweenness this shows that temporal analysis is not 
dependent on the number of emails sent and received by each individual. 1 The static degree centrality 
is de.ned as the number of edges connected to a node i, normalised by the total possible neighbour nodes 
(n - 1) [22] Figure 3: Dissemination Process: Dissemination ra­tio starting from top 2 (left) and top 
10 (right) close­ness source nodes. Area under curve reported in legend for temporal (t) and static (s) 
centrality.  3.4 Effectiveness of Central Nodes on DynamicProcesses 3.4.1 Trace-driven Simulation Setup 
To evaluate the role and the centrality of the employees identi.ed by temporal and static analysis, we 
consider two dynamic processes. First, we simulate a simple information dissemination process over the 
temporal graph constructed from the Enron traces. The process is simulated as follows. We select the 
top N nodes from the ranking based on tem­poral closeness centrality. We place an identical message m 
into their (in.nite) bu.ers. We refer to any node that has received a copy of this message as reached. 
We then replay the contact trace through time and as reached nodes make contact with an unreached node 
u, the message is replicated into the bu.er of node u. We assume that messages are transferred instantaneously 
and only the .rst neighbour in a time window can be reached. We then repeat this for static closeness 
centrality and plot the dissemination ratio across time for both. Second, to model the role of individuals 
as part of an infor­mation mediation process, we borrow concepts from the more commonly known epidemic 
immunisation process where the dissemination ratio of a contagion spreading throughout a static network 
is measured before and after certain nodes are immunised against the contagion [2]. This is analogous 
to measuring the spread of information (the contagion) be­fore and after important individuals are removed 
from the network (such as going on holiday or being discharged) since our conjecture is that removing 
mediators will impact the network communication e.ciency greatly. In the trace-driven simulation, instead 
of a single mes­sage spreading within the organisation, we seed all employ­ees with a di.erent message 
that needs to be delivered to all other employees. This models multiple channels of commu­nication. In 
order to derive a baseline performance, we start by calculating the dissemination ratio when no nodes 
are re­moved. We then remove the top N individuals identi.ed by temporal betweenness and rerun the information 
spreading process. Nodes which are removed cannot receive or pass on messages. We then repeat the same 
process for comparison using static betweenness centrality for the ranking.  3.4.2 Evaluating Information 
Dissemination &#38; Me­diation We present plots using N = {2, 10} for information dis­semination (Figure 
3) and information mediation (Figure 4). Figure 4: Mediation Process: Dissemination ratio after removing 
top 2 (left) and top 10 (right) be­tweenness nodes. Area under curve reported in legend for temporal 
(t), static (s) and baseline (b) where no nodes are removed. As we can see the di.erent pairs of traders 
identi.ed by tem­poral analysis are better than the arbitrary nodes selected by static analysis for both 
disseminating information through the organisation and acting as mediators between commu­nication channels. 
In the information dissemination case, although the .nal dissemination is the same across the long period 
of time, the two traders selected by temporal analysis disseminate information quicker. Only after increasing 
to 10 nodes the static analysis presents similar results. In the in­formation mediation case, the .nal 
dissemination ratios for both temporal and static centrality nodes slightly decreases by removing the 
nodes but are comparable. However, re­moving the two traders gives an overall more prolonged drop in 
message dissemination. In the case of the removal of 10 nodes, the individuals identi.ed by means of 
the temporal metrics slow the dissemination process further compared to static ones.  3.5 Insights into 
Temporal Dynamics To gain some insight into the temporal dynamics of the in­dividuals selected by temporal 
and static analysis, Figure 5 plots the number of emails sent and received over time, again by the top 
two centrality nodes. Also we recall from Section 3.4 that there is a strong correlation between static 
close­ness and betweenness with degree. Such strong correlation between static closeness and betweenness 
with degree has been well documented in [18, 3]. By comparing the contact distribution between static 
anal­ysis (top row) and temporal analysis (bottom row), we ob­serve that the traders identi.ed as important 
individuals by temporal analysis clearly interact earlier in time com­pared with the nodes identi.ed 
by static analysis. This .ts the intuition that earlier interactions are key to faster dis­semination 
and hence temporal metrics are more accurate at identifying key individuals. This also con.rms our ar­guments 
that static analysis ignores time information such as duration, frequency, time ordering and, at the 
simplest level, earlier interactions. Instead for both betweenness and closeness centrality, static analysis 
has prioritised individu­als who interact with the highest number of di.erent people.  4. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we have presented novel temporal central­ity metrics, namely temporal closeness and temporal 
be­tweenness to infer individuals playing a central role in time­ Figure 5: Distribution of total emails 
sent &#38; re­ceived over time by top 2 centrality nodes. Bin size=50 days. From top-left: Static Closeness 
(SC), Temporal Closeness (TC), Static Betweenness (SB), Temporal Betweenness (TB). varying networks from 
a communication perspective. More speci.cally, we have shown that by means of these metrics, we are able 
to identify nodes that are central in information dissemination processes with greater accuracy with 
respect to the corresponding static ones. We have evaluated and compared the static and temporal metrics 
by means of a large corporate email dataset. We have shown that these metrics are more e.ective for the 
identi.cation of nodes that are able to speed up or block information di.usion processes in this class 
of networks. These metrics are applicable to a number of system traces with timestamp information and, 
in general, to dynamic net­works that change over time. We are in the process of further evaluating the 
potential of these modelling techniques and metrics in other contexts. Acknowledgments The authors would 
like to acknowl­edge useful feedback from Salvatore Scellato, Ross Anderson and the other members of 
the Security Group, Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge. This work was sup­ported through EPSRC 
grants EP/D077273, EP/C544773 and EP/F013442.  5. REFERENCES <RefA>[1] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, 
and A. Vespignani. The architecture of complex weighted networks. PNAS, 101(11):3747 3752, Mar. 2004. 
[2] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespignani. Dynamical Processes on Complex Networks. Cambridge 
University Press, Nov. 2008. [3] M. Barth´elemy. Betweenness centrality in large complex networks. The 
European Physical Journal B -Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 38(2):163 168, Mar. 2004. [4] S. Boccaletti, 
V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D. Hwang. Complex networks: Structure and dynamics. Physics Reports, 
424(4-5):175 308, Feb. 2006. [5] E. Bullmore and O. Sporns. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical 
analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10(3):186 198, Mar. 2009. [6] CBS 
News. Enron traders caught on tape. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/06/01/ eveningnews/main620626.shtml, 
June 2004. [7] CBS News. Former Enron Trader Pleads Guilty. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/06/16/ 
national/main623569.shtml, Aug. 2004. [8] CNN. Enron paid hefty bonuses before bankruptcy. http://archives.cnn.com/2002/LAW/02/09/ 
enron.bonuses/index.html, Feb. 2002. [9] E. Daly and M. Haahr. Social network analysis for information 
.ow in disconnected Delay-Tolerant MANETs. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 8(5):606 621, 2009. 
 [10] H. Ebel, L. Mielsch, and S. Bornholdt. Scale-free Topology of E-mail Networks. Phys. Rev. E, 66(3):035103, 
2002. [11] P. Elkind and B. McLean. The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall 
of Enron. Penguin, Sept. 2004. [12] Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Addressing the 2000-2001 Western 
Energy Crisis, Dec. 2008. [13] P. Holmes. Congestion and centrality in tra.c .ow on complex networks. 
Advances in Complex Systems, 6(2):163 176, 2003. [14] F. Jordan, T. A. Okey, B. Bauer, and S. Libralato. 
Identifying important species: Linking structure and function in ecological networks. Ecological Modelling, 
216(1):75 80, Aug. 2008. [15] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos. Maximizing the spread of in.uence 
through a social network. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD 03, pages 137 146, 2003. [16] M. G. Kendall. A 
new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1-2):81 93, 1938. [17] J. Kleinberg. Bursty and hierarchical 
structure in streams. In Proceedings of SIGKDD 02, pages 91 101, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 2002. ACM. 
[18] M. J. Newman. A measure of betweenness centrality based on random walks. Social Networks, 27(1):39 
54, 2005. [19] J. Shetty and J. Adibi. Discovering important nodes through graph entropy the case of 
Enron email database. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Link Discovery, pages 74 81, 
Chicago, Illinois, 2005. ACM. [20] J. Tang, M. Musolesi, C. Mascolo, and V. Latora. Temporal distance 
metrics for social network analysis. In Proceedings of WOSN 09, 2009. [21] Washington Post. Enron fraud 
trial ends in 5 convictions. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp­dyn/articles/A23034-2004Nov3.html. [22] 
S. Wasserman and K. Faust. Social Networks Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1994.  
</RefA>			
