
 Computer Graphics Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 AN APPLICATION OF COLOR GRAPHICS TO THE DISPLAY OF 
SURFACE CURVATURE John C. Dill Computer Science Department Genera] Motors Research Laboratories Warren, 
Michigan 48090* ABSTRACT analysis the designer works with variations in the line's curvature with arc 
length, and must In developing a mathematical representation for a repeat this for many such lines. 
surface, designers currently must use line drawing graphics to examine the curvature of a line in a 
Since curvature of a line in a plane is a one- plane, a two-dimensional analysis. By combining a dimensional 
quantity, it would be desirable to result from differential geometry with the use of provide a tool 
for analysis of two-dimensional color raster graphics, the method described in this curvature, particularly 
since up to 25% of the paper provides a means for the designer to examine overall computer-aided design 
effort is spent in surface curvature, a three-dimensional analysis. constructing mathematical surfaces 
from the clay In particular, a formulation for the Gaussian and data. Especially desirable would be 
a new average curvatures is given and it is shown how approach both to simplify this effort and to pro- 
these indicate the presence or absence of protru- vide an improved analysis tool. sions, hollows, etc. 
in a surface, i.e., how, where, and by how much the surface curves. As pointed out in [l] differential 
geometry deals with local curvature of surfaces, and in particu- Showing a fourth variable, curvature 
in this case, lar shows that the (local) nature of a surface can over a three-dimensional surface is 
difficult, if be characterized by its average and Gaussian cur- not impossible with traditional line 
drawing vatures. These scalar valued functions can be computer graphics. The method described solves 
 computed for a variety of surfaces and can be this problem by using color as a fourth dimen- used to 
indicate bumps, holl'ows, saddle points, sion. Examples are given, including both known etc. in the 
surface. shapes (torus) and automotive parts (hood, fender). Graphical representation of this information 
in a form easily understood by a designer is, however, KEY WORDS AND PHRASES: Computer graphics, raster 
 very difficult with traditional line drawing graphics, computer-aided design, sculptured computer graphics 
hardware (e.g., DEC GT62 or IBM surfaces, surface curvature. 3250 vector refresh displays). The solution 
to this difficulty is the use of color raster CR CATEGORIES: 8.2 , 3.2 graphics where color with solid 
shaded images can show a designer how curvature varies over a three- INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND dimensional 
surface. cer- lies in the smooth blending of highlights and tain results from differential geometry 
with the shadows. This, in turn, is determined by the Part of the attractiveness of a car's appearance 
This paper describes a method for combining use of color raster graphics to display surface shape of 
the surface. Thus a major part of the curvature of three-dimensional surfaces. Follow- computer-aided 
design of vehicle outer surfaces ing sections contain: is construction of mathematically smooth, esthetically 
pleasing surfaces from raw clay -description of the curvature problem data. A key element of this process 
is analysis -method to obtain surface curvature of the lines formed by intersecting the surface -results 
of applying this method to known with planes (surface cross sections). In this shapes and automotive 
parts -discussion and conclusions Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
THE PROBLEM OF SURFACE CURVATURE provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the Design of outer surfaces is an important use 
of publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by computer-aided design. At 
General Motors, for. permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy example, approximately 
25% of this effort is in otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. *Present 
address: Corne11 University, Ithaca, New York 14853 &#38;#169;1981 ACM O-8971-045-1/81-0800-0153 $00.75 
 Computer Graphics Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 the construction of a mathematical description of 
the sampled data from the clay model. The result must be mathematically smooth (continuous in the second 
derivative) and esthetically pleasing, i.e., have smoothly flowing highlights and shadows. In brief, 
the procedure for accomplishing this is (see [2] ) : l. The surface of the clay model is sampled to 
produce an array of (x y z) coordinate triples. The samples are usually taken along cross sections at 
10-cm intervals, and along various key lines. 2. For each cross section the designer fits a mathematically 
smooth line (i.e., cubic polynomial) through the raw clay data points.  3. To obtain an esthetically 
pleasing result, the designer then works with the curvature of the resulting lines, using displays like 
that in Figure l [2]. The goal is to split the line into regions where the curvature changes monotonically 
and smoothly, with the resulting line sufficiently close to the original data.  4. Lines from perpendicular 
sets of cross sections are then interpolated to form surfaces, usually so-called Gordon surfaces [2,3]. 
  2.2 0.0 L___ Y  -2.3 CURVATURE VS. ARC LENGTH DEVIATIONS  .04 0.0 -0.3 Figure I. Curvature 
analysis plots. Curve "A" is the mathematical approximation to the raw data, "B" is the deviation of 
"A" from the data, and "C" is the curvature of A. There are several difficulties with this method. First, 
the curvature plots are made at only a finite number of sections, i.e., the curvature is "sampled" and 
not examined in the intervening intervals. Second, it is a one-dimensional curva- ture, that of a line 
in a plane, rather than of a surface in 3-space. Third, with line drawing graphics, the designer must 
rely on cross sections through the resulting Gordon surface to examine overall flow and smoothness. A 
potential solu- tion might be a suitably realistic computer rendering of the surface. However, even 
with this, ambiguities can result [l]. What is desired then is an objective measure of surface curvature. 
 APPROACH The subject matter of differential geometry addresses, among other topics, the issue of sur- 
face curvature [1,4], and as we will see, supplies an objective measure of this curvature. We first discuss 
the mathematical basis of surface curva- ture on an intuitive basis; a detailed derivation is given 
in an appendix. We then describe a method for graphically presenting this informa- tion to a designer. 
 Surface Curvature In Figure 2, the plane (P) cutting the surface (S) contains the surface normal (N--) 
at the point A on the surface. At the point A, suppose the line of intersection has curvature K. As P 
is rotated about E, K changes with the angle of rotation, 0: K = K(0). As described in [4], Euler proved 
there are unique directions for which K reaches a minimum and maximum. Curva- tures in these directions 
are called the princi- pal curvatures, K m and K M. Further., two combina- tions of these characterize 
the local nature of the surface, the average and Gaussian (often referred to as Total) curvatures K 
and K . a g K a = (K m + KM)/2 Kg = K'K M Figure 2. Surface curvature illustration.  To see how ~o 
compute these, consider first the two-dimensional case of a circle as shown in Figure 3. From elementary 
calculus, the curva- ture K is K "- Y" (l + y,2)3/2  At the origin, y' = O and K = y" . Expanding 
in a Maclaurin series, since y(O) = y'(O) = O, Computer Graphics Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 Ay 
= 1/2Ax2y '' + O(Ax 2) and lim 2A~ y" = K = Ax+O Ax z  describes the curvature at the origin. Y Ax 
 Figure 3. Curvature of a circle.  Surfaces of interest are bivariate param___etric surfaces, ~.g., 
~(u,v). In Figure 4, AS is the change in S as we move a short distance along the intersection line. The 
parametric analog of ~y is the projection of AS on N, the dot product AS.N. Thus we are led to the following 
expression for K for a parametric surface. where (A B C) = Q'(Lu S SVV) "Q = ('Su x ~) UV ' a normal 
vector, and Su, Svv , etc. are partial derivatives of ~(u,v). What is it that these values tell us about 
the nature of the surface? A local protrusion or bump will have K > 0 while an indentation will a have 
K < 0, with the magnitude of K indicating a a  the sharpness of the bump or hollow. But if K m and 
K M differ in sign or are near zero, K a tells us little. K , on the other hand, nicely charac- g terizes 
the nature of the local curvature by dis- tinguishing among three cases, as illustrated in Figure 5. 
The cases depend on whether K m and K M have the same or opposite sign, or are near zero. Shape K m 
K M K g ell iptical same > 0 (bump, hollow) sign K = l im 2N.AS As 0 Figure 4. Curvature of parametric 
surface.  A bivariate Taylor expansion yields an expression for K(Au, Av) which can be differentiated 
to obtain extrema of K. From this can be derived equations for K a and Kg, and from these, K m and K 
M can be computed (see Appendix). K a = (A I\1 2 -2BSu'Sv + CI Su 12)/2]EI 3 K = (AC -B)/[~I 4 g hyperbolic 
opposite < 0 (saddle point) sign cyl indrlcal one or = 0 (ridge, hollow, plane) both = 0 Figure 5. Characterization 
of surface elements by K . g K then readily distinguishes elliptlcal, hyper- g bolic and cyllndrlcal 
cases; K a can be used subse- quently to separate bumps and hollows, ridges and hollows, etc. Thus K 
and K serve to character- a g [ze the local shape of the surface, providing just the objective measure 
of surface curvature that we sought. Described in the next section, these scalar values may be computed 
at any point of the surface and tell us (locally) if there is a bump, hollow, etc. along with the magnitudes 
of each. Graphical Representation Though we now have an objective measure of surface  Computer Graphics 
Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 curvature, the problem of presenting this to a designer, i.e., showing 
the variation in curva-ture over a surface in 3-dlmensional space, remains. The difficulty is the lack 
of a fourth spatial variable with which to represent curvature. The same difficulty, of course, applies 
to any scalar, e.g., pressure, temperature, etc. Although various solutions have been attempted with 
line drawing graphics, none have proven satisfactory: -numerical values on surface: crowded, hard to 
read and distinguish -contour lines: computationally demanding, subject to misinterpretation -hedgehog 
diagrams: (surface normals with length proportional to value) difficult to interpret. Use of the color 
spectrum, as first pointed out by Christiansen [5], provides the needed extra dimen- sion, superimposing 
this color variation on the three-dimensional image, as described below. As an example, consider how 
K might be shown. Areas g where K is positive are red, areas where it is g negative are blue, and areas 
where it is near zero are yellow. Superimposing these colors on a solid shaded image (as opposed to a 
wire-frame line drawing) will show the user immediately and quantl- tatively how curvature varies over 
the surface. IMAGE GENERATION This starts with the construction of a polygonal approximation formed by 
sampling the parametric surface along flow lines (constant u and v). The designer may specify either 
the number of samples or a maximum chordal deviation between samples. All four curvature values (Km, 
K M, Ka, and Kg) are computed at each vertex or sample point. A set of values for Km, etc. is assigned 
to each polygon by averaging the values at the vertices. To remove hidden portions, back-facing polygons 
are optionally culled; the remainder are colored and shaded as described below and sent to a frame buffer 
for display in reverse order of their distance from the viewpoint (painter's algorithm). Polygons are 
assigned a color either by the user interacti~ely specifying a color for the entire surface, or by using 
a color-encoded curvature value, described below. Shading uses a simple constant-plus-cosine-squared 
rule (ambient plus Lambertian reflection), assuming a single light source at the viewpoint. Each polygon 
has a uniform shade since no attempt was made to produce smooth shading. To color-encode the curvature 
(or any scalar value), the entire scalar range is divided into five inter-vals (initially) with each 
interval assigned a different color. The initial color assignment for a curvature range of -.07 to +.03 
is shown in Figure 6. Interactive commands support modifica- tion of this assignment as well as specification 
of which curvature to use for the encoding. curvature (r g b) value values color .01 to .03 l 0 0 red 
-.01 to .O1 I l 0 yellow -.O3 to -.Of 0 1 O green -.O5 to -.03 0 1 1 turquoise -.07 to -.05 0 O l blue 
 Figure 6. Default color assignments. The surface sampling and curvature computations were written in 
PL/I and added as a user option to GM's CADANCE system [7] which runs on a large IBM system. The results 
are transmitted as geom- etry and curvature files to a DEC VAX ll/7BO where images are generated and 
manipulated. The display device is a Ramtek 9300 (640 by 480 resolution, lO bits per pixel). RESULTS 
To test the theory and implementation, several known shapes, all mathematically well defined, were displayed. 
Consider, for example, a torus, illustrated in Figure 7 below. On the outside, K M and K m have the same 
sign (Kg > 0), while on the inside they have opposite signs (Kg < 0). On the rim, K will be zero yielding 
K = O. The m g default color assignment results in the image shown in Figure 7, as predicted. Consider 
a sur- face element on the "outside" of the torus. Here both K m and K M curve towards the center of 
the torus. Both have the same slgn, hence K is posi- g rive and outside areas are colored red. Similarly, 
for an "inner" element, K m and K M have opposite signs, K is negative and the inner areas are blue. 
g A second interesting example is the catenold, a catenary of revolution. One result of this being a 
"minimal energy" surface is that the average curvature is everywhere zero. Thus, as demonstra-ted in 
Figure 8, K says nothing about the shape. a K on the other hand varies from -i.O at the center g to zero 
at the ends, illustrating the change in shape. Basically this says every point on the catenold is a saddle 
point, with the sharpest curvature at the center. m and K M tend Both ...K toward zero with increasing 
dlstance from the center. Automotive Components Following testingwith known shapes, the system was applied 
to several automotive parts. Illustrated in Figure 9 is the right half of a 1980 Pontiac "B" body hood, 
in both normal and curvature colored forms. Observe that the normal colored image (Figure 9a) says little 
about the detailed shape, Even the longitudinal crease is visible only as a faint darkening. The Gaussian 
curvature colored image (Figure 9b) gives much more information, and more clearly. As expected, most 
of the hood is relatively flat (red area), with high values of   Computer Graphics Volume 15, Number 
3 August 1981 curvature along the longitudinal crease and at the front (yellow, green). Unexpected, however, 
was the high value at the back outside corner. An observer from Design Staff on seeing this was moti- 
vated to examine the hood of a production vehicle, and in fact, discovered a minor "flat" spot in just 
this area. Figure IO shows a portion of a front fender from a 1980 Oldsmobile "B" body (Delta 88). Here 
four separate Gordon surface patches are shown. It will be seen that the patches blend together in an 
overlapping fashion. This is indicated by, for example, the small green areas in the blue part and vice 
versa in Figure lOa where the parts were assigned different colors and colored normally. In this design, 
each part has been extended a little beyond the original boundaries to get a better blend. Thus, where 
the two parts overlap, they are very close in "Z" value. Due to the particular hidden surface algorithm 
then, some polygons of each part are shown on top of the other in essentially random locations because 
this algorithm does not handle intersecting surfaces correctly. Figure IOb shows the average curvature 
for the same part. Observe the relative constant curva- ture (desirable for a "smooth" surface) except 
in the region where the blade of the scythe meets the handle. DISCUSSION As the example of the torus 
illustrates, Gaussian curvature does show the nature of surface curva- ture. Further, the superimposition 
of color graphically shows the variation of curvature over a surface in 3-space. Other examples, not 
illus- trated, including a sine wave of revolution and a sphere, confirmed both the use of Gaussian and 
average curvature to understand how a surface behaves and the use of color as the mechanism for illustrating 
it. The example also shows that these ideas can be applied to real automotive components. The point 
to be made from the "flat spot" example is the qualitative use of this approach, that is, its utility 
in providing a complete view of curvature over theentire surface as well as providing a means for the 
designer to get a qualitative "feel" for how the surface behaves.. As an example of this in a quite 
different context, during early testing, a display of surface curvature of a bivariate probability distrlbution 
[6] was made. According to the analyst, had it not been for this display he would have missed a certain 
beak in the distribution. In sum, potential problem areas are made imme- diately apparent to the designer, 
in a single image, an achievement not possible using a line drawing display. Thus, this approach holds 
poten- tial for improving design quality while reducing the time required, and may help move the applica- 
tion of computer-aided design to earlier stages in the overall design process. The examples also illustrate 
the potential for the use of color as a quantitative measure of a fourth dimension. To be sure, the precision 
is not high. However, we believe it is certainly adequate as a "school grade" (i.e., A B C D E) measure 
which suffices in many applications. CONCLUSIONS Gaussian and average curvature can be used to indicate 
the shape of local elements of a three- dimensional curved surface. The method described here, by providing 
a means for color-encoding these scalar functions and superimposing the result on a three-dimensional 
image, provides a useful, effective means for displaying surface curvature to a designer. While further 
work is required, the examples indicate this approach holds much potential as a tool for surface design 
and analysis. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The writer is indebted to W. Weston Meyer of the Mathematics Department, 
GM Research Laboratories, for showing him the derivation given in the Appen- dix for curvature of parametric 
surfaces, and for discussions relating to surface curvature. The writer also wishes to thank G. Werschler, 
GM Design Staff, and N. Oliver, Computer Science Department, GM Research Laboratories, for program- ming 
the CADANCE sampling operator and curvature computation subroutine, respectively. REFERENCES<RefA> I. Forrest, 
A.R. "On the rendering of surfaces." SIGGRAPH '79 Proceedings 13(2), August 1979. 2. Jones, J.I. "A 
system for designing and approximating aesthetically smooth curves with interactive graphic controls." 
Ph.D. Thesis, U. of Detroit, 1970.  3. Gordon, W.J. "Spline-blended surface inter- polation through 
curve networks." J. Math. &#38; Mechanics 18(IO), 931-952, 1969.  4. Struik, D.J. Differential Geometry. 
Addison- Wesley, Cambridge, 1950.  5. Christiansen, H. "Application of continuous tone computer generated 
images in structural mechanics." In: Structural Mechanics Computer Programs -Surveys, Assessments and 
Availability (Pilkey, Saczalski and Schaefler, eds.), U. Press of Virginla,'1974.  6. Rodrlguez, R.N. 
"Multivariate Burr III dis- tributions. Part I. Theoretical properties." Research Publication GMR-3232, 
General Motors Research Laboratories, Warren, Michigan, 1980.  7. Dill, J.C. "An overview of CADANCE 
-a computer graphics system at General Motors." Research Publication GMR-3150, General Motors Research 
Laboratories, Warren, Michigan, 1980.  Computer Graphics </RefA>APPENDIX Curvature Derivation The curvature 
K of a parametric surface ~(u,v) = (X(u,v) Y(u,v) Z(u,v)) is (see APPROACH): lim 2N .AS K = -- As+o 
I~1 ~ Expanding X(u,v) in a bivariate Taylor series, F Au2 7  AX = X u +× v + 1 iXuu x uv Xvvl i 
2- L Av2 J with similar expressions for AY and AZ (subscripts u, v denote differentiation with respect 
to u and v). In vector form, AS = (AX AY AZ)  IX uu Xuv Xv!l rut = LAu + ~'vAV + l /u ,uv ,vv I z 
z LAv~ .J L UU UV V Since N is perpendicular to U and Sv, N.S U = N'S = O, and V X X f Au2 7 N-AS = 
~ I (N x Ny N z) Yuv Y AuAv I UU UV VV zUU vv Z Z Av2 ,_,I L UU UV V = ~1 (N x Ny Nz) " (S'uu S uv Svv) 
AuAv I Av 2 _J Letting A : N-Suu, B : N.Suv and C = N.Svv, we have N.~S : 1 (AAu 2 + 2BAuAv + CAv 2) 
and since I~1 : I~Au + ~vAVl, AAu 2 + 2BAuAv + CAv 2 K(Au, Av) =  l~ul~u~ ÷ 2~u ~v~U~V ÷ I~vl2Av 
2 Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 To see how K varies wlth Au and Av, we divide by Av 2 and substitute 
t = Au/Av. Letting E = 12' G = vlSI2' F = S -S v, we have 'u'IS- U g(t) : (At 2 + 2Bt + C)/(Et 2 
+ 2Ft + G) Recasting this as an extremum problem with the implicit function H(g(t), t) = O, we see that 
 H(g(t), t) = (A -gE)t 2 + 2(B -gF)t + (C -gG) Conditions for an extremum are H(g(t), t) = O, and aH/at 
= O. The second of these yields t = (gF -B)/(A -gE), which, when substituted into the first, gives 
 g2(F2 -EG) + g(AG -2FB + EC) + B 2 -AC = 0 Under this condition then, we have extrema. In effect, we 
do not care what g looks like as long as we can find values which produce roots. Recalling that the sum 
and product of the roots of a quadratic are -b/a and c/a, we have from the above equation, AG -2FB + 
EC K = a 2(EG -F) 2  AI~I 2 -2B~u " ~v + CI~ 12 2(EG -F) 2 AC -B K - g (EG -F) 2 Since EG- F2 = 
l~uI~ I~v12- %.Sv)~= l~u× ~vI2,  Al~v 12 - 2BSu- Sv + cl~ 12 K a AC -B K  g 1\ x\i2  Using Q 
= S x S instead of the unit normal N, U V  and letting (A' B' C') = Q" (Lu Suv Svv)' we obtain the 
computationally more convenient Computer Graphics Volume 15, Number 3 August 1981 A' I~I ~ -2B'~- ~ 
. c'l\l~ U V K  a 21~I 3 A' C' B' K - g I~1 ~ Letting b = ~Kg -K a = (K M -Km)/2, the maximum and 
minimum curvatures are K M : K a -b K :K +b m a   
			
