
 An Alternative Culminating Experience for Master s Students in Computer Science James C. McKim, Jr., 
Timothy O. Mart yn, Roger H. Brown, Michael M. Danchak, Kathleen L. Farrell, C. William Higginbotham, 
Irina S. Ilovici, Brian J. McCartin &#38; J. Peter Matelski, The Hartford Graduate Center Abstract 1 
Introduction The Hartford Graduate Center (HGC), lo­cated in Hartford, Connecticut, is an inde­pendent 
institution which, in affiliation with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), offers Master s Degrees 
in Computer Science, Engi- Most schools that offer Master s Degrees in neering, and Management. HGC 
was estab- Computer Science require some sort of cul­ lished in 1955 expressly to provide graduate 
minating experience. Typically these experi­ level education for the working professional. ences consist 
of a full fledged master s thesis Currcutly, more than 95% of our more than or project, an examination 
based on certain 2000 students are indeed working profession­ core courses, or a capstone course. als 
who attend HGC on a part time basis, tak­ing one or two evening courses per semester. The Hartford Graduate 
Center offers an un- HGC students must satisfy the same admis­usual, perhaps unique, culminating experi­sion 
requirements as RPI graduate students en ce. Students in the final year of their and must fulfill a 
course of study equal in qual­master s program are required to take a one it y to their RPI counterparts. 
 credit course called Computer Science Semi­ nar. Over the course of the year the students attend six 
presentations by leaders in their re The Master s Degree is the terminal degree spective areas of computer 
science. Concur-for most of our students. As a result we in ren tly, they work on modest sized (20 double­ 
the Computer and Information Science (CIS) spaced pages) original or expository research Depa] tment 
feel the need to provide a sub­papers. These papers are thoroughly reviewed stantial culminating experience 
at the Mas­by the faculty, and may be revised multiple ter s level. Our philosophy is that by the time 
times. At the end of the academic year, a con-our students have completed their courses of ference is 
held at which each student presents study they should have the ability to continue his/her paper. Proceedings 
of the conference their education independently. Thus we de­are published and a copy given to each st 
u-vised a process through which each student dent. would propose, research, write, and present at least 
a small research project. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided 
that the copies are not made or distributed for Such a philosophy effectively rules out any direct commercial 
advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the kind of examination. On the other hand, we title of the publication 
and its date appear, and notice is given felt the need to find a better approach than that copying is 
by permission of the Association for Computing the standard six credit project or thesis be- Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee cause and/or specific permission. 01991 ACM 0-89791-377-9191 
10002-0210 ...S1 .50 1. We feel six credits (20% of a student s curriculum) is too much to require. 
As it is, many students express regret that they are unable to take all the courses they would like. 
We, ofcourse, still allow a six credit project/thesis as an option. 2. We feel that the full 3. Such 
a requirement would put too much of a burden on the faculty, as we have lit­erally hundreds of students 
but only eight full time CIS faculty members. Although we are fortunate to have a goodly number of qualified 
adjuncts, the full time faculty would have to bear the brunt of the work involving full fledged projects/theses). 
 fledged project/thesis approach may be incompatible with the applied nature of our program. Instead, 
the CIS faculty at HGC developed an unusual culminating experience, called Semi­nar that meets our philosophical 
goals without putting an impossible burden on the faculty. 2 Evolution of Seminar Up to 19S0, each student 
was required to present a lecture in an advanced course that went beyond the material normally covered 
in the course. In principle this is a viable ap­proach, but we quickly discovered problems with it. We 
found that it was difficult to enforce con­sistent quality of the students research across so many different 
courses and instructors. This problem was aggravated by the fact that we employed (and still employ) 
a large number of part time instructors. It is hard enough for an instructor whose full time commitment 
is outside our institution to present a first class course without having to be concerned with helping 
students satisfy a department wide re­quirement that is independent of the course s/he is teaching. There 
were also the obvious logistical prob­ lems of keeping track of just who had com­ pleted the Seminar 
requirement, what topics were being covered, as well as when and with whom the requirement was completed. 
These problems led us to consider the real pur­pose of Seminar. After much soul searching we arrived 
at the following conclusions. The main goals of Seminar are to provide a positive learning experience 
derived from 1. Researching a specific topic and commu­nicant ing the results. 2. Exposure to leading 
researchers in (or us­ing) Computer Science.  The combination of the problems in the previ­ous system 
and the statement of well defined goals led us to separate the Seminar from ex­isting courses. In 1980, 
the Seminar became a O credit course required of all students in the CIS program. Students attended a 
number of lectures by invited speakers presenting their research. The students were then expected to 
develop a lecture on an advanced topic and present it at a special Seminar meeting held in late April. 
This approach solved most of the logistical problems. Seminar students were now clearly identified, and 
there was no question about when a student completed Seminar. However, there was still great inconsistency 
in the qual­ity of the presentations. Further, based on presentations alone, it was difficult to deter­mine 
rvhether a student had really done an adeql!ote job of researching and organizing his/her lecture. A 
polished lecturer could con­ceivably cover up shoddy research and, on the other hand, the best researcher 
could go un­recogll ized due to a lack of presentation skills. The fiual major modification, begun in 
the 1984-85 academic year was to require each stude]lt to write a research paper on an ap­ proved topic 
and have the paper carefully re­ viewed before it was presented. The precise manner in which all this 
is achieved is the topic of the next section. 3 Current Format of Sem­inar Requirement In this section 
we present in detail the cur­ rent requirements for the Seminar experience at HGC. 3.1 Seminar Speakers 
Students must attend at least six of seven 90 minute colloquia presented monthly between September and 
March. The first of these is largely organizational. It is here that the stu­dents receive most of the 
information that is covered in the remainder oft his section. How­ever, one of the award winning students 
from the previous year s conference is given 30 min­utes to present his/her paper (awards will be discussed 
shortly). This helps to give the cur­rent crop of students a mark to shoot for. The remainder of the 
colloquia are devoted to talks by computer scientists or people apply­ing computers at the cutting edge 
of their re­spective fields. Thus we have had talks on the standard areas of computer science operat­ing 
systems, networks, compilers, artificial in­telligence, software engineering, graphics, and so on. But 
we have also had talks on the appli­cations of computers to medicine and music, to name but two. We are 
blessed to be located within easy driv­ing distance of a number of first rate schools in New York and 
Massachusetts, as well as Yale and the University of Connecticut within our own state. In addition there 
are top flight people working in nearby industries and busi­nesses. Thus we have a wealth of local talent 
to draw from. Finally we have occasionally gone further afield to bring in such luminar­ies as David 
Parnas and Turing award winner Dennis Rit chic. 3.2 Evolution of Papers Each student must write a research 
paper to be presented at the annual HGC Computer Science Conference. The Conference is open to the public 
and its Proceedings are pub­lished. Each paper is carefully reviewed at each step of its evolution to 
ensure high qual­ity of content, scholarship, and style. 3.2.1 Proposals Each student submits a proposal 
at the Oc­tober colloquium. The proposal is generally expect ed to be in the following format. 1. Statement 
of the Problem. Provide an exact, clear, and concise state­ment of the problem to be investigated. 2. 
Intended Purpose of the Paper. Is the paper a summary of original work? A review of an existing body 
of work? Some combination? 3. Justification and Relevance of the Topic. State the significance of the 
problem to be ill vestigated. Summarize current knowl­edge in the topic area. 4. Scope of Research and 
Content of the Pa­ pa. State the goals of the research. Define the scope of the proposed research paper. 
De­scribe the methods of investigation and approach. Outline and discuss the pro­posed content of the 
paper. 5. Key References and Material Sources. List prior research results, reports, and published papers 
that form the basis for the proposed research paper. State what material resources will be required (e.g. 
computers, software packages, laboratory equipment). 6. Personal Background and Qualifications. Indicate 
the courses taken that provided the prerequisite knowledge for the pro­posed area of research. If the 
proposal is work related, indicate appropriate on­the-job assignments and responsibili­ties.  In general 
students are expected to form their own proposals. They are told that faculty do not have ready made 
lists of potential topics. However, once students have formulated ideas, they are encouraged to talk 
them over with appropriate faculty members. We recommend students propose topics that both reflect their 
int crests and are based on advanced courses. While a few students do truly original work (see the Appendix), 
most write expository pa­persinwhich they synthesize andanalyzeex­isting work. Each proposal is evaluated 
by two faculty members, usually both full time members. However, if an adjunct faculty member haa particular 
expertise in the research area en­ compassed by a particular proposal, that ad­junct may be asked to 
review the proposal along with a full time member. Every effort is made to return the proposals by the 
November meeting. Most proposals fall into one of the following broad categories: 1. Accepted with minor 
or no qualifications. This group may begin working on their outlines as described below. 2. Accepted 
with significant qualifications. A significant qualification is one that must be met by the student if 
s/he wants to continue in the process without re­proposing. For example, one of the most common problems 
is the students ten­dency to propose far more than can rea­sonably be accomplished in the time and space 
allotted. Thus if a student proposes to do X, Y, and Z, the faculty evaluators might accept the proposal 
on the condi­tion that the student just do X and Y. 3. Rejected with suggestions as to how to save the 
proposal. For example, the stu­dent may be unaware of existing work that directly bears on his/her proposal. 
In this case the proposal may have to be substantially revised to take this work into account, but at 
least the student has a good idea as to what the revisions should be. 4. Rejected as beyond help. These 
are typ­ic;lly proposais that a;e too broad ( ;A Survey of Software Engineering ) or too low level ( 
Simulating Concurrency in Modula-2° ). In general it is difficult for the evaluators to even suggest 
how to transform these into viable proposals.  A student whose proposal is rejected has the opportunity 
to repropose as soon as possible. Experience shows that most of the students in category 3) above successfully 
repropose while many in category 4) do not. As stu­dents with viable proposals almost always suc­cessfully 
finish the course, it is mainly those with poor initial proposals that withdraw to fight again another 
day. This attrition rate is about 15%. However, these students almost invariably meet with success on 
their second attempt at the course. Indeed only two or three students out of several hundred in the six 
year history of the Seminar requirement have failed to receive their degree solely as a result of not 
passing Seminar. 3.2.2 Outlines Outlines are due early in January and are ac­cepted only from those 
who have approved proposals. At this point the student is as­signed a single faculty member. This faculty 
member, one of the evaluators of the student s proposal, will review the outline, read and re­view drafts 
of the paper, and barring schedul­ing difficulties, chair the session of the con­ference at which the 
student presents his/her paper. We shall refer to this faculty member as the student s session chair. 
The outline consists of a (an): 1. Title, which clearly denotes the subject of the paper in concise technical 
terms. 2. Abstract, which states the purpose of the paper and previews its results and con-CIusions. 
 3. Introduction, which orients the reader to the nature, importance, and background of the problem. 
 4. N[ajor Sections, which show the frame­work of the paper and indicate the depth of detail to be presented 
in each section. 5. Conclusion, which summarizes the key points of the paper and how they are sup­ported 
by the evidence presented. 6. 13ibliography, which is to be complete and relevant to the topic.  Each 
student must continue work on the out­ line until his/her session chair is satisfied.  3.2.3 Drafts 
In early March, the final draft of the pa­per is due to each student s session chair. In reality there 
will probably be a number of it­erations of this final draft before both the student and session chair 
are satisfied. How­ever, we as faculty members are not interested in looking at anything the students 
might call a rough draft. We want to see their best shot first and then work with them to improve their 
paper yet further. The absolute final date comes in late March or early April. In the past students submitted 
their papers on 11 by 17 galley sheets, which were collated in-house and sent to an outside printer for 
duplication and binding. This year, we hope to do more of the work in-house. In any case, the result 
is The Proceedings of the nth Annual Hartford Graduate Center Com­ puter Science Conference. These Proceedings 
are distributed free of charge to participating students.  3.3 The Conference The HGC Computer Science 
Conference is held on a Saturday near the end of April and is open to the public. Typically, a number 
of computer science and data processing pro­fessionals from the area attend to get a feel­ing for what 
s new in their particular field. Several concurrent sessions are held through­out the day. Students are 
encouraged to re­main the entire day, attending the sessions of, and lendlng moral support to, their 
comrades. Each student is given roughly 20 minutes to present his/her paper and answer a few ques­tions. 
The talk is treated strictly aa a pmserz­tation and not as a defense of the student s work. In other 
words, students cannot fail Seminar at this point, provided they show up and don t faint in the middle 
of their talk! Lunch is provided, along with coffee and soft drinks at breaks between sessions. At the 
end of the day two awards are pre­sented, one for most original paper and one for best presentation. 
Students and faculty vote for both. The nominees for most original paper are selected in advance by the 
faculty. The winner of one of these awards, usually the winner for most original paper, is invited back 
as the first speaker to the following year s Seminar class.  3.4 Support In addition to the faculty 
there is a variety of support services available to the students. Our librarians offer help in the form 
of literature searches, tracking down resources through interlibrary loan, and in general help­ing students 
make the best possible use of our library facilities. We also have a technical communications ex­pert 
on our staff. She teaches a course on the topic which is a requirement for all our students. Since this 
requirement has only re­cently been instituted, some of the students coming into Seminar this year have 
had the course and some have not. To help alleviate this uncomfortable situation our expert will be giving 
workshops both on writing and present­ing technical papers from January through April of the coming academic 
year. It should be noted that one of the reasons for institut­ing the technical communications requirement 
was the poor writing produced by too many Seminar students. 3.5 Grading System Seminar students are 
graded on Pass/No Pass basis. A student who completes all the re­quirements obviously passes. With very 
few excep lions, those who do not complete the requirements are withdrawn from the course. This allows 
them to retake Seminar the follow­ing year without a black mark on their perma­nent record.  3.6 Special 
cases Our students do have the option of completing a standard six credit project or thesis wherein the 
student works closely with a major advisor to produce a substantial, high quality artifact. The student 
must then defend his/her paper before a committee in a public forum. Such students are still required 
to enroll in Seminar, however their Seminar paper usually amounts to a summary or extended abstract of 
their project or thesis. Occasionally, students are unable to satisfy the attendance requirement through 
no fault of their own (e.g. sickness, relocation). In such cases, students are allowed to attend colloquia 
sponsored by other institutions to make up the difference. All students, even those who may have relocated, 
are expected to present their papers at the Conference. Those few who cannot attend the Conference or 
who missed the final submission deadline for reasons beyond their control, are allowed to present their 
papers in a public forum dur­ing the summer.  4 Feedback The CIS Seminar has operated in its current 
format for the past six years. During this time external feedback has been provided by three formal review 
committees. Also, stu­dents and faculty have continuously offered internal feedback. We describe this 
feedback below. 4.1 External Feedback The CIS Academic Review Committee is com­posed of two individuals 
who hold academic appointments in Computer Science Depart­ments which offer graduate level degrees. This 
committee meets every two years to critique the overall quality of education offered by the HGC CIS Department. 
Their feedback on the CIS Seminar has been consistently positive. It was their recommendation that formal 
aca­demic credit be granted to students who suc­cessfully complete the Seminar. This sugges­tion was 
enacted in 1989. The CIS Industrial Review Committee is com­posed of five individuals who hold high level 
managerial positions in the corporate commu­ nity. This committee takes a more pragmatic viewpoint than 
the Academic Review Com­mittee. It is charged with determining the relevance and quality of education 
offered by the CIS Department from the working pro­fessio~lal viewpoint. Members of this com­mittee were 
sensitive to the problem of com­petent technicians possessing poor communi­cation skills. Therefore, 
even though the Sem­inar is primarily an academic exercise, the committee strongly endorsed it as a positive 
effort to address a very real professional prob­lem. In 19S6 the Connecticut Board of Governors for Higher 
Education updated its regulations pertaining to the awarding of the Master s De­gree. It mandated that 
each school or de­partment require all Master s Degree students to participate in some form of culminating 
experience as part of their academic pro­gram. The intent of the culminating expe­rience is for the students 
to be able to demon­strate their ability to synthesize the content of their respective programs, and 
to give ev­idence of their ability to use the knowledge they ve gained. Their representative to HGC specifi 
tally cited the CIS Seminar as a good example of such an experience. The IIartford Graduate Center was 
one of the first institutions to be evaluated for compli­ance with this new regulation. The CIS De­partment 
proposed that its Seminar be recog­nized as fulfilling the culminating experience objec[ ive. Earlier 
this year the Connecticut Board of Higher Education officially accepted this proposal. 4.2 Internal 
Feedback Students offer various opinions about the Sem­ inar experience. During the school year, when 
they are working on their papers, their feed­back is often negative or neutral, sometimes posit i~re. 
However, when we have queried stu­dents after they have successfully completed the Seminar, their opinions 
are typically posi­tive. ib students they recognize the academic value of the experience. And, as working 
pro­ fessiomls, they often comment on the practi­cal bcuefits of the experience.  5 Summary and Future 
Considerations It appears that the current format of Seminar will remain basically the same into the 
fore­seeable future. This means that the problem of helping a student find an appropriate Sem­inar topic 
will continue and perhaps become even more of a challenge. It is expected that advising students to consider 
this issue earlier in their academic program should help. A more pressing problem is one of image. We 
believe that many students, and possibly po­tential students, incorrectly perceive the Sem­inar as a 
thesis. (In fact, we have, perhaps unfortunately, used the term mini-thesis to describe the Seminar.) 
Trying to distinguish the Seminar Requirement from a full thesis effort relies on communicating some 
of the subtle distinctions made above. We speculate that most potential students who are working professionals 
do not favor a program which requires a master s thesis. Hence, at a time of declining student enrollments 
in Computer Science programs nationwide, the Seminar Re­quirement could be a negative admissions fac­tor. 
On the other hand, while the number of Com­puter Science students enrolled in our pro­gram is decreasing, 
the quality (measured mainly by average undergraduate QPA) is in­creasing. A small, but significant number 
of students has indicated that our curriculum is considered to be more demanding and of higher quality 
than our competitors in part because of the Seminar requirement. The CIS faculty is unanimous in its 
support of Seminar. We feel that it is an appropriate cul­minating experience for our students in that 
it meets the dual goals of requiring each student to demonstrate the ability to perform inde­pendent 
research, and to be exposed to leading researchers in Computer Science. We heartily recommend our model 
to other schools who may be struggling with the question of just what their students culminating experience 
at the Master s level should be.  Appendix To give the reader a feeling for what the stu­dents papers 
are like, we present a list of the papers voted as most original for the five years that we have been 
giving that award (awards were not given in the first year of the confer­ence). Year: 1986 Title: CALEB: 
An Intelligent Second Lan­guage Tutor [1] Author: P.A. Cunningham Abstract: This paper is about CALEB, 
a machine tutor that actively engages stu­dents in the process of learning a second lan­guage. It brings 
together a teaching style, the Silent Way; a tutoring architecture, MENO-TUTOR; and a machine, the Macintosh, 
to explore various issues in the development of an intelligent machine tutor. Year: 1987 Title: Realistic 
Image Generation Using Ray Tracing [2] Author: Edward Marshall Abstract: This paper describes a relatively 
new technique for generating realistic com­puter graphics images called ray tracing. Ray tracing accurately 
models the illumina­tion of a scene by tracing light rays through each pixel in the viewing plane and 
into the 3D environment. Images generated by this method offer a dramatic improvement in qual­ity over 
previous methods, especially when modeling reflective and transparent objects. Unfortunately, ray tracing 
is computationally expensive, particular y for environments that cent ain complex lighting schemes, and 
there­fore has not been widely used. The ray trac­ing algorithm is described and a survey of re­cent 
techniques to improve ray tracing perfor­mance is presented. Year: 1988 Title: Acoustic Speech Recognize: 
A PC-Based Tool [3] Author: Stephen J. Smith Abstract: This paper reports on the concept of using computer 
vision techniques in paral­lel with an acoustic pattern recognition pro­cess to more accurately and less 
expensively accomplish automatic recognition of speech. Prior work is reviewed and foundations for human 
performance in lip-reading or speech­reading are introduced to begin to under­stand what features may 
be extracted from the image data. Additionally, the report sum­marizes efforts on the first phase of 
evalu­ating use of a low cost, commercially avail­ able, PC-based, image processing system used to experimentally 
evaluate feature extraction techniques. These features, selected initially based on prior work, are evaluated 
as poten­tial sources of supplementary cues for use by an acoustic word recognize. The word vocab­ulary 
to be evaluated visually was tested off­line using an acoustic speech recognize (ASR) as a guide for 
determining the adequacy of the visual feature set. The report concludes with an assessment of system 
capabilities to sup­port future experiments. Year: 1989 Title: An Application of a Neural Network in 
Pattern Recognition of the Clinical Elec­ trocardiogram [4] Author: Deborah E. Meadow Abstract: Any scanning 
system s ability to adequately analyze the ECG signal de­pends on the quality of the recorded waveform 
fed into it. Although sophisticated software has been created, artifact problems remain a source of analysis 
errors. Fully automated analyses tend to have problems in the form of both false positives and false 
negatives. Neurocomputers are excellent at pattern recognition, even the recognition of incom­ plete 
patterns, and other heuristic functions. They may not always find an exact match but they can find a 
best match. This abil­ ity makes them a natural for storing various types of arrhythmias and running 
a pattern mat ch against the current signal. The ability of a neural network to adapt to its environment 
makes it a good candidate for solving problems where the input is unstable, It is capable of adjusting 
its formulas to match the input and thus provide the desired output. The network can also be tuned to 
preserve Year: 1990 Title: An Analysis of Parallax Problems varying degrees of det ail; this makes them 
well suited for signal processing or signal-noise re­ duction problems. Found with Infrared Touch Screens 
and a Pos­sible Software Solution [5] Author: Helen Jung Douglas Abstract: The purpose of this paper 
is to present the results of an analysis of the par­allax problems associated with the infrared touch 
screen technology when used on a 19 cathode ray tube (CRT). An experiment was run to establish a baseline 
of performance characteristics of this Human Computer In­terface. Operator accuracy and response time 
were measured as a function of switch loca­tion. The same experiment was run again in­corporating a proposed 
parallax compensat­ing software. The results were compared to show l~ow the operator s performance, which 
was degraded due to the parallax problems experienced when using switches located on both sides and in 
the corners of the CRT, increased by using the parallax compensat­ing software. This experiment did not 
signifi­ cantly prove that the operator s response time decreased when using the parallax compensat­ing 
software; however, it did show a st artist­ ically significant decrease in the operator error rate (a 
7.6910 decrease in the number of missed switch selections). By being able to compen­sate for the parallax 
problems associated with this new interface technology, a more reliable and operable system can be in 
use resulting in a greater acceptance of the infrared touch screen technology for a wider range of appli­ 
cations. Acknowledgments First and foremost, we want to thank the hun­dreds of students who have worked 
so hard and conscientiously to make Seminar a suc­cess. In adtlition, we owe a special debt of gratitude 
to Margaret Kulos and Thea Iberall, who, while no longer members of our faculty, are dearly missed and 
were highly involved in the development of Seminar, especially the Con­ference, in its present form. 
 References <RefA>[1] P.A. Cunningham, CALEB: An Intelli­gent Second Language Tutor , Proceed­ings of the 2nd 
Annual Hartford Grad­uate Center Computer Science Confer­ence, pp. 123 128, 1986. [2] Edward Marshall, 
Realistic Image Gen­eration Using Ray Tracing , Proceed­ings of the 3rd Annual Hartford Grad­uate Center 
Computer Science Confer­ence, pp. 133 138, 1987. [3] Stephen J. Smith, Acoustic Speech Rec­ognize: A 
PC-Based Tool , Proceed­ings of the dth Annual Hartford Grad­uate Center Computer Science Confer­ence, 
pp. 67 72, 1988. [4] Deborah E. Meadow, An Application of a Neural Network in Pattern Recogni­tion of 
the Clinical Electrocardiogram , Proceedings of the 5th Annual Hartford Graduate Center Computer Science 
Con­ference, pp. 76-81, 1990. [5] Helen Jung Douglas, An Analysis of Parallax Problems Found with Infrared 
Touch Screens and a Possible Software Solution , Proceedings of the 6th Annual Hartford Graduate Center 
Computer Sci­ence Conference, pp. 204 209, 1991. 
			</RefA>
