
 Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, 
and G. W. Evans, eds. A FOUR STEP METHODOLOGY FOR USING SIMULATION AND OPTIMIZATION TECHNOLOGIES IN STRATEGIC 
SUPPLY CHAIN PLANNING Donald A. Hicks LLama-Soft, Inc. 1377 North 300 W., Suite 1A Provo, UT 84604, 
U.S.A.  ABSTRACT Supply chains are real world systems that transform raw materials and resources into 
end products that are consumed by customers. Supply chains encompass a series of steps that add value 
through time, place, and material transformation. Each manufacturer or distributor has some subset of 
the supply chain that it must manage and run profitably and efficiently to survive and grow. Decisions 
about how to plan a company s supply chain operations can be operational, tactical, or strategic. Strategic 
decisions are the most far-reaching and difficult d to make. These decisions are characterized by complexity, 
interdependence, and uncertainty. Simulation and optimization modeling techniques are used to help make 
supply chain strategic decisions. The four-step methodology is a proposed approach to supply chain strategic 
planning that attempts to leverage the strength of multiple modeling techniques. Each step solves a different 
part of the master planning problem, using either optimization, simulation, or simulation-optimization. 
By using complementary modeling approaches together in the Four Step Methodology, the supply chain planner 
s activities and decisions can be greatly improved. INTRODUCTION Since its commercialization and proliferation 
as a viable industrial technology, discrete event simulation (DES) modeling has achieved a status of 
pre-eminence in the analysis of complex systems. DES offers analysts and decision-makers a means to replicate 
the behavior of complex systems as they operate over time. The most common applications of DES include 
plant floor operations, logistics systems, and human service delivery systems, although there are many 
different applications that do not fall neatly into one of these three headings. As DES technology has 
matured, supporting methodologies and accepted practices have grown along with it, to provide a blueprint 
of how to successfully deploy it and avoid the pitfalls of past failed projects. However, while a core 
nucleus of dedicated experts and vendors has helped to further the development and maturation of DES 
technology, the task of clarifying the contextual borders which define the touch-points of DES with other 
alternative modeling technologies has largely been left to the user community. Many simulation experts 
focus on and promote the use of simulation technology with regard to the problems it can solve, but few 
have an agenda that includes defining what simulation can t do. Aside from educators and a few leading 
edge researchers, it is the User Community itself that has been forced to take on the formidable task 
of defining when simulation is relevant, and when it is not. As many practitioners will attest, the most 
crucial stage of any project that involves problem solving and decision making is the formulation of 
the problem itself and the selection of which tools and technologies to attack the problem with. When 
one knows an issue is a simulation problem, one can proceed with established methodologies. When one 
knows it is not, one can select a different approach. 2 DOMAIN DEFINITION AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGIC 
PLANNING In recent years, the problem of domain definition has become more and more acute. As practitioners 
in industry continue to demand better solutions to their analytical and planning problems, they have 
pushed technologies such as DES towards the boundaries of what they can be expected to do. Simulation, 
once considered as a statistical sampling technique for selecting finished designs (preferably in a head 
to head comparison) are now being expected to provide projections, predictions, and even prescriptions 
about how a design can be improved or a problem should be solved. These increased expectations resulted 
in a renewed effort by simulation industry experts to incorporate other techniques into their simulations, 
and in 1994, SimRunner, the first simulation-optimization package was released by Decision Science, Inc. 
In the five years that followed, nearly all of the major simulation vendors have incorporate some form 
of model optimization or improved output analysis into their tools. Unfortunately, while improving the 
size of the DES problem-solving domain, these developments also had a deleterious effect on domain definition, 
causing the user community to be less clear about what problems were appropriate for discrete event simulation, 
and which problems were not. Perhaps nowhere has this problem been more evident than in the area of supply 
chain planning. Supply chain planning problems encompass industrial production process design and improvement, 
inventory control policy, transportation management, supply procurement, and demand planning in short, 
all of the major activities that a large industrial company could be involved with. Increasingly throughout 
this decade, corporate planners and operations managers have come to realize that it is the very fact 
of the complexity of the enterprise that results in planning and decision making problems. Although the 
first step of enterprise analysis and improvement efforts to reduce the scope of the problem to a manageable 
size by examining only one aspect (link) in the supply chain, it is now common knowledge that slicing 
up the problem can likely cause the underlying root causes of problem s symptoms to vanish. In other 
words, simplifying the supply chain planning problem, or reducing it to parts, often renders the analysis 
itself moot. It is the complexity and interdependence of the operational links that result in the areas 
of interest for the typical industrial decision-maker. Hence, it has become a requirement of supply chain 
analysis projects to deal with not only complexity and interdependence, but randomness too; to model 
problems accurately, but to solve them as well; to describe and determine, only to then to predict and 
prescribe. In short, supply chain planning and analysis places requirements upon its would-be participants 
to use multiple techniques and technologies, as needed, to arrive at different facets of a complex solution. 
Of course, this is exactly what sharp analytical approach domain definition facilitates, and hence exacerbates 
by its absence. This is a problem with large financial implications for practitioners, and it demands 
attention. Over the last two years, a team of experts from different decision support technology niches 
has been collaborating on projects and sharing information about their products. The goal of this collaboration 
was to produce a common approach, or methodology, for utilizing different modeling techniques to help 
analyze and solve supply chain strategic planning problems. The team focused on strategic decisions because 
they are the most ambiguous and the most dependent on advanced modeling and simulation techniques. The 
remainder of this paper will attempt to outline the approach, called the Four Step Methodology. It should 
be noted that new data and fresh perspectives have already resulted in modification to the Four Step 
Methodology. The Methodology is only a first, tentative step down a long path which, hopefully, will 
lead towards an improved environment for users and better supply chain planning decisions.  3 TERMS 
AND DEFINITIONS Before we review the steps in the Four Step Methodology, we must define a few terms. 
The words simulation, optimization, modeling, and systems, are used by many people to describe many different 
things. The same is true for the term supply chain, and clearly strategic is in the eye of the beholder. 
As far as this paper is concerned, modeling is a generic term which refers to the process of creating 
an abstract representation of a system. The abstraction, or model, is used to gain insight into the working 
of the system that it represents, or to predict the system s future performance, or to test out the results 
of changing some aspect of the system. Modeling approaches vary greatly, from graphical and physical, 
to logical and data oriented. For the analysis of supply chain systems, modeling techniques are generally 
mathematical in nature, and are used to calculate some aspect of the real world system s performance. 
Optimization means finding the specific certain set of inputs to a function, such that any change to 
any of the inputs will result in a less desirable function output. Optimization approaches are generally 
thought of as either analytical/mathematical or direct/empirical. Regardless of the specifics, in an 
optimization routine in the most general sense is a procedure that, when applied to a model, will result 
in the determination of the best model as defined by the fitness of an objective function. Most problems 
are solved by matching a modeling approach with an optimization, or solving approach. Different matches 
have different strengths and weaknesses, but they operate on the same general concept. Simulation is 
a specific computer based modeling approach which uses a chain of cause and effect relationships to help 
the user build complex models from the ground up, one link at a time. On the other hand, optimization 
often requires a simplistic modeling approach in order to have a model that can be completely optimized. 
Finally, while there are many published definitions of the term supply chain, the most general and broadest 
definition is that the supply is the series of steps and operations that take raw materials and resources 
at one end of the process, and produce consumable products at the other end of the process. Supply chain 
operations include procurement, production, inventory, transportation, and demand planning. While some 
consultants hold that a supply chain must necessarily be an intra-enterprise operation, this paper assumes 
that a company could be looking only at its own internal operations and processes. In this case, the 
term business logistics is just as appropriate, but as many projects are examining one slice of the supply 
chain with an eye towards expanding up and down the chain, the term supply chain seems to better capture 
the current spirit of these projects. FOUR STEP METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW AND PURPOSE Supply chain strategic 
planning problems involve decisions about how a company s internal supply chain and external linkages 
(both with suppliers and customers) are fundamentally organized. From a systems perspective, one can 
think of an entire supply chain as a series of objects that interact to perform a given function in this 
case, the meeting of end customer demand in the most efficient way possible. The elements, or objects, 
that make up the system, can be considered a supply chain s structure. Some examples of structural elements 
include: products, sites, shipments, transportation assets, machines, and workers. These objects all 
interact with each other, and how they do so is governed by the rules, or policies, that the objects 
follow. Policies can be rules that govern how much inventory is stocked at a given site, or how a site 
reacts when an order is received, or how that site deals with product shipments when they arrive. By 
combining a supply chain structure with a set of supply chain policies, one can arrive at a very precise 
description of a corporate supply chain. Most strategic decisions and planning activities involve either 
proposed changes to the supply chain s structure, or else modifications the supply chain s policies (behavior.) 
The point of the Four Step Methodology is to help guide users to decide what techniques are appropriate 
for each type of decision. The Four Step Methodology starts from the assumption that you are beginning 
the strategic supply chain design process with a clean sheet of paper. In other words, if all you have 
is a list of customer demand points, the methodology will take you completely through the entire strategic 
design with no presupposed objects. However, except for a few cases, such as planning to penetrate a 
new market, or in evaluating the potential of a green-field structure, a user usally has an existijg 
supply chain, and is looking to modify it. Since most companies already have a supply chain structure 
they wish to modify or change incrementally, users will not usually go through all the steps sequentially; 
most of the time they focus on one step or another, which will often force them to go back or forward 
to answer other new questions. Special consideration must be given to the formulation of demand data 
to drive the analysis, regardless of which step or steps are included. For strategic level analyses, 
historical demand data is usually rolled up, or aggregated, into a higher level. However, since most 
strategic planning exercises are performed to make a decision in the future, in most analyses, some level 
of demand forecasting is required. Commonly used curve fitting tools just do not have the sophistication 
to deal with repeating patterns, trends, and seasonality. Yet, despite its importance to strategic modeling 
projects, demand forecasting has tended to receive scant attention by modelers. With that caution, once 
we assume that we have a good future demand estimate for strategic level projects, we can proceed on 
to the first step. 4.1 Step One: Network Optimization The objective of Step One is to arrive at an overall 
network structure that is efficient, meets all current demands, minimizes structurally based cost issues, 
and supports any other management constraints. To do this, a linear- mixed integer (LP-MIP) programming 
model is formulated, then solved. In LP-MIP models, the supply chain structure is built up as a generic 
network of nodes and arcs. By changing or removing the flow between different nodes, different costs 
result. The model is a mathematical model that takes only a split second to evaluate total cost. Powerful 
optimization solvers are applied to cycle through millions of alternative structures, turning candidate 
warehouses and factories off and on, and trying many different supply assignments. The resulting flows 
(dictated by the structure and the constraints) yield different cost outputs. The power of network optimization 
modeling lies in two main strengths. First, it can be proven to provide the mathematically global optimal 
solution to the problem. The solver will, with near certainty (depending on the specific algorithm), 
locate the least cost feasible network structure. Second, network optimization models can handle millions 
and millions of possible alternative designs in a very short time. Large, global, multi-modal distribution 
networks can be optimized effectively. Of course, the weaknesses of the approach stem from the same source 
of its strengths. In order to provide a model that can be evaluated quickly and solved, many simplifications 
are made. Most notably, this analysis normally is performed for a single time bucket, for aggregate data. 
In other words, the supply chain is simplified to be a distant abstraction from reality so it can be 
solved in a short amount of time. A summary of some of the data requirements for Step One include: 
List of candidate sites, candidate site locations  List of demand sites, demand locations  Total demand 
quantities per location  Cost per unit of flow and out of each site  Cost of transporting units in 
and out  Constraints, such as requiring that every demand point is within 500 miles of a warehouse 
 The output results of Step One include a number of summary statistics, such as total cost, total flow 
in and out of each node, the breakdown of transportation mode usage by lane, the manufacturing capacity 
utilized by the design, and which nodes supply which other nodes. By examining the final node to node 
flow totals, you can determine which warehouses should supply which customers, which factories should 
supply which warehouses, and so forth. The technology for network optimization has been successfully 
deployed and used byt thousands of practitioners. Some of the more advanced tools for performing network 
optimization also have some capabilities to do multi-time period optimizations, incorporate production 
and throughput constraints, and handle complicated tax and tariff calculations.  4.2 Step Two: Network 
Simulation While Step One will produce an optimal supply chain structure, it really ignores the issues 
of how the network will actually behave over time. As a result, it tells you what supply chain network 
design to select, but it cannot tell you exactly what will happen when that design is actually implemented. 
In order to predict exactly how a proposed supply chain design will operate, the design must be simulated 
in Step Two of the Methodology. In this Network Simulation step, a discrete event simulation model is 
built to replicate the design that was produced in Step One. However, this design is simply a structure, 
or shell, of a proposed network design. In order to predict the system s performance, more data is required 
by the simulation, while some of the data required by Step One is not needed in Step Two. Most notably, 
in Step One, demand data was aggregated and process logic was not needed. In Step Two, the user must 
define the rules, or policies, which govern how inventory is managed and when it is replaced. Sourcing 
and transportation policies must also be defined. To perform Network Simulation, time related demand 
data must be incorporated into the model. While aggregate quantities were sufficient for flow optimization, 
in order to simulate the demand properly, the model must know how the demand arrives over time. A summary 
of some of the data requirements for Step Two include: It is formulated based on data such as:  List 
of demand sites, demand locations  Total demand quantities per location  Cost per unit of flow and 
out of each site  Cost of transporting units in and out  Constraints, such as requiring that every 
demand point is within 500 miles of a warehouse  Network Simulation s greatest strength is its ability 
to predict very accurately how well a design will perform, in a variety of metric categories, such as 
inventory level, cycle time measurement, warehouse fill rate, and detailed costing. However, simulation 
as a technique generally requires long model building times, and long run times, limiting its usefulness 
as a selection tool. In Step Two, this not a major drawback, as the objective of Step Two is to predict 
a design s performance. For companies that already have an existing supply chain network design, Step 
One is not necessary, and they begin at Step Two. Table 1 reviews the major differences between Step 
One and Step Two. Table 1: Summary of Differences Between Network Optimization and Network Simulation 
Network Optimization Network Simulation Evaluate larger number of alternatives (>100,000) Evaluate few 
alternatives (<10) Models structure only Models structure and behavior Aggregate network stats Detailed 
performance stats No complexity or variance Complexity and randomness Optimal problem solutions No optimization 
Use to determine candidate supply chain structures Use to make final supply chain decision It should 
be obvious that Step One and Step Two, Network Optimization and Network Simulation, are complementary 
modeling approaches which offer two different, useful ways to analyze and determine a supply chain design. 
 4.3 Step Three: Policy Optimization While discrete event simulation is an extremely accurate modeling 
approach, capable of predicting system performance, it does not in itself help to improve system design. 
The net result of Step One and Step Two is a supply chain network design, including the structure and 
a proposed policy scheme. Network optimization provided a powerful means of selecting an optimal supply 
chain structure. However, the design can still be improved through attempting to optimize the policy 
choices used to govern the network s behavior. Since DES must be used to predict the performance of various 
policy approaches, Step Three involves the running of multiple simulations in order to observe the effects 
of different policies and select the best set. This step can be performed by the analyst in a manual 
approach, but this is a tedious and difficult method. Instead, a better method is to use simulation-optimization 
as a modeling and problem solving approach which will result in an optimized simulation model that prescribes 
the inventory, sourcing, and transportation policies which should be adopted from a strategic level in 
the network design. Simulation-optimization applies is a direct optimization method which applies an 
intelligent algorithm to a discrete event simulation model. Only in the last few years has this technique 
been commercialized and studied enough to render it a feasible method for practitioners. The data requirements 
for Step Three are the same as for Step Two, with the additional requirement that candidate policies 
and policy parameters must be explicitly identified. For inventory policy for example, the upper and 
lower bounds of the reorder point and the reorder quantity must be defined. For transportation policy, 
all of the potential transportation modes must be identified (full truckload, less than truckload, combined 
truckload, etc.). An additional requirement is that the data set for the simulation being optimized must 
be complete and accurate. While Step Two can be performed reasonably well with an incomplete data set, 
in Step Three any missing data or incomplete costs will result in the algorithm being tricked into recommending 
the wrong solution. Policy Optimization is a cutting edge technology that can produce extremely valuable 
recommendations for policy improvement and better supply chain designs. However, along with this power, 
it has several weaknesses that must be watched with care. First, as mentioned, simulaiton-optimization 
requires a complete model with consistent and accurate input data and costs. Second, because each simulation 
run can take several minutes to complete, a full simulation optimization will take a lot of time (real 
world). This combines with the third problem, that realistic policy optimizations can result in hundreds 
or even thousands of decision variables, which must be manipulated and optimized.  4.4 Step Four: Design 
for Robustness The final step in the Four Step Methodology is Design for Robustness. The objective of 
this step is to ensure that the final selection of the supply chain s network structure and policies 
will operate well under a wide variety of situations. During the first three steps of the Methodology, 
the user assumes that the design is being improved to operate as efficiently and effectively as possible 
Perhaps more importantly, performed properly, Step Four will ensure that the selected supply chain design 
will, under less than expected or unusual circumstances will not perform unacceptably poor. This should 
not be confused with simple variance. In Steps Two and Three, random variance may have been introduced 
to produce more realistic approaches. So, Step Four is not centered around randomness and its effects; 
rather, it is the evaluation of the results of changing some of the external given data assumptions. 
Step Four uses all of the techniques discussed in this paper as needed. There are no guidelines that 
would predict which technique to use for which answer. Instead, Step Four relies heavily on the knowledge 
and expertise of its users. Table 2 outlines and summarizes all of the most important differences between 
each of the Four Steps. Table 2: Strengths and Weaknesses of the Four Step Methodology Step One Step 
Two Step Three Step Four Name Network Network Simulation Policy Optimization Design for Optimization 
Robustness Objective Optimze network Predict network Optimize network Minimize risk of structure behavior 
behavior undesirable outcomes Technique Used Linear/Mixed Integer Programming Discrete Event Simulation-Optimization 
All Techniques; Simulation Statistical Analysis   CONCLUSIONS Supply chain strategic analysis and 
planning places enormous difficulties in front of the intrepid user who would look to use the latest 
technologies. Each question that must be asked of a model, if it is truly strategic in nature, may require 
one or several different technological approaches. It is the complexity of the problem that necessitates 
advanced and multi faceted approaches to finding the solution. By combining the techniques discussed 
in this paper, within the context of the Four Step Methodology, the user can bring unprecedented power 
to solving existing problems, as well as problems that may occur in the future too. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY 
DONALD A. HICKS Donald A. Hicks is CEO and President of LLama-Soft, Inc., a software company that produces 
simulation and optimization based applications that help clients perform supply chain strategic planning. 
Prior to joining LLama-Soft, he served as Senior Vice President of Development for PROMODEL Corporation. 
Mr. Hicks was also the founder and CEO of Decision Science, Inc., the company which released the first 
simulation-optimization software application. Mr. Hicks is the author of "The Systems Perspective", the 
award winning technology column for IE Solutions, and a frequent public speaker on issues of technology 
and strategy. He has a B.S. in Systems Engineering from the United States Military Academy, and an MBA 
from the University of Michigan. 
			
