
 ADVISORY COMMITI EES: ONE APPROACH TO USER INPUT Jennifer Fajman Associate Director Computer Science 
Center University of Maryland College Park, Maryland 20742 (301) 403-4602 Jennifer_Fajnaan@untail. umd.edu 
 Dr. Susan Clabaugh Director Educational Technology Center College of Education University of Ma~yland 
College Park, Maryland 20742 (301) 405-3604 Susan_Clabaugh@umail. umd.edu  Dr. Warren Phillips Professor 
Government and Politics University of Ma~land College Park, Maryland 20742 (301) 405.4137 Warren_Phillips@u 
mail. umd.edu SITUATION The University of Maryland at College Park is a large state research university. 
There are approximately 35,000 students, 2,500 faculty and 3,500 staff, and 13 colleges. The Computer 
Science Center provides academic computing services for instruction and research for the university community. 
Providing quality information technology services in the educational environment involves working closely 
with faculty, students, administrators and staff to insure that the services provided match the customers 
needs. The ideas and activities of advisory committees have provided invaluable input on services that 
are provided and how these services are delivered. ADVISORY COMMITTEES SUMMARY The established advisory 
committees are: Committee on Academic Computing Policy (CACP) Campus Computer Coordinating Committee(CCCC) 
Student Advisory Committee (SAC) College Advisory Committees Advisory committees for particular camp 
projects  COMMITTEE ON ACADEMIC COMPUTING POLICY (CACP) The Committee on Academic Computing Policy (CACP) 
is a committee established by the Vice President for Academic AtTairs and Provost to advise the Computer 
Science Center on academic service policy issues. The CACP reports directly to the Provost. The membership 
is composed of representatives of the Colleges and other campus units which are directly affected by 
academic computing issues, The Provost appoints the members of the committee and the chair of the committee. 
The current membership includes representatives from: Colleges, as recommended by the Deans  Faculty 
Senate, as recommended by the Senate Chair  Libraries, as recommended by the Director of Libraries 
 Communications Services  Provost s OffIce  Representative of the President s offke  Director of the 
Computer Science Center  To provide continuity, the terms are for two years. The Chair of the CACP, 
Dr. Warren Phillips, is a full professor from the Department of Government and Politics, and was appointed 
by the Provost. The Chair of the CACP must have a strong interest and background in information technology 
issues, particularly how they relate to the campus  an understanding and appreciation of campus policies 
and procedures  c the ability to provide leadership, in a changing environment Permission to copy without 
fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for 
direct commercial adua ntage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and Jor specific permission. Copyright 1992 ACM 0-89791 
-546-1 /92/0011 /0089.. $1.50 stepping infothehtture c  o   ACM SIGUCCS XX 1992 89 the respect 
of the campus community to provide an unbiased direction The Chair appoints an Executive Committee to 
oversee the operations of the CACP. The Executive Committee is composed of representatives from the Provost 
s office, selected college CACP members, as well as the Director of the Computer Science Center, The 
committee members not only represent the individual needs of their colleges, but also maintain a campus 
perspective on the issues that need addressing. The committee provides a mechanism for information technology 
experts to appreciate and recognize the diverse needs for a variety of types of services for the campus 
community. Information from the CACP is distributed to the campus community by making the minutes of 
the meetings available online, the CACP members discussing the issues with their colleagues, and the 
Chair of the CACP meeting on a regular basis with the Provost, The Provost meets with the committee when 
requested or when he feels it is important to hear the conversations directly. The membership of the 
CACP is also available online, so that the campus community can communicate their concerns to any member 
of the committee. The CACP establishes working subcommittees to report directly to the CACP on specific 
issues. One of the standing subcommittees is the Campus Computing Coordinating Committee (CCCC), which 
is discussed below. Another major committee that has been active over the past months has been a committee 
developing a Strategic Plan for Information Technology issues on campus. Other committees are established 
when needed, and disbanded when their work is complete. Subcommittee membership includes appropriate 
people from the campus community; the chair is a member of the CACP, while the membership of the committee 
is not restricted to members of the CACP, in order to broaden the involvement of the campus community. 
During times of decreasing budgets from the state, the CACP has helped the Computer Science Center in 
evaluating its activities. The Director of the Computer Science Center presents the Center s yearly goals 
to the committee as they are being developed, in order to obtain input as to the importance of various 
projects to the campus community. Combined with the evaluation of the goals, is advice on the budget 
needed to accomplish the goals. During times of budget cuts, it is extremely valuable to get advice from 
this committee as to what programs are the most important to keep intact. The committee meets every 3 
or 4 weeks during the fall and spring semester. Some of the subcommittees work during the summer, depending 
on the issues that need addressing. The Associate Directors of the Computer Science Center attend the 
CACP meetings, in order to provide appropriate follow up on issues that need addressing. At times, given 
the agenda, other staff members are invited to attend selected meetings.  CAMPUS COMPUTING COORDINATING 
COMMITTEE (CCCC) One of the standing subcommittees of the CACP is the Campus Computing Coordinating 
Committee. The main goals of the CCCC are to address computing support issues that benefit from coordination 
and to recommend policies to the CACP. The charge for the CCCC is to address coordination issues at 
two levels: among the distributed computing units and between distributed computing units and the campus 
level. Recommendations which move beyond basic coordination activities or which have policy implications 
at the campus level are forwarded to the CACP for action. Ongoing tasks assigned to the CCCC by the CACP 
include (1) workstation deployment, and (2) standards. Membership on the CCCC includes People responsible 
for college level computing activities  Representation from the Libraries and Communications Services 
who are involved with daily activities that relate to information technology  Representatives from units 
which provide administrative smmort for camcms  b, Associate Director-~nd Worksta~ion Support person 
from the Computer Science Center In general, the members of the CCCC are different from the members 
of the CACP. The CC(7C members are closer to the implementation issues, while the CACP members are more 
involved with campus policy issues. The chair of the CCCC, Dr. Susan Clabaugh, is appointed by the chair 
of the CACP. Dr. Clabaugh is Director of the Educational Technology Center, in the College of Education, 
and is the College s representative to the CACP. When selecting the chair of the CCCC, an individual 
is chosen who has an understanding of the campus goals for information technology  a clear understanding 
of the relationships between distributed computing support issues and campus level support issues  a 
working knowledge of the issues that need to be addressed  The diverse representation in the CCCC provides 
the campus with direct input on how decisions affect the various units, especially in terms of implementation. 
An added benefit is the sharing of knowledge and information about services various units provide. Information 
from the CCCC is distributed to the campus community by making the minutes of the meetings available 
online, the CCCC members discussing the issues with their colleagues, and reports by the Chair of the 
CCCC to the CACP. The membership of the CCCC is also available online, so that the campus community can 
communicate their concerns to any member of the committee. The CCCC establishes a number of subcommittees 
to cover specific topics and bring recommendations back to the CCCC for follow up. Recent subcommittees 
of the CCCC are: Workstations: Discusses issues such as workstation deployment and maintenance b Software 
Standards: Works with the Computer Science Center to recommend standards for software  High End Workstation 
Standards: Deve]oB. standards for high end workstations  The subcommittees are chaired by a member of 
the CCCC, and appropriate members of the campus computing community are invited to attend the meetings, 
The recommendations of the subcommittees are presented to the CCCC, and, when appropriate, the Chair 
of the CCCC brings the issues to the CACP. The committee meets once a month during the fall and spring 
semesters. When needed, the committee and subcommittees meet during the summer.  STUDENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
(SAC) The student advisory committee is composed of student representatives who are recommended by the 
Deans of the Colleges. One member of the committee is elected to be the chair of the committee. The committee 
meets on an irregular basis, when isues arise that need student advice. There is no formal representative 
from the Computer Science Center to the committee, although the Center does provide support for the committee. 
The committee requests Center statl to attend portions of the meetings to present information and answer 
questions that the committee wants to address. Minutes of the advisory committee meeting are madeavailable 
to the Center, and are used as input into decisions that affect the student community. COLLEGE ADVISORY 
COMMITTEES There are 13 colleges at the University of Maryland at College Park. A number of the colleges 
have established advisory committees to discuss information technology issues and how they affect the 
colleges. The formation of these committees varies according to the college. One of the colleges has 
two very active advisory committees, one on policy issues and one on operational issues. Some colleges 
only have one advsory committee, addressing both policy and operational issues. There are colleges that 
have no advisory committees. The Computer Science Center is sometimes represented in the committees by 
the Campus Computing Associate, who is a discipline-oriented consultant assigned to the college. There 
are times when the college advisory committees request attendance by a member of the Computer Science 
Center in order to address particular issues. Usually, the College representatives to the CACP and CCCC 
participate in the College advisory committees, to provide a link between the college and campus wide 
advisory committees. PROJECT ADVISORY COMMITTEES Specialized projects sometimes have advisory comittees 
to advise the project members on directions and implementation issues. The members of these avisory committees 
are faculty, staff and administrators who are intimately involved with the project. The AT&#38;T Teaching 
Theater project is one example of a project with a very active advisory committee. Committee members 
include faculty who are interested in the design and implementation issues of the Teaching Theater for 
group interactions. Representation from the Center for Teaching Excellence is included in the committee, 
as well as representation from the Provost s ofllce. The committee advises the Teaching Theater staff 
on requirements and also reviews proposals from faculty who want to use the facility. The Advanced Visualization 
Laboratory, a recent project that is jointly sponsored by the Computer Science Center and the Department 
of Astronomy, will have an advisory committee during the upcoming year. Currently, there is a steering 
committee, which helps provide support for the direction of the project. With the expansion of the usage 
of visualization on campus, it is important for more input to be obtained for direction of the Laboratory. 
The individual project steering committees are specialized. The input received from these committees 
help the future direction of the projects. EVALUATION OF ADVISORY STRUCTURE The advisory committee structure 
has proved to be invaluable to the operation of academic computing services. Some of the benefits to 
the academic community are: clearer statement of goals for academic computing  better understanding 
of the academic computing budget  better understanding of the issues that affect colleges, by the Computer 
Science Center, the administration, and the campus service units  * ability to better allocate resources 
to meet the needs of the academic computing community improved planning efforts campus wide  better 
knowledge of the services provided, not only by the Computer Science Center, but also by the colleges 
 improved working relationships between the Computer Science Center and the academic community  There 
is a cost to working so closely with advisory committees. The time involved by the advisory committee 
members and the Computer Science Center in support of the advisory committees is not negligible, For 
faculty, this means that time is taken away from their academic pursuits. For the Computer Science Center 
staff, the time to complete some projects is increased. Since consulting with the campus users before 
a project is done helps to insure that the campus needs are being met, in many cases, the time to complete 
a project is reduced and there is an improvement in quality. Support staff working on projects are becoming 
more aware of the benefits of working with customers during the development of a product. The benefits 
are well worth the effort and time spent with the advisory committee process. In general, the operation 
of the advisory committees is excellent. The student advisory committee needs more structure in order 
to provide more effective input to the planning process. The advisory structure is not the only method 
of receiving input on academic computing needs on campus. Other methods include: participation in other 
meetings on campus (e.g., Deans Council, Directors of Academic Support units meetings); input from individual 
interactions with faculty, students, administrators and sta~, user surveys; and input from end user support 
groups. With the closer integration between academic computing support and administrative and library 
services, more coordination with the various information technology resources on campus are needed. The 
current structure of the advisory committees provides an important vehicle for these interactions, as 
the various units have strong representations on these committees. LESSONS LEARNED The advisory structure 
at College Park has evolved over a number of years. Working with advisory committees over the years has 
provided a number of valuable lessons: Technical solutions for each unit are quite different at the hardware 
level (e.g., DEC and SUN workstations in Engineering, and DOS and Macintoshes in Arts and Humanities). 
A common networking protocol connects the different platforms. Standards for both hardware and software 
are important for both support and easy transfer of information, Software standards must be flexible 
enough to meet the unique needs of the campus community.  Unit needs are usually perceived differently 
by administrators and academics.  Budget tracking needs to be done carefully because problem oriented 
plans tend to cross over budget categories in most accounting systems. Budgets are usually done organizationally, 
while functionality is extremely important for analysis.  There is a real need for ad hoc teams to solve 
special topical problems (e.g., is it appropriate to buy a supercomputer at this time). Standing committees 
do not necessarily bring the best minds together for special problems. Also, the best minds for one problem 
are not necessarily the best minds for another problem.  Several different long distance visionaries 
should be represented on the committee to know where the campus should be going: a computer expert, an 
educator, an administrator.  6 Members of the committee should be non-parochial thinkers; they need 
to wear campus-wide hats. Solutions are usually linked to the ways problems are identified. The technology 
usually agreed upon depends primarily on the way the problem is characterized. SUMMARY During a time 
of tight resources and a need for more accountability, the team relationships built between the Computer 
Science Center and the advisory committees have proved invaluable towards improving the quality of academic 
computing support. 
			
