
 ANALYZING AND RE-ENGINEERING BUSINESS PROCESSES USING SIMULATION R. Bhaskar Ho Soo Lee Anthony Levas 
Raja P&#38;akian Flora Tsai Bill Tulskie IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center P,O. BOX 218 Yorktown Heights, 
New York 10598 ABSTRACT Increasingly, companies around the world are re­engineering their core business 
processes to be more profitable and to improve customer satisfaction. Model­ing and analysis are two 
critical steps in any process ~design effort. In this paper, we discuss the need for sim­ulation tools 
that can be used effectively to model, docu­ment, and analyze business processes. We also present the 
design of such a hierarchical simulation tool called BPMAT and discuss its implementation. INTRODUCTION 
Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) is a recent addition to the suite of approaches that business manag­ 
ers can use to improve the performance of their business. Over the last two years many corporations have 
engaged in re-engineering efforts. In spite of uncertain results @all, Rosenthat, and Wade 1993). the 
success stories have resulted in new BPR projects being initiated regu­larly. While the merits and innovative 
aspects of BPR are open to debate (Vltiello 1993), BPR provides opportuni­ties for management science 
and operations research pro­fessionals to use their skills and tools in helping shape decisions that 
have great implications for businesses (Cypress 1994). In exchange, these professionals can enrich BPR 
by contributing scientific analysis to comple­ment the qualitative thinking currently used in the field. 
Investigating the business process under study and creating new process designs requires strong modeling 
skills and good tools. There are various modeling approaches that can be used. Van Ackere, Larsen, and 
Morecroft (1993) argue that since BPR has its roots in systems engineering (where a system may be a business 
system, a manufacturing system, a social system, etc.), the systems thinking approach is quite appropriate 
for BPR modeling. Systems Engineering offers many model­ing and analysis tools such as simulation, decision 
theory, queueing theory, optimization, utility theory, and others. The authors emphasize simulation, 
they contend that recent advances have made simulation technology more accessible for use in BPR. Ardhaldjian 
and Fahner (1994) go further when they show how simulation in BPR can be used not only for modeling the 
As is and To be pro­cesses but also for marketing, communication, educa­tional, and Ixmchmarking purposes. 
Our experience at IBM suggests that simulation can play an impmtant role in the modeting and analysis 
activ­ities that take place in a Business Process Re-engineering effort. When used appropriately, simulation 
has been able to provide quantitative estimates of the impact that a pro­cess redesign is likely to have 
on key performance mea­sures. In sharp contrast to other modeling methods, such as optimization models 
or systems differential equations, simulation is well suited to handle the stochastic and time-varying 
nature of processes as well as the non-linear interactions between process elements. To encourage a more 
widespread use of simulation by IBM analysts and consultants, we have developed a Business Process Modeling 
and Analysis Tool @PMAT) that has an advanced gmphical user interface and has strong simulation capabilities. 
BPMAT was designed and implemented according to requirements identified through formal surveys of BPR 
field practitioners, pilots, literature review, and the evaluation of existing simula­tion tools. It 
provides, in an integrated environment, the means for documenting a process and capturing in a hier­archical 
model the characteristics that are important for a process redesign. Through simulation, users can evaluate 
the effect that re-engineering designs may have on per­ 1206 formance measures. The tool may also be 
used to visually present process design and simulation results leading to improved communication between 
participants in a re­engineering effort. Finally, BPMAT provides mecha­nisms for managing and sharing 
the intellectual capital that gets created in re-engineering engagements. This paper is organized as 
follows. In section 2 we review existing literature on BPR and simulation. In sec­tion 3 we discuss requirements 
that are specific to BPR simulation tools. Section 4 contains an overview of BPMAT. In section 5 we provide 
details about the main modeling concepts in BPMAT. In section 6, we discuss various usage scenarios of 
the tool. Finally, in section 7 we present our conclusions and plans for future work. 2 BACKGROUND Re-engineering 
is a highly public field, with people expressing conflicting views. Here we attempt to present those 
views without necessarily endorsing or rejecting them. In fact, the authors of this paper don t hold 
a single collective opinion about BPR, its merits, and limitations. Michael Hammer s work (Hammer 1990 
and Ham­mer and Champy 1993) provides the most frequently quoted definition of business process. Most 
authors seem to follow his lead in defining business processes as a set of tasks typically crossing organizational 
boundaries which deliver something of value to an internal or exter­nal customer. The term re-engineering 
captures the rad­ical redesign of these processes. Hammer and others assert that historically the pro­cesses 
in a typical organization were never engineered at all, let alone with the broad business goals in mind. 
Rather they evolved over time from temporary proce­dures and quick fixes. Hammer argues that the typical 
organization evolved in an entirely different business environment than that in which we now compete. 
As a result, today s typical business processes contain much unnecessary content, make the leaps across 
organiza­tional boundaries poorly, and actually impede optimal business performance. Thus, radical change 
is needed. Smalt incremental improvements simply won t do. Reports of business process re-engineering 
work indicate that it is proceeding with vigor in spite of unset­ tlingly low success rates, mostly less 
than expected results, and some spectacular failures (Caldwell 1994, Hall Rosenthal and Wade 1993, Arend 
1993). Seemingly, the trend to reengineer has impetus from the publicized successes, our own corporate 
cultures (Vitiello 1993), but the fact is that competitive pressures are forcing compa­ nies to change. 
Re-engineering, by Hammer s definition, is a good way to go about it, in spite of uncertain results. 
Hammer s (1990) definition emphasizes radical change through application of information technology. Davenport 
and Short (1990) also stress the role of infor­mation technology. Information technology has a dual role 
in the transformation of business processes (Van Ackere, Larsen, Morecroft, 1993). As originally high­lighted 
by Hammer, it enables new levels of productivity, new kinds of organizational structure and deployment, 
and new kinds of products and services. Daverqxxl and Short (1990) suggest a recursive relationship between 
this role for information technology and business process redesign. New technologies enable and therefore 
cause redesigns of business processes while, in general, process redesign should be done with the intent 
of exploiting ttxhnology. In the second role, information technology can help in the mechanics of the 
transformation itself in modeling the options and assessing the changes with the greatest impact. It 
is this second role that captures the essence of our work, Van Ackere, Larsen, Morecroft (1993) argue 
that simple process maps do not typically provide sufficient understanding of the process to know what 
to change although many teams start this way. Van der AaIst (1992) suggests that the intended anrdysis 
dictates the type of modeling that is done. fle goals of a re-engineering effort are most often framed 
as quantitkd business improvement measures. The process map hellps the team understand the problem framework, 
but to aid a team in knowing what to change, the process map must be backed with numerical analysis. 
If the process does not contain significant random­ness in either its environment or its internal features, 
basic mathematical analytical techniques may be indi­cated. Such cases can benefit significantly from 
optimiza­tion employing linear prograrnming, mixed integer programming, goal programming, and other operations 
research techniques. Simulation, however, is typically employed in situations where the random content 
does matter and cannot be modeled by other analytical tech­niques. Cheng (1992) views simulation as a 
tool of last resort to be employed only when other methods are ruled out. He cites the high computational 
cost and the time and effort required to build models as disativantages of the simulation approach. On 
the other hand, Swain (1993) suggests that the ease of model building and cost economies in computing 
make simulation the tool of choice for modeling complex systems and validating ana­ lytical models before 
proceeding to optimization. Van der Aalst (1993) suggests that the complexity and analytical detail are 
essential to sound analysis. Yet, excessive complexity and detail can impede human understanding of the 
process. Van der Aalst recommends a library of reusable, domain specific building blocks which themselves 
may be quite detailed but can be used as black boxes. We favor Zeigler s (1987) earlier work as a more 
complete treatment of the issue. Processes can be hierarchically decomposed to the level of detail neces­sary 
to suit the analysis and the needed human under­standing. And such abstractions can be organized into 
domain specific libraries for reuse. Arend (1993) asserts the value of models and simu­lation in building 
consensus and generating new ideas within a re-engineering team referencing IDEFO as a valuable communications 
vehicle. Hall, Rosenthrd, and Wade (1993) list overlooking communications as one of four most damaging 
practices in re-engineering work. Hammer says that communications has two purposes in the context of 
re-engineering: to make a compelling case for change and to create a vision of what the company is to 
be (Karlgaard 1993). We see these messages of change and vision as most suitably coming from the office 
of the CEO as leader and lead designer of the organization (Keough and Doman 1992).  3 REQUIREMENTS 
FOR A BPR MODELING TOOL In 1992, we conducted a detailed survey of more than fifty analysts and consultants 
who were directly involved in various business process re-engineering efforts. The goal of the survey 
was to identify the key features required in a business process modeling and analysis tool. We also reviewed 
existing literature on business process and enterprise modeling. From this effort emerged an early design 
for a hierarchical business process modeling and simulation tool. Soon after, we had the oppwtunity to 
use that design to model and analyze the supply chain of an IBM busi­ness. We developed a simulation 
program that had no graphical user interface and used it to model the demand planning, parts procwement, 
production planning, manu­facturing, warehousing, distribution, and order fulfill­ment processes. The 
interactions between these processes were carefully modeled. The results of this work played a major 
role in shaping the strategy of that IBM business. Since then we have used the program in various other 
simulation studies to help IBM reengineer its key busi­ness processes in this specific domain (An et 
al. 1994). From this experience. we have developed a set of requirements that we believe should be met 
by tools used for modeling and simulating business processes. These requirements can be organized into 
five categories: pro­cess documentation, process redesign, performance mea­surements, communication, 
and institutional learning. One of the most common activities that consultants and analysts engage in 
at the outset of a BPR effort is to document the existing business processes. This documen­ tation can 
be either in the form of descriptive text or as process maps. It becomes the basis for a shared under­ 
standing of the documented processes. Therefore any BPR modeling tool must have documentation capabilities 
otherwise it creates redundant efforts. Since we expect business process modeling tools to be used in 
re-engineering studies, it is important that they have the ability to capture characteristics that are 
relevant to process redesign in a model. First, one should be able to represent structural changes in 
the process such as eliminating non value-add activities, minimizing rework, consolidating process steps, 
reducing the time it takes to perform some activities, etc. Second, it is important that policy changes 
akin to routing jobs in the process and regulating the output of an activity as a function of its input 
can be modeled. Next, because resource allocation issues are very important in a process model, a BPR 
simu­lation tool should provide ways to model resource requiremcn(s for activities, processing rates 
for resources, number and mix of resources, resource capac­ity, and resource availability schedules. 
One of the main benefits of simulation is that statisti­cal estimates of various performance measures 
can be easily obtained. We have found that the following mea­surements are considered to b crucial across 
many BPR efforts: cost, cycle time, work-in-process, serviceability, resource utilization, and quality. 
We therefore believe that good BPR simulation tools should provide reliable quantitative estimates of 
the above measurements. While modeling a process is a critical step in BPR, presenting the model to others 
can be often just as impor­tant in insuring the success of a re-engineering effort. First, if a graphical 
process map is used to gain agree­ment from various people involved in a re-engineering effort, it is 
more likely that a common view of the exist­ing process and of the proposed process designs emerges. 
Thus the ability to generate and print such a map should be a feature in BPR modeling tools. In addition, 
simula­tion tools that generate graphical charts to summarize the statistical Esults of simulation output 
provide the analyst with an effective means of presenting results to others. Tools that provide histograms, 
bar charts, pie charts, trace charts, etc., become valuable re-engineering aids. Consultants and analysts 
are often very concerned about managing the intellectual capital that is gained over time. This particularly 
holds true in the BPR arena. In effect, business processes that deliver equivalent prod­ ucts (or services) 
tend to share many components across various enterprises. For example, many of the same prin­ ciples 
and designs form the basis of the order fulfillment process that exists in various companies even if 
those companies come from dissimilar industries. The consult­ ant or analyst who leverages the knowledge 
gained in one engagement and uses it in subsequent studies makes bet­ ter use of time and resources. 
It is therefore essential that a BPR modeling tool provides the means for capturing intellectual capital 
in the form of process models and allow the analyst to share and merge process models within a consulting 
engagement or across engagements. We also believe that a good BPR simulation tool should not only provide 
the above requirements but it should also integrate them in a coherent way. Finally, such a tool should 
be easy to use and should have a graphical user interface designed for this specific goal. It is with 
these requirements in mind that we have con­ducted our research and development of BPMAT. OVERVIEW OF 
THE BPMAT BPMAT is the product of a joint development effort between the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center 
and CACI Products Company. It was developed using MOD-SIM II, an object-oriented simulation language 
sold by CACI. SIMOBJECT, CACI S object-oriented framework, provided an advanced starting point for building 
the tool. BPMAT runs on the Unix, Windows, and 0S/2 operating systems. The main graphical editor is shown 
in Figure 1. :.,.:.:.:.:.:..:.:.,,.  ifi$Tr$,J G ! 1 + =~:~ --bate Tine ~.: .. ..-s... . ........ .. 
...A.......%..vm ..-..,,.................. ! Figure 1: BPMAT s Main Graphicat Editor Notwithstanding 
the SIMOBJECT libraries, BPMAT consists of approximately 300 classes and 50,000 lines of code. As shown 
in Figure 2, the software is organized in four major levels of hierarchy. The first two levels, called 
MetaLib and SimLib, constitute the SIMOBJECT class libraries. MetaLib contains the classes that manage 
the graphicat user interface including animation, while Sim-Lib contains the classes that implement simulation, 
input and output interface, and the library management capa­bilities. The last two levels, are SimDemo 
and BPMAT. SimDemo contains the drivers necessary for the imple­mentation of the application. BPMAT, 
which is derived from all of the above libraries, contains the objects spe­cific to the BPMAT application, 
such as Activities, Resources, and Reports. The Integrated Development Environment (IDE) includes a compiler, 
an object browser, and a graphical user interface builder. BPMAT II SimDemo IDE SimLib SIMCIBJECT MetaLib 
MODSIM II H Figure 2: BPMAT Software Architecture 4.1 Modeling Processes with BPMAT The three main 
concepts a user of BPMAT manipu­lates to create a business process model are Processes, Resources, and 
Tokens. Figure 3 illustrates the relation­ship between these concepts. A process repnmnts behav­ior or 
actions and may require some amount of time to be performed. A resource is used to model the objects 
that can perform a task or are used in some process. Finally, tokens are elements that flow through a 
process and get transformed. For example, parts (tokens) may flow into a process that uses people and 
equipment (resources) to make products (tokens). Section 5 contains a more detailed description of these 
three concepts. Tokens: Tokens: orders, ~~ --B:==n etc. j:::i:iz*,,Ai:::::ii. etc. .:::?.:::: :.:, Resources: 
people, equipment, tools, etc. Figure 3: BPMAT Modeling Concepts In BPMAT, a business process model 
is created by graphically selecting activities and processes from the palette bar, customizing their 
behavior through parame­ters presented in a dialog box, linking them together with input/output arcs, 
and specifying the tokens that flow between them and the resources that are used. A business process 
model has two views: one is static (descriptive) while the other is dynamic (behavioral). The static 
view captures the sequence of activities, the flow of tokens, the resources that are used and contains 
a textual description that is used to understand the process. The dynamic view captures the information 
that is used to represent its behavior (durations, release rates, usage rate). Simulation is used to 
execute the business process model and collect measurements that indicate its performance (cost, cycle 
time, defect rates).  4.2 BPMAT Reporting Capabilities BPMAT s reporting functions allow the user to 
spec­ify the types of reports that will be needed prior to run­ning the simulation. BPMAT monitors only 
those processes, activities, tokens, and resources necessary to produce the user specified reports. BPMAT 
s time series reports show cycle times, token counts, and the various states of resources. They are continually 
updated while the simulation is running. Other reports such as the cycle time distribution, average, 
and peak, the token count dis­tribution, average and total, as well as the resource capac­ity utilization 
are plotted using graphs such as histograms, bar charts, and pie charts. These reports can be selected 
for display by the user at the end of a simula­tion. In addition, data from the charts can be viewed 
in tabular format and saved to tiles for further processing.  4.3 BPMAT Libraries Several types of libraries 
are available in BPMAT. They are user defined process libraries and system defined process libraries. 
Users have the ability to define their own libraries and populate them with customized activities, processes 
they have created, and processes they select from other libraries and applications. This enables a user 
to organtze and reuse processes conve­ niently. System defined process libraries contain tested, domain 
specific processes that are developed program­ matically. These processes are building blocks from which 
applications can be developed. For example, pro­ cess building blocks relevant to such domains as manu­ 
facturing, distribution, insurance claim processing, etc., can be organized in libraries and made available 
to users. The Manufacturing library may contain processes such as Assemble, Transport, Warehouse, Process 
Order, Distrib­ ute, etc. A user is free to use them, modify them or add et al. them to their own libraries. 
5 BPMAT MODELING CONCEPTS In this section we describe in detail our notion of processes, resources and 
tokens. 5.1 Processes A key distinguishing feature of BPMAT is its hierar­chical process modeling ability. 
This enables a user to decompose a process into as many levels of detail as required. This capability 
greatly enhances the ability to understand a process by facilitating the decomposition of the process 
into sub-processes that can be refined with more details. There are two concepts used to create pro­cess 
models in BPMAT. They are Process and Activity. The Process construct allows the user to create hierarchi­cal 
process models. Activities are the objects at the leaf level of the process model. They are non-decomposable 
objects and have an associated behavior such as using a resource to perform some activity that has a 
duration. A challenge in the design of BPMAT is to provide a set of Activities that can be used to compose 
models of a large portion of business processes. There are currently twelve Activities defined in BPMKP 
. Source generates tokens (orders, parts, etc.) at specified intervals of time during simulation. Sink 
accumulates all relevant statistics on the tokens that flow into it and then disposes of the tokens. 
 Delay models the passage of time and usage of resources. Branch routes tokens through alternative process 
paths during simulation based on probability or characteristics of the arriving token. Batch aggregates 
tokens based on batching parameters. Unbatch unbundles a batch into the tokens which comprise it. Clone 
duplicates the arriving token and releases a user specified number of copies. Transform converts one 
type of token into another type. Gate stores arriving tokens and holds them until a rngger signal is 
received. Synchronize synchronizes the release of tokens when one of each type is available. Merge 
funnels tokens from many different paths through one common process.  Assign assigns a value to a user 
specified attribute. The user creates parametrized instances of activities and connects them with arcs 
to define processes. 5.2 Resources The second primary modeling concept is Resource. A resource may be 
used to represent things like people, tools, computers, trucks, manufacturing equipment, floor space 
that are required to perform tasks associated with an activity. The limited availability of resources 
can often constraint the performance of a business process. Associ­ated with a resource is a unit of 
capacity which specifies the amount of work that can be performed. For example, a gas station may have 
10 pumps (capacity is ten) or a ~rson can perform only one task at a time (capacity is one). Many advanced 
functions for resources are available in BPMAT. The user has the ability to schedule planned incapacitation, 
or time periods during which resources are known to be unavailable. For example, if a person does not 
work on weekends, the resource can be sched­uled to be unavailable on Saturday and Sunday. Unplanned 
incapacitation, e.g. random machine down times, can atso be modeled. The user can also reserve resources 
so that only one activity can be using the resource at a given time. Finally, the user can define the 
set of resource combinations that can be used to perform an activity and the quantities required for 
each resource. BPMAT contains two orthogonal hierarchies built upon resources: departments and workgroups. 
Depart­ments represent collections of resources and departments. A resource or a department may not belong 
to more than one department. Departments are used to group resources in a hiermchical manner similar 
to that of many tradi­tional business organizations. On the other hand, work­groups represent collections 
of resources, departments, and workgroups that are required to perform a task, Any given resource, department, 
or workgroup may take part in more than one single workgroup. Using the department and workgroup structures 
to arrange resourees provides the user with a more realistic and versatile model of busi­ ness processes. 
 5.3 Tokens The third primary modeling concept is Token. Tokens are the objects that flow though the 
process dur­ ing simulation. They represent the physical units (parts, products, ete.) and informational 
units (orders, signals, etc.) that trigger the behavior of activities. They can also be trartsformed 
into some other token by the work per­ formed at the process. An order, for example may be tracked through 
a business process, operated upon, or rngger some behavior in a process and can have data col­ lected 
on the cost and time associated with fulfilling it. Tokens are also hierarchical. A token may contain 
 other tokens that retain their original identity. For exam­ple, a shipping palette may contain some 
quantity of per­sonal computers. The palette may travel as a single unit during transportation but will 
get disaggregate into its constituent parts when it reaches its final destination. A token can also have 
a count that signifies the number of such identical tokens that it contains. However, in this case the 
identity of the individual units is not kept. This feature is used to model large numbers of identicd 
tokens where the individual elements don t need to be distin­guished from one another, e.g., a truck 
load of oranges or a shipment of capacitors. A user has the ability to define the tokens that are rel­evant 
to the business being modeled. Since it is impossi­ble to envision all the attributes of these tokens, 
BPMAT provides user defined variables. Using this capability, a user can associate attributes with tokens 
ancl can set, branch upon, and monitor these attributes durinlg simula­tion. For example, a user can 
define a Token called PC, and associate a user defined attribute called CIOST with it. It can then be 
used to accrue costs, to branch on its value, and its final value may be inspeeted at [he end of simulation. 
 6 USING BPMAT BPMAT is useful in three complementing, but dis­tinct, paradigms of use: the Committee 
Paradigm, the Dynamic Hypothesis Paradigm, and the Numerical Para­digm. 6.1 The Committee Paradigm Re-engineering 
work is often collegiat in nature. That is, it often involves several people from different organizations, 
disciplines and even enteqxises. Re-engi­neering work, then, can consist in large part of co-opera­tive 
work often carried on in a committee room where the results of data collection efforts are presented 
and plans are made for the next phase of data collection or re-engi­neering. Because BPMAT provides a 
graphical represen­tation of business processes, it can be useful in allowing simultaneous development 
of different parts alf a model or in communication about a model. In essence the screen displaying the 
BPMAT model can be the blackboard for the re-engineenng workgroup s meeting. BPMAT in this paradigm is 
essentially an information collection and storage device, where information about different parts of 
an organization is kept, in a way that makes it meaningful in the context of the whole business process. 
It may even contribute to the clarity of the discussion! 6.2 The Dynamic Hypothesis Paradigm Once the 
model has been constructed and M the data has been collected and stored in the model, BPMAT can simply 
be run. That is, the business process is simulated, and it is possible to receive tabular and graphical 
infor­mation about the simulation run and its results. Through the animation feature, it may be possibie 
simply by watching the screen during the run to form impressions about where the significant bottlenecks 
and gates in the process occur. This dynamic simulation capability, spe­cially the iconic monitoring 
as~cts can sometimes explain the puzzle of why a perfectly good business pro­cess design fails in service. 
 6.3 The Numerical Paradigm Once a simulation has been run, it is possible to begin a series of numerical 
experiments to explore the functioning of the business process in service. This can be done in two ways: 
 Parameters of the various processes can be changed and the simulation can be re-run to examine the effects, 
for example of different resource constraints.  Structural variations of the model can be con­structed 
and run. This allows exploration of dif­ferent designs for the same process, and these designs can be 
significantly different.  6.4 Other Usage Paradigms Although we have descrhd three different contexts 
in which BPMAT can prove useful, there are many other ways in which BPMAT can be used ---as devices for 
storing organizational histories, as a way of comparing how different organizations cm carry out the 
same func­tion. 7 CONCLUSIONS Our goal in developing BPMAT was to create an integrated software package 
that could be used through­out a business process re-engineering effort. This was accomplished by developing 
a softwm tool that was designed to address each aspect of the re-engineering process (see section 3) 
and by presenting the functional­ity of BPMAT in an intuitive manner through a well thought out graphical 
user interface. A major benefit that BPMAT affords through its ease of use is that re-engineering practitioners 
can simulate the business process under investigation and obtain quan­titative measurements of key business 
processes (cost, cycle time, resource utilization, etc.). This aJlows the evaluation of alternative process 
designs in terms of quantitative criteria and the selection of the most promis­ing ones for implementation. 
In addition, the ability to create libraries of domain specific process building blocks (warehouse, transport, 
etc.) or of complete process applications (Supply Chain Management, etc.) acceler­ates the development 
of new models and provides a repository of knowledge captured from previous re-engi­neering efforts. 
We currently have 50 users of BPMAT and are par­ticipating in several pilot re-engineering studies using 
BPMAT. Additional features are being added to BPMAT. Currently underway is the design of a form of activity­based 
costing (Tumey 1991) that enables cost estimates to be obtained through simulation as well as statically. 
User defined variables will be enhanced so that they can be associated with processes and the global 
model as well as with tokens. In addition, these variables will be avail­able to the user for making 
policy decisions and collect­ing statistics on objects of interest. Severat new reports and ways to expedite 
their viewing are also being devel­oped. It is our belief that the integration, functionality and ease 
of use that BPMAT provides will enable re-engi­neering practitioners to evaluate many more process alternatives 
and select the most promising approaches based on quantitative metrics as opposed to basic intu­ ition. 
BPMAT should reduce the time required to perform a reengineer engagement and assist in the discovery 
of novel process designs. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Chae An, Steve Buckley, Srinivas Koleti, 
Jim Korein, Nitin Nayak, and Diane Shirzadi of IBM and John Goble, Conrado Gatula, and Michael Angel 
of CACI Products Company for their significant contribution to the design and development of BPMAT. The 
authors are also indebted to Ranga Jayaraman, Larry Lieberman, Sarah Hood, and Jim Yeh of IBM for helping 
manage and direct the development and deployment of the tool. Finally, the authors thank all the BPMAT 
users who through their helpful feedback have helped improve the tool and educate us. REFERENCES <RefA>An, 
C., R. Bhaskar, S. Buckley, D. Connors, G. Feigin, R. Jayaraman, H. S. Lee, A. Levas, N. Nayak, R. Petrakian, 
R. Snnivasan, F. Tsai, and W. Tulskie. 1994. Simulation modeling for business process reengineering. 
To appear in Proceedings of New Directions in Simulation for Manufacturing and Com­ munication, Waseda 
University, Tokyo, Japan. Ardhaldjian, R,, and M. Fahner. 1994. Using simulation in the business process 
reengineering effort. Indus­ trial Engineering July, 60-61. Arend, M, 1993. Do you really need to reengineer? 
. ABA Banking Journal, December, 46-50. Caldwell, B. 1994. Missteps, miscues. lnformation-WEEK, June 
20,50. Cheng, T. C. E. 1992. Computer simulation and its man­agement applications. Computers in Industry 
20:229­ 238. Cypress, H. L. 1994. Re-engineering. OR/MS Today, Feb­ruary, 18-29. Davenport, T. and J. 
Short. 1990. The new industrial engineering: information technology and business process redesign. Sloan 
Management Review, Sum­mer, 11-27. Hall, G., J. Rosenthal, and J. Wade. 1993. How to make rengineering 
really work. Harvard Business Review, November-December, 119-131. Hammer, M. 1990. Reengineering work: 
don t automate, obliterate. Harvard Business Review, July-August, 104-112. Hammer, M., and J. Champy. 
1993. Reengineering the corporation: a manifesto for business revolution. New York Harper Business. Karlgaard, 
R. 1993. Mike Hammer. Forbes, September 13,69. Keough, M., and A. Doman. 1992. The CEO as designer, an 
interview with Jay W. Forrester. McKinsey Quar­terly, 2,3-30. Swain, J. J. 1993. Flexible tools for modeling. 
OR/MS Today, December, 62-65. Turney, P. B. B. 1991. Common cents: the ABC perfor­mance breakthrough. 
Hillsboro, Oregon Cost Tech­nology, Van Ackere, A., E. R. Larsen, and J. D. W. Morecroft. 1993, Systems 
thinking and business process rede­sign: an application to the Beer Game. European Management Journal 
11:412-423. Van der Aalst, W. M. P. 1992. Modelling and analysis of complex logistic systems. In lFIP 
Transactions on Integration in Production Management Systems, ed. H. J. Pels and J. C. Wortmann, 277-292. 
Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands. Vltiello, J. 1993. Revenge of the nerds. Journal of 
Busi­ness Strategy, November-December, 46-47. Zeigler, B. P. 1987. Hierarchical, modular discrete-event 
modelling in an object-oriented environment. Simula­tion 49:219-230. </RefA>AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES R. BHASKAR is 
a scientist in the field of artiticiat intel­ligence. He has been at IBM since 1982. He can be reached 
by email at bhaskar@watson. ibm.com. HO S00 LEE is a Research Staff Member in the Manu­ facturing Research 
Department at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. He received his Ph.D. in artificial intel­ligence 
from Northwestern University in 1985. His research interests include knowledge-based systems, search 
algorithms for scheduling and constraint satisfac­tion problems, and business process re-engineering. 
ANTHONY LEVAS is an Advisory Programmer in the Manufacturing Research Department at the IBM T. J. Watson 
Research Center, He received his M.S. degree in computer science from the University of Connecticut at 
Storrs in 1983. He has worked in the areas of speech per­ception and speech synthesis, robot task planning 
and simulation, sensor based smategies, and knowledge based modeling and simulation. His current research 
focus is in business process modeling and simulation. RAJA PkTRAKIAN is a Research Staff Member in the 
Manufacturing Research Department at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. He received his Ph.D. degree 
in industrial engineering and operations research from the University of California at Berkeley in 1991, 
His research interests me in business process modeling and simulation, supply chain management, job shop 
schedul­ing, production planning, and optimization. FLORA TSAI is a Senior Associate Programmer in the 
Manufacturing Research Department at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. She received a B.S. degree 
in Electrical Engineering from MIT in 1991, and a M.S. degree in Computer Science from Columbia University 
in 1992, She has previously worked on job shop schedul­ing, rule classification for database mining, 
and statistical analysis of randomly-generated data. Currently, she is working on business process modeling 
and analysis. BILL TULSKIE is Senior Engineer in the Manufactur­ing Research Department at the IBM T. 
J. Watson Research Center. He received a BSEE from Drexel Uni­versity. He was awarded an MS in Engineering 
and the title Moore Fellow in the Management of Technology from the University of Pennsylvania. He has 
worked in research and production engineering while at Litton Sys­tems, and in marketing and systems 
engineering at IBM. His research interests include business process modeling and simulation, supply chain 
management, and product life cycles and substitution dynamics.  
			
